ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Forward Looking Statement Notice
This Current Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These include statements about our expectations, beliefs, intentions or strategies for the future, which we indicate by words or phrases such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “will,” “we believe,” “believes,” “management believes” and similar language. Except for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and elsewhere in this report are forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The factors listed in the section captioned “Risk Factors,” as well as any cautionary language in this report; provide examples of risks, uncertainties and events that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those projected. Except as may be required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events after the date of this Form 10-K.
Overview of Business
Our mission is to invest in innovative technologies, intergrated with business development in the healthcare ecosystem.
We are focused on protein and peptide small molecular drugs research and development, diagnostic and medical devices with AI cloud computing, cell therapy and regenerational medicine and supplements manufacturing and sales.
On September 3, 2021, the Company entered into an Assets Acquisition Agreement with Wang’s Property Investment & Management LLC to purchase 53 units in 19 real estate properties appraised at $7,626, 286.37 for a purchase price of $7,000,000, The purchase price shall be paid as follows : (i) $1,000,000 on execution of the Agreement, (ii) $2,000,000 within 60 days thereof and (iii) the remainder by April 10, 2022. The Agreement is subject to customary closing conditions, including, satisfactory due diligence. On September 9, 2021, the Company entered into a Supplemental Assets Acquisition Agreement with Wang’s Property Investment & Management LLC to amend and clarify that (i) it was purchasing 19 real estate properties which includes 53 units appraised at $7,626,286.37 for a purchase price of $7,000,000 and (ii) that it will waive and not conduct due diligence in order for the transaction to proceed. The acquisition has not been consummated. With the asset acquisition from Wang’s Property Investment & Management LLC, the Company will diversify its business into property investment and management.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020.
Sales amounted to $195,671 and $5,474 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in sales is because the company sold products bought in the open market to a customer who accounted for 99% of our total sales in the year ended June 30, 2021.
Cost of goods sold amounted to $144,318 and $3,369 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of cost of goods sold is due to increased sales.
Gross profit amounted to $51,353 and $2,105 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of gross profit in 2021 is due to increased sales. The Company has one major wholesale transaction with a new customer in the year ended June 30, 2021. Sales to this customer accounted for approximately 99% of total sales of the year ended June 30, 2021.
Gross profit rates were 26.24% and 38.46% for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in gross profit rate in 2021 is due to the Company selling products at a lower, wholesale price to a new customer.
Operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $294,913 and $48,256, respectively. The increase was mainly due to increased payroll expenses, rent expenses and professional expenses.
Our net loss for the year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $269,054 and $51,916, respectively. The increase in net loss was mainly due to increased operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity are funds generated by operations, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures.
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements (“CFS”)were prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying CFS, the Company has incurred recurring net losses. For the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company recorded a net loss of $ $269,054, used cash to fund operating activities of $329,241, and at June 30, 2021, had a shareholders’ deficit of $467,827. For the year ended June 30, 2020, the Company recorded a net loss of $51,916, used cash to fund operating activities of $39,559. These factors create substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
The Company is raising the additional capital to achieve profitable operations.
Our cash needs for the year ended June 30, 2021 were primarily met by loans and advances from our current majority shareholder. As of June 30, 2021, we had cash balance of $396,136. Our future majority shareholders will need to provide all of our working capitals going forward.
Primarily as a result of our recurring losses and our lack of liquidity, we received a report from our independent registered public accounting firm for our financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2021 that includes an explanatory paragraph describing the uncertainty as to our ability to continue as a going concern.
Financial Position
As of June 30, 2021, we had $396,136 in cash, working capital of $50,989 and an accumulated deficit of $3,555,696.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements (“CFS”) in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reported periods. Actual results may differ from those estimates and such differences may be material to the financial statements. The more significant estimates and assumptions by management include among others, the fair value of shares of common stock issued for services. The current economic environment has increased the degree of uncertainty inherent in these estimates and assumptions.
Revenues
Revenue from sale of goods under Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, is recognized in a manner that reasonably reflects the delivery of the Company’s products and services to customers in return for expected consideration and includes the following elements:
●
executed contract(s) with customers that the Company believes is legally enforceable;
●
identification of performance obligation in the respective contract;
●
determination of the transaction price for each performance obligation in the respective contract;
●
allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation; and
●
recognition of revenue only when the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or net realizable value. Adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value are made, if required, for estimated excess, obsolescence, or impaired balances.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value measurements are determined using authoritative guidance issued by the FASB, with the exception of the application of the guidance to non-recurring, non-financial assets and liabilities as permitted. Fair value is defined in the authoritative guidance as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A fair value hierarchy was established, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value into three broad levels as follows:
Level 1-Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2-Inputs, other than the quoted prices in active markets, are observable either directly or indirectly.
Level 3-Unobservable inputs based on the Company’s assumptions.
The Company is required to use observable market data if available without undue cost and effort.
The Company’s financial instruments include cash and accounts payable. Management has estimated that the carrying amounts approximate their fair value due to the short-term nature.
Loss per Share
Basic earnings (loss) per share are computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number of common shares available. Diluted earnings (loss) per share is computed similar to basic earnings per share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the potential common shares had been issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive. The Company’s diluted loss per share is the same as the basic loss per share for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, as there are no potential shares outstanding that would have a dilutive effect.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on pretax financial accounting income. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts. Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will more likely than not be realized. The Company recorded a valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets as of June 30, 2021 and 2020.
The Company accounts for uncertainty in income taxes using a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. The Company classifies the liability for unrecognized tax benefits as current to the extent that the Company anticipates payment (or receipt) of cash within one year. Interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in the provision for income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Footnote 2 of the financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any contractual obligations or off-balance sheet arrangements.