ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report.
Business Overview
We are a leading global provider of outsourced aircraft and aviation operating services. We operate the world’s largest fleet of 747 freighters and provide customers a broad array of 747, 777, 767 and 737 aircraft for domestic, regional and international cargo and passenger operations. We provide unique value to our customers by giving them access to highly reliable modern production freighters that deliver the lowest unit cost in the marketplace combined with outsourced aircraft operating services that we believe lead the industry in terms of quality and global scale. Our customers include express delivery providers, e-commerce retailers, the U.S. military, charter brokers, freight forwarders, direct shippers, airlines, manufacturers, sports teams and fans, and private charter customers. We provide global services with operations in Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, the Middle East, North America and South America.
We believe that the following competitive strengths will allow us to capitalize on opportunities that exist in the global airfreight industry:
Market leader with leading-edge technology and differentiated, value-creating solutions
The 747-8F and 777-200LRF aircraft are two of the most efficient long-haul wide-body commercial freighters available and we are currently the only operator offering both of these aircraft under ACMI and CMI agreements. Our operating model deploys our aircraft to drive maximum utilization and value from our fleet. The scale of our fleet enables us to have aircraft available globally to respond to our customers’ needs, both on a planned and ad hoc basis. We believe this provides us with a commercial advantage over our competitors that operate smaller and less flexible fleets.
Our Dry Leasing business is primarily focused on a portfolio of 777-200LRF aircraft, and our fleet of 767-300 freighter aircraft for regional and domestic applications. These aircraft are Dry Leased to customers on a long-term basis, which further diversifies our business mix and enhances our predictable, long-term revenue and earnings streams.
Stable base of contractual revenue and reduced operational risk
Our focus on providing long-term contracted aircraft and operating solutions to customers stabilizes our revenues and reduces our operational risk. ACMI and CMI contracts with customers generally range from two to seven years. Long-term Charter programs provide customers with dedicated Charter capacity generally ranging from one to three years. We also provide certain of these services on a short-term basis. Dry Leasing contracts with customers generally range from five to nine years. Under these types of contracts, our customers assume fuel, demand and price risk resulting in reduced operational risk for AAWW, while typically providing us with a guaranteed minimum level of revenue and target level of profitability.
Focus on asset optimization
By managing the largest fleet of outsourced freighter aircraft, we achieve significant economies of scale in areas such as aircraft maintenance, crew efficiency, crew training, inventory management and purchasing.
Our mix of aircraft is closely aligned with our customer needs. By providing the broadest array of 747, 777, 767 and 737 aircraft for domestic, regional and international applications, we believe that we are well-suited to meet the current and anticipated requirements of our customers.
We continually evaluate our fleet to ensure that we offer the most efficient and effective mix of aircraft to meet our customers’ needs. Our service model is unique in that we offer a portfolio of operating solutions that complement our freighter aircraft businesses. We believe this allows us to improve the returns we generate from our asset base by allowing us to flexibly redeploy aircraft to meet changing market conditions, ensuring the maximum
utilization of our fleet. Our Charter services complement our ACMI services by allowing us to increase aircraft utilization during open time and to react to changes in demand and Yield in these businesses. We have employees situated around the globe who closely monitor demand for commercial charter services in each region, enabling us to redeploy available aircraft quickly. We also endeavor to manage our portfolio to stagger contract terms, which mitigates our remarketing risks and aircraft down time.
Long-term strategic customer relationships and unique innovative service offerings
We combine the global scope and scale of our efficient aircraft fleet with high-quality, cost-effective operations and premium customer service to provide unique, fully integrated and reliable solutions for our customers. We believe this approach results in customers that are motivated to seek long-term relationships with us. This has historically allowed us to command higher prices than our competitors in several key areas. These long-term relationships help us to build resilience into our business model.
Our customers have access to our innovative solutions, such as inter-operable crews, flight scheduling, fuel-efficiency planning, and maintenance spare coverage, which, we believe, set us apart from other participants in the outsourced aircraft and aviation operating services market. Furthermore, we have access to valuable operating rights to restricted markets such as Brazil, Japan and China. We believe our freighter services allow our customers to effectively expand their capacity and operate dedicated freighter aircraft without simultaneously taking on exposure to fluctuations in the value of owned aircraft and, in the case of our ACMI and long-term Charter contracts, long-term expenses relating to crews and maintenance. Dedicated freighter aircraft enable schedules to be driven by cargo rather than passenger demand (for those customers that typically handle portions of their cargo operations via belly capacity on passenger aircraft), which we believe allows our customers to drive higher contribution from cargo operations.
We are focused on providing safe, secure and reliable services. The Airlines have successfully completed the International Air Transport Association’s Operational Safety Audit (“IOSA”), a globally recognized safety and quality standard.
We provide outsourced aircraft and aviation services to some of the world’s premier express delivery providers, e-commerce retailers, airlines and freight forwarders. We will take advantage of opportunities to maintain and expand our relationships with our existing customers, while seeking new customers and new geographic markets.
Experienced management team
Our management team has extensive operating and leadership experience in the airfreight, airline, aircraft leasing and logistics industries at companies such as United Airlines, US Airways, Lufthansa Cargo, GE Capital Aviation Services, GE, Air Canada, Canadian Airlines, American Airlines, JetBlue Airways, ICF International, ASTAR Air Cargo, FPG Amentum, KLM Cargo, SMBC Aviation Capital, Spirit Airlines, Spirit AeroSystems, Singapore Airlines Cargo and China Cargo Airlines, as well as the United States Army, Navy, Air Force and Federal Air Marshal Service. In addition, our management team has a diversity of experience from other industries at companies such as Mastercard, PepsiCo, Moody’s, Ralph Lauren, Kate Spade, Avon Products, New York Life Insurance, Hess and Unisys, as well as nationally recognized accounting and law firms. Our management team is led by John W. Dietrich, who has more than 30 years of experience in all facets of aviation and airline management.
Business Strategy
Our strategy includes the following:
Focus on securing long-term customer contracts
We will continue to focus on securing long-term contracts with fast-growing customers, including those in express, e-commerce and the fastest-growing regional markets, which provide us with relatively stable revenue streams and margins. In addition, these agreements limit our direct exposure to fuel and other costs and mitigate the risk of fluctuations in both Yield and demand in the airfreight business, while also improving the overall utilization of our fleet.
Aggressively manage our fleet with a focus on leading-edge aircraft
We continue to actively manage our fleet of leading-edge wide-body freighter aircraft to meet customer demands. Our 747-8F and 777-200LRF freighter aircraft are primarily utilized in our ACMI business, while our 747-400s are utilized in our ACMI and Charter business. We aggressively manage our fleet to ensure that we provide our customers with the most efficient aircraft to meet their needs.
Our Dry Leasing business is primarily focused on a portfolio of modern, efficient 777-200LRF aircraft and our fleet of 767-300 freighter aircraft for regional and domestic applications. We will continue to explore opportunities to invest in additional aircraft.
Drive significant and ongoing productivity improvements
We continue to enhance our organization through a cost saving and productivity enhancing initiative called “Continuous Improvement.” We created a separate department to drive the process and to involve all areas of the organization in the effort to re-examine, redesign and improve the way we do business.
Selectively pursue and evaluate future acquisitions and alliances
From time to time, we explore business combinations, joint ventures and alliances with express delivery providers, e-commerce retailers, airlines, freight forwarders and other companies to enhance our competitive position, geographic reach and service portfolio.
Appropriately managing capital allocation and delivering value to shareholders
Our commitment to creating, enhancing and delivering value to our shareholders reflects a disciplined and balanced capital allocation strategy. Our focus is on growing our business while generating returns above our cost of capital, maintaining a strong balance sheet and returning capital to shareholders.
Business Developments
Our Airline Operations results for 2021, compared with 2020, were positively impacted by our ability to enhance our long-term strategic customers, manage our fleet and increase aircraft utilization to meet strong customer demand. During 2020 and 2021, we entered into numerous ACMI and long-term Charter agreements and extensions with key customers seeking to secure committed cargo capacity. These long-term contracts provide us with guaranteed revenue and include indexed fuel price adjustments to mitigate our exposure to fuel price volatility. In 2020, we reactivated four 747-400BCF aircraft that had been temporarily parked and began long-term Charter operations using a 777-200 freighter aircraft that was previously in our Dry Leasing business.
Strong customer demand in fast-growing trade lanes was further enhanced by the continued reduction of available cargo capacity in the market provided by passenger airlines and the disruption of global supply chains due to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in significantly higher commercial charter cargo Yields, net of fuel.
COVID-19 has disrupted global manufacturing, supply chains, passenger travel and consumer spending, resulting in flight cancellations, in 2020, by certain of our ACMI customers and lower AMC passenger flying as the military took precautionary measures to limit the movement of personnel through June 2021.
Given the dynamic nature of this pandemic, the financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. We have incurred and expect to incur significant additional costs, including premium pay for pilots operating in certain areas significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and other operational costs, including costs for continuing to provide a safe working environment for our employees. In addition, the availability of hotels and restaurants, evolving COVID-19-related travel restrictions and health screenings, employees who are unable to work, and reductions in passenger flights by other airlines globally or airport closures have impacted and could further impact our ability to position employees to operate our aircraft.
In response to these challenging times, we have:
•
made COVID-19 vaccinations and test kits available to employees and their families;
•
provided paid time-off for employees to get COVID-19 vaccinations;
•
implemented frequent deep cleaning of all aircraft and facilities;
•
provided safety kits for each crewmember and all aircraft;
•
continuously adjusted routes to limit exposure to regions significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
implemented significant workforce testing, social distancing and protection measures at all of our facilities;
•
arranged for employees who can work remotely to do so and developed plans for a partial return to the workplace based on local conditions;
•
reduced nonessential employee travel;
•
reduced the use of contractors;
•
implemented a number of other cost reduction initiatives;
•
taken other actions, such as the sale of certain nonessential assets; and
•
entered into a PSP Agreement with the U.S. Treasury with respect to payroll support funding available to cargo carriers.
The continuation or worsening of the aforementioned and other factors could materially affect our results for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In August 2021, the Department of Defense activated the CRAF for the first time since 2002 to augment support to the U.S. Department of State in the evacuation of U.S. citizens and personnel, special immigrant visa applicants, and other at-risk individuals from Afghanistan. We provided three 747-400 passenger aircraft to support the CRAF activation, which ended in mid-September, and also provided additional 767 passenger aircraft in support of these evacuations for the AMC.
We have achieved a new five-year CBA with our pilots. This long-term CBA was reached through a binding arbitration process, with the arbitrator’s decision being issued on September 10, 2021. The new pay rates became effective as of September 1, 2021, and we’re working closely together with the union’s new leadership on the implementation of other provisions of the agreement. Under this industry competitive agreement, all of our pilots will receive significantly higher pay, quality of life improvements and enhanced benefits. There are a few remaining open items from the arbitration decision that the parties are working together to resolve. Labor costs arising from the new CBA are materially greater than the costs under our previous CBAs (see Note 14 to our Financial Statements for further discussion).
We continually assess our aircraft requirements and will make adjustments to our capacity as necessary. Some of these actions may involve grounding or disposing of aircraft or engines, which could result in asset impairments or other charges in future periods.
We manage our fleet to profitably serve our customers with modern, efficient aircraft. In December 2021, we signed an agreement with The Boeing Company (“Boeing”) for the purchase of four new 777-200LRF aircraft. The first of the four new 777-200LRFs is expected to be delivered in November 2022, with the other three expected to be delivered throughout 2023. In January 2021, we signed an agreement with Boeing for the purchase of four new 747-8F aircraft. The aircraft are expected to be delivered from May through October 2022. Between May and October 2021, we acquired six of our existing 747-400 freighter aircraft that were previously on lease to us. In May and June of 2021, we reached agreement with several of our lessors to purchase five of our other 747-400 freighters at the end of their existing lease terms, which range from March to December 2022. Acquiring these eleven 747-400 freighter aircraft keeps them in our fleet and ensures committed capacity to our customers.
Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Financial Statements and other financial information appearing and referred to elsewhere in this report.
Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Statistics
The following tables compare our Segment Operating Fleet (average aircraft equivalents during the period) and total Block Hours operated:
*
Airline Operations average fleet excludes spare aircraft provided by CMI customers.
**
Out-of-service includes aircraft that are either temporarily parked or held for sale.
***
Includes Airline Operations and other Block Hours.
Operating Revenue
The following table compares our Operating Revenue (in thousands):
Airline Operations
Airline Operations revenue increased $822.2 million, or 26.8%, primarily due to an increase in Revenue per Block Hour and increased flying. Revenue per Block Hour rose primarily due to an increased proportion of higher-yielding flying, including the impact of new and extended long-term contracts, the impact of the ongoing reduction of available cargo capacity provided by passenger airlines in the market and the continued disruption of global supply chains due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as higher fuel prices. The increase in Block Hours flown was primarily due to our ability to increase aircraft utilization to meet strong customer demand, reflecting growth in airfreight volumes. Due to strong demand for our services, we reactivated four 747-400BCF aircraft throughout 2020 that had been temporarily parked and began using a 777-200 freighter aircraft that was previously in our Dry Leasing business.
Dry Leasing
Dry Leasing revenue was relatively unchanged.
Operating Expenses
The following table compares our Operating Expenses (in thousands):
NM represents year-over-year changes that are not meaningful.
Salaries, wages and benefits increased $186.5 million, or 25.3%, primarily due to higher pilot costs related to our new JCBA since the beginning of September 2021, including $29.2 million related to adjustments to paid time-off benefits in our new JCBA (see Note 14 to our Financial Statements). In addition, pilot costs reflected higher profit sharing driven by higher earnings, as well as increased flying.
Aircraft fuel increased $384.3 million, or 87.2%, primarily due to an increase in the average fuel cost per gallon and an increase in consumption related to increased Charter flying. Our exposure to fluctuations in fuel price is limited to the shorter-term commercial portion of our Charter services only, as fuel risk is largely mitigated by price adjustments, including those based on indexed fuel prices for longer-term commercial charter contracts. We do not incur fuel expense in providing ACMI and CMI services or in our Dry Leasing business as the cost of fuel is borne by the customer. Similarly, we generally have no fuel price risk for AMC charters because the price is set under our contract with the AMC, and we receive or make payments to adjust for price increases and decreases from the contractual rate. Average fuel cost per gallon and fuel consumption for 2021 and 2020 were:
Maintenance, materials and repairs decreased by $33.8 million, or 6.7%, primarily reflecting $68.4 million of decreased Heavy Maintenance expense, partially offset by $22.1 million of increased Line Maintenance expense and $12.6 million of increased Non-heavy Maintenance expense. Heavy Maintenance expense on 747-400 aircraft decreased $73.3 million primarily due to a decrease in the number of engine overhauls and a decrease in the number of D and C Checks. Partially offsetting this decrease was an increase in Heavy Maintenance expense on 747-8F aircraft of $3.5 million primarily due to an increase in the number of C Checks, partially offset by a decrease in the number of D Checks. Line Maintenance expense increased primarily due to increased flying. Non-heavy Maintenance expense on 747-8F aircraft increased $9.0 million primarily due to an increase in landing gear overhauls. Heavy airframe maintenance checks and engine overhauls impacting Maintenance, materials and repairs for 2021 and 2020 were:
Depreciation and amortization increased $23.5 million, or 9.1%, primarily due to the acquisition of flight equipment, changes in 747-400 freighter aircraft leases (see Note 10 to our Financial Statements) and an increase in the amortization of deferred maintenance costs related to 747-8F engine overhauls (see Note 2 to our Financial Statements).
Navigation fees, landing fees and other rent increased $29.0 million, or 18.7%, primarily due to increased Charter flying.
Travel increased $8.2 million, or 5.3%, primarily due to increased flying.
Passenger and ground handling services increased $18.1 million, or 13.1%, primarily due to increased Charter flying.
Aircraft rent decreased $29.1 million, or 30.1%, primarily due to changes in 747-400 freighter aircraft leases (see Note 10 to our Financial Statements) and the acquisition of 747-400 freighter aircraft that were previously on lease to us.
Gain on disposal of aircraft in 2021 and 2020 represented net gains from the sale of certain nonessential assets (see Note 6 to our Financial Statements).
Special charge in 2020 represented a $16.3 million charge related to fair value adjustments for spare engines classified as assets held for sale (See Note 6 to our Financial Statements).
Transaction-related expenses in 2020 primarily related to professional fees in support of the Payroll Support Program under the CARES Act (see Note 3 to our Financial Statements).
Other increased $28.1 million, or 13.0%, primarily due to an increase in professional fees, which included costs associated with negotiations and arbitration for a new JCBA (see Note 14 to our Financial Statements), as well as costs for continuing to provide a safe working environment for our employees and costs associated with the movement of spare engines.
Non-operating Expenses (Income)
The following table compares our Non-operating Expenses (Income) (in thousands):
Interest expense decreased $7.1 million, or 6.2%, primarily due to the scheduled repayment of debt.
Capitalized interest increased $7.4 million primarily due to pre-delivery deposits related to our January 2021 agreement to purchase four 747-8F aircraft from Boeing (see Note 2 to our Financial Statements).
Loss on early extinguishment of debt in 2021 was due to the repayment of two term loans (see Note 9 to our Financial Statements).
Unrealized loss on financial instruments represents the change in fair value of a customer warrant liability (see Note 8 to our Financial Statements) primarily due to changes in our common stock price until the exercise of certain warrants in October 2020 and January 2021.
Other (income) expense, net decreased $145.0 million primarily due to a $110.6 million decrease in CARES Act grant income (see Note 3 to our Financial Statements) and a $35.0 million reduction in refunds of aircraft rent paid in previous years (see Note 6 to our Financial Statements).
Income taxes. Our effective income tax rates were 23.8% and 27.5% for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The effective income tax rate for 2021 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to state income taxes and certain expenses that are not deductible for tax purposes. The effective income tax rate for 2020 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to nondeductible changes in the fair value of a customer warrant liability (see Note 8 to our Financial Statements).
Segments
The following table compares the Direct Contribution for our reportable segments (see Note 13 to our Financial Statements for the reconciliation to Operating income) (in thousands):
Airline Operations Segment
Airline Operations Direct Contribution increased $281.3 million, or 38.0%, primarily due to our ability to increase aircraft utilization to meet strong customer demand, increased Yields, net of fuel, including the impact of new and extended long-term contracts, and lower Heavy Maintenance expense. Direct Contribution also benefited from the operation of four 747-400 freighters reactivated throughout 2020 and a 777-200 freighter aircraft that was previously in our Dry Leasing business. Partially offsetting these improvements were higher pilot costs related to our new JCBA (see Note 14 to our Financial Statements) and higher pilot profit sharing driven by higher earnings.
Dry Leasing Segment
Dry Leasing Direct Contribution increased $1.5 million, or 3.7%, primarily due to lower interest expense related to the scheduled repayment of debt.
Unallocated expenses and (income), net
Unallocated expenses and (income), net increased $208.7 million, or 103.8%, primarily due to a $110.6 million decrease in CARES Act grant income (see Note 3 to our Financial Statements), a $35.0 million reduction in refunds of aircraft rent paid in previous years and a $29.2 million increase related to adjustments to paid time-off benefits in our new JCBA (see Note 14 to our Financial Statements).
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Statistics
The following tables compare our Segment Operating Fleet (average aircraft equivalents during the period) and total Block Hours operated:
*
Airline Operations average fleet excludes spare aircraft provided by CMI customers.
**
Out-of-service includes aircraft that are temporarily parked or held for sale.
***
Includes Airline Operations and other Block Hours.
Operating Revenue
The following table compares our Operating Revenue (in thousands):
Airline Operations
Airline Operations revenue increased $512.8 million, or 20.1%, primarily due to an increase in Revenue per Block Hour and increased cargo flying. The increase in Revenue per Block Hour was primarily due to an increased proportion of higher-yielding commercial cargo Charter flying, reflecting a reduction of available cargo capacity provided by passenger airlines in the market and the disruption of global supply chains due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Partially offsetting these improvements were lower fuel prices and an increase in CMI flying. Block Hours flown increased primarily due to increased demand for our Charter services driven by the factors impacting commercial cargo demand noted above and our ability to increase aircraft utilization. Due to this increased demand, we began operation of a 777-200 freighter aircraft that was previously in our Dry Leasing business. Partially offsetting these improvements was lower AMC passenger flying for 747-400 aircraft as the U.S. military took precautionary measures to limit the movement of military personnel during the first half of 2020 and fewer charters for sports teams and fans as sports leagues cancelled games during 2020. In addition, Block Hours were negatively impacted from flight cancellations by certain of our customers caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Dry Leasing
Dry Leasing revenue decreased $35.6 million, or 17.7%, primarily due to $22.3 million of revenue during the first quarter of 2019 from maintenance payments related to the scheduled return of a 777-200 freighter aircraft, changes in leases and the disposition of certain nonessential Dry Leased aircraft during the first quarter of 2020.
Operating Expenses
The following table compares our Operating Expenses (in thousands):
Salaries, wages and benefits increased $138.2 million, or 23.0%, primarily due to higher pilot costs related to premium pay for pilots operating in certain areas significantly impacted by COVID-19, increased flying and increased pay rates we provided to our pilots in May 2020.
Maintenance, materials and repairs increased by $124.6 million, or 32.6%, primarily reflecting $115.3 million of increased Heavy Maintenance expense and $10.9 million of increased Line Maintenance expense driven by increased flying. Heavy Maintenance expense on 747-400 aircraft increased $104.5 million, primarily due to an increase in the number of engine overhauls performed to take advantage of availability and opportunities for vendor pricing discounts, and an increase in the number of D Checks. Heavy Maintenance expense on 747-8F aircraft increased $7.4 million primarily due to an increase in the number of D Checks, partially offset by a reduction in the number of C Checks. Heavy airframe maintenance checks and engine overhauls impacting Maintenance, materials and repairs for 2020 and 2019 were:
Aircraft fuel decreased $43.2 million, or 8.9%, primarily due to a decrease in the average fuel cost per gallon, partially offset by higher consumption related to increased Charter flying. Our exposure to fluctuations in fuel price is limited to the shorter-term commercial portion of our Charter services only, as fuel risk is largely mitigated by price adjustments, including those based on indexed fuel prices for longer-term commercial charter contracts. We do not incur fuel expense in providing ACMI and CMI services or in our Dry Leasing business as the cost of fuel is borne by the customer. Similarly, we generally have no fuel price risk for AMC charters because the price is set under our contract with the AMC, and we receive or make payments to adjust for price increases and decreases from the contractual rate. Average fuel cost per gallon and fuel consumption for 2020 and 2019 were:
Depreciation and amortization increased $6.6 million, or 2.6%, primarily due to an increase in the amortization of deferred maintenance costs related to 747-8F engine overhauls (see Note 2 to our Financial Statements) and an increase in the scrapping of rotable parts related to the increase in the number of engine overhauls. Partially offsetting these increases was a reduction in depreciation related to the 747-400 freighter asset group that was written down during the fourth quarter of 2019, and certain spare CF6-80 engines and aircraft that were classified as held for sale during the fourth quarter of 2019.
Navigation fees, landing fees and other rent increased $10.3 million, or 7.1%, primarily due to increased flying, partially offset by a decrease in purchased capacity, which is a component of other rent.
Travel decreased $34.4 million, or 18.2%, primarily due to decreased rates and travel related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in flying.
Passenger and ground handling services increased $8.1 million, or 6.2%, primarily due to increased cargo flying.
Aircraft rent decreased $58.8 million, or 37.8%, primarily due to a reduction in the amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets related to the 747-400 freighter asset group that was written down during the fourth quarter of 2019.
Loss (gain) on disposal of aircraft in 2020 represented a net gain of $7.2 million from the sale of certain nonessential assets that were classified as assets held for sale during the fourth quarter of 2019 (see Note 6 to our Financial Statements). 2019 primarily represents a loss on the trade in of a GEnx engine as part of an exchange transaction.
Special charge in 2020 represented a $16.3 million impairment charge related to fair value adjustments for spare engines classified as assets held for sale. 2019 primarily represented a $580.3 million impairment charge related to the write-down of the 747-400 freighter fleet and a $58.1 million impairment charge related to assets sold and held for sale, including certain aircraft in our Dry Leasing portfolio, spare CF6-80 engines and 737-400 passenger aircraft previously used for training purposes. See Note 6 to our Financial Statements for additional discussion. We may sell additional flight equipment, which could result in additional charges in future periods.
Transaction-related expenses in 2020 primarily related to professional fees in support of the Payroll Support Program under the CARES Act (see Note 3 to our Financial Statements). 2019 primarily related to professional fees for a customer transaction with warrants (see Note 8 to our Financial Statements).
Non-operating Expenses (Income)
The following table compares our Non-operating Expenses (Income) (in thousands):
Unrealized loss (gain) on financial instruments represents the change in fair value of a customer warrant liability (see Note 8 to our Financial Statements) primarily due to changes in our common stock price.
Other income, net increased $158.1 million primarily due to CARES Act grant income of $151.6 million (see Note 3 to our Financial Statements).
Income taxes. Our effective income tax rates were an expense rate of 27.5% for 2020 and a benefit rate of 38.0% for 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to nondeductible changes in the fair value of a customer warrant liability (see Note 8 to our Financial Statements). The effective tax rate for 2019 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to a tax benefit related to the favorable completion of an IRS examination of our 2015 income tax return and, to a lesser extent, a tax benefit due to nontaxable changes in the fair value of a customer warrant liability.
Segments
The following table compares the Direct Contribution for our reportable segments (see Note 13 to our Financial Statements for the reconciliation to Operating income) (in thousands):
Airline Operations Segment
Airline Operations Direct Contribution increased $371.8 million, or 101.1%, primarily due to increased commercial cargo Charter Yields, net of fuel, and demand for our commercial cargo Charter services, reflecting a reduction of available capacity in the market, the disruption of global supply chains due to the COVID-19 pandemic and our ability to increase aircraft utilization. Direct Contribution also benefited from a reduction in aircraft rent and depreciation, increased CMI flying and the operation of a 777-200 freighter aircraft that was previously in our Dry Leasing business. Partially offsetting these improvements were higher Heavy Maintenance expense, including additional engine overhauls performed to take advantage of availability and opportunities for vendor pricing discounts, higher pilot costs related to premium pay for pilots operating in certain areas significantly impacted by COVID-19 and increased pay rates we provided to our pilots in May 2020. In addition, Airline Operations Direct Contribution was negatively impacted by fewer passenger charters for sports teams and fans as sports leagues cancelled games during 2020 and lower AMC passenger flying for 747-400 aircraft as the U.S. military took precautionary measures to limit the movement of military personnel during the first half of 2020.
Dry Leasing Segment
Dry Leasing Direct Contribution decreased $29.3 million, or 41.7%, primarily due to $22.3 million of revenue during the first quarter of 2019 from maintenance payments related to the scheduled return of a 777-200 freighter aircraft, changes in leases and the disposition of certain nonessential Dry Leased aircraft during the first quarter of 2020.
Unallocated expenses and (income), net
Unallocated expenses and (income), net decreased $136.4 million, or 40.4%, primarily due to CARES Act grant income (see Note 3 to our Financial Statements).
Reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our Financial Statements presented in accordance with GAAP, we present certain non-GAAP financial measures to assist in the evaluation of our business performance. These non-GAAP financial measures include Adjusted income from continuing operations, net of taxes, Adjusted Diluted EPS from continuing operations, net of taxes and Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”), which exclude certain noncash income and expenses, and items impacting year-over-year comparisons of our results. These non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for Income from continuing operations, net of taxes and Diluted EPS from continuing operations, net of taxes which are the most directly comparable measures of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing the performance of our ongoing operations and in planning and forecasting future periods. These adjusted measures provide a more comparable basis to analyze operating results and earnings and are measures commonly used by shareholders to measure our performance. In addition, management’s incentive compensation is determined, in part, by using Adjusted income from continuing operations, net of taxes and Adjusted EBITDA. We believe that these adjusted measures, when considered together with the corresponding GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations to those measures, provide meaningful supplemental information to assist investors and analysts in understanding our business results and assessing our prospects for future performance.
The following is a reconciliation of Income (loss) from continuing operations, net of taxes and Diluted EPS from continuing operations, net of taxes to the corresponding non-GAAP financial measures (in thousands, except per share data):
The following is a reconciliation of Income (loss) from continuing operations, net of taxes to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
(a)
CARES Act grant income in 2021 and 2020 related to income associated with the Payroll Support Program (see Note 3 to our Financial Statements).
(b)
Adjustments to JCBA paid time-off benefits in 2021 are related to our new JCBA (see Note 14 to our Financial Statements).
(c)
Noncash expenses and income, net in 2021, 2020 and 2019 primarily related to amortization of debt discount on the convertible notes (see Note 9 to our Financial Statements).
(d)
Other, net in 2021 primarily related to a $6.0 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt, as well as leadership transaction costs and costs associated with our acquisition of an airline, partially offset by a gain on the sale of aircraft. Other, net in 2020 primarily related to a $7.2 million net gain on the sale of aircraft, as well as costs associated with the Payroll Support Program (see Note 3 to our Financial Statements), costs associated with the refinancing of debt, costs associated with our acquisition of an airline and accrual for legal matters and professional fees. Other, net in 2019 primarily related to a loss on the sale of a GEnx engine, a net insurance recovery, loss on early extinguishment of debt, unique training aircraft costs required for a customer contract, costs associated with a customer transaction with warrants (see Note 8 to our Financial Statements), costs associated with our acquisition of an airline and accrual for legal matters and professional fees.
(e)
Dilutive warrants represent potentially dilutive common shares related to warrants issued to a customer (see Note 8 to our Financial Statements). These warrants are excluded from Diluted EPS prepared in accordance with GAAP when they would have been antidilutive.
(f)
Represents the economic benefit from our convertible notes hedges in offsetting dilution from our convertible notes as we concluded in no event would economic dilution result from conversion of each of the convertible notes when our stock price is below the exercise price of the respective convertible note warrants (see Note 8 to our Financial Statements).
(g)
Special tax item in 2021 represents the income tax expense from the integration of a previously-acquired airline (see Note 14 to our Financial Statements). Special tax item in 2019 represents the income tax benefit from the completion of the 2015 IRS examination (see Note 11 to our Financial Statements). Both of these Special tax items are not related to ongoing operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In March 2021, we borrowed $16.2 million related to GEnx engine performance upgrade kits and overhauls under an unsecured five-year term loan at a fixed interest rate of 0.93%.
In June 2021, we borrowed $7.8 million related to GEnx engine performance upgrade kits and overhauls under an unsecured five-year term loan at a fixed interest rate of 0.91%.
In October 2021, we refinanced a term loan secured by a 747-8F aircraft and received proceeds of $90.0 million from a financing with an 83-month term for this aircraft at a blended fixed rate of 2.90%.
In November 2021, we refinanced a term loan secured by a 747-8F aircraft and received proceeds of $90.0 million from a financing with an 84-month term for this aircraft at a blended fixed rate of 2.98%.
In November 2021, we borrowed $8.8 million related to GEnx engine performance upgrade kits and overhauls under an unsecured five-year term loan at a fixed interest rate of 1.45%.
Operating Activities. For 2021, Net cash provided by operating activities was $923.0 million, which primarily reflected Net income of $493.3 million, noncash adjustments of $357.3 million for Depreciation and amortization and $152.4 million for deferred taxes. Partially offsetting these items was a $49.8 million increase in Prepaid expenses, current assets, and other assets, a $37.8 million increase in Accounts receivable and a $11.5 million decrease in Accounts payable and accrued liabilities. For 2020, Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,009.5 million, which primarily reflected Net income of $360.3 million, noncash adjustments of $328.1 million for Depreciation and amortization, $133.6 million for deferred taxes and $71.1 million for Unrealized loss on financial instruments, a $115.5 million increase in Accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and a $26.1 million decrease in Accounts receivable. Partially offsetting these items was a $56.7 million increase in Prepaid expenses, current assets, and other assets.
Investing Activities. For 2021, Net cash used for investing activities was $493.4 million, consisting primarily of $407.7 million of payments for flight equipment and modifications, and $90.3 million of core capital expenditures, excluding flight equipment, partially offset by $9.5 million of proceeds from the disposal of aircraft. Payments for flight equipment and modifications during 2021 were primarily related to pre-delivery payments, spare engines and GEnx engine performance upgrade kits. All capital expenditures for 2021 were funded through working capital and the financings discussed above. For 2020, Net cash used for investing activities was $145.3 million, consisting primarily of $184.3 million of payments for flight equipment and modifications, and $78.9 million of core capital expenditures, excluding flight equipment, partially offset by $126.3 million of proceeds from the disposal of aircraft. Payments for flight equipment and modifications during 2020 were primarily related to spare engines and GEnx engine performance upgrade kits. All capital expenditures for 2020 were funded through working capital and the financings discussed above.
Financing Activities. For 2021, Net cash used for financing activities was $364.9 million, which primarily reflected $542.6 million of payments on debt and finance lease obligations and $35.6 million in payments of maintenance reserves, partially offset by proceeds from debt issuance of $212.7 million, and $17.7 million of customer maintenance reserves and deposits received. For 2020, Net cash used for financing activities was $121.4 million, which primarily reflected $429.7 million of payments on debt obligations, $175.0 million of payments on
our revolving credit facility and $14.4 million in payments of maintenance reserves, partially offset by proceeds from debt issuance of $417.7 million, proceeds from our revolver credit facility of $75.0 million, and $15.2 million of customer maintenance reserves and deposits received.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have significantly reduced nonessential employee travel, reduced the use of contractors, implemented a number of other cost reduction initiatives and taken actions to increase liquidity and strengthen our financial position, including participation in the Payroll Support Program. We consider Cash and cash equivalents, Net cash provided by operating activities and availability under our revolving credit facility to be sufficient to meet our debt and lease obligations, to fund capital expenditures for 2022 and to purchase shares of our stock under our stock repurchase program (see Note 17 to our Financial Statements), as follows:
•
Principal payments related to our debt and finance lease obligations are expected to be approximately $656.6 million, which includes our convertible notes issued in 2015 that are due in June 2022.
•
Payments related to our operating leases are expected to be approximately $62.9 million.
•
Core capital expenditures are expected to range from $135.0 to $145.0 million, which excludes flight equipment and capitalized interest.
•
Committed capital expenditures for flight equipment are expected to be approximately $763.9 million.
Committed capital expenditures include pre-delivery and delivery payments for the purchase of four new 747-8F and four new 777-200LRF aircraft from Boeing, and other agreements to acquire spare engines. We expect to finance the aircraft delivery payments through secured debt financing. The four 747-8F aircraft are expected to be delivered from May 2022 through October 2022. The first 777-200LRF aircraft is expected to be delivered in November 2022, with the other three expected to be delivered throughout 2023.
In February 2022, our board of directors approved the establishment of a new stock repurchase program authorizing up to $200.0 million of our common stock. Purchases may be made at our discretion in the form of accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) programs, open market repurchase programs, privately negotiated transactions, or a combination of these methods. As part of the stock repurchase program, we will enter into a $100.0 million ASR program. Purchases under the ASR program are expected to be completed by the end of the second quarter.
We may access external sources of capital from time to time depending on our cash requirements, assessments of current and anticipated market conditions, and the after-tax cost of capital. To that end, we filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC in April 2020 that enables us to sell debt and/or equity securities on a registered basis over the subsequent three years, depending on market conditions, our capital needs and other factors. Our access to capital markets can be adversely impacted by prevailing economic conditions and by financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control. Additionally, our borrowing costs are affected by market conditions and may be adversely impacted by a tightening in credit markets.
We do not expect to pay any significant U.S. federal income tax for at least several years. Our business operations are subject to income tax in several foreign jurisdictions and in many states. We do not expect to pay any significant cash income taxes for at least several years in these foreign jurisdictions and states. We may repatriate the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to the extent taxes are insignificant. The U.S. and numerous other countries are currently considering tax reform, which could result in significant changes to U.S. and international tax laws. The potential enactment of these laws could have a material impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. We continue to monitor developments and assess the impact to us.
Description of Our Debt Obligations
See Note 9 to our Financial Statements for a description of our debt obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
See Note 10 to our Financial Statements for a discussion of aircraft-leasing trusts that meet the criteria for variable interest entities. We have not consolidated any of the aircraft-leasing trusts in which we are not the primary
beneficiary.
We hold equity interests in two joint venture arrangements to help develop a diversified freighter aircraft Dry Leasing portfolio and to purchase rotable parts and repair services for those parts, primarily for our 747-8F aircraft. Neither of these joint ventures qualifies for consolidated accounting treatment. The assets and liabilities of these entities are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets and we record our net investment under the equity method of accounting. See Note 2 to our Financial Statements for further discussion.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
General Discussion of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
An appreciation of our critical accounting policies and estimates is important to understand our financial results. Our Financial Statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP. Our critical policies require management to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported. Actual results may differ significantly from those estimates. The following is a brief description of our current critical accounting policies and estimates involving significant management judgment:
Accounting for Long-Lived Assets
We record our property and equipment at cost, and once assets are placed in service, we depreciate them on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives to their estimated residual values over periods not to exceed forty years for flight equipment (from date of original manufacture) and three to five years for ground equipment.
We record right-of-use assets for operating leases with terms greater than 12 months, including renewal options when appropriate, as the present value of fixed lease payments over the lease term. Since our leases do not typically provide a readily determinable discount rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate to discount lease payments to present value. Operating lease right-of-use assets are amortized over each lease term.
We record finite-lived intangible assets acquired at fair value and amortize them over their estimated useful lives. The estimated useful lives are based on estimates of the period during which the assets are expected to generate revenue.
We record impairment charges for long-lived assets when events and circumstances indicate that the assets may be impaired, the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than their carrying amount and the net book value of the assets exceeds their estimated fair value. In making these determinations, we use certain assumptions and estimates, including, but not limited to: (i) estimated fair value of the assets, and (ii) estimated future cash flows expected to be generated by these assets, which are based on additional assumptions such as asset utilization, revenue generated, associated costs, length of service and estimated residual values. In developing these estimates for flight equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets, we use external appraisals, adjusted for maintenance condition, as necessary; bids received from independent third parties; and industry data. To estimate the fair value of operating lease right-of-use assets, we determine the present value of current market fixed lease rates utilizing our incremental borrowing rate for the remaining term of each lease. To conduct impairment testing, we group assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of cash flows of other assets and liabilities. For flight equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets and finite-lived intangible assets used in our Airline Operations segment, assets are grouped at the operating fleet level. For flight equipment and finite-lived intangible assets used in our Dry Leasing segment, assets are assessed at the individual aircraft or engine level. Our long-lived asset groups evaluated for impairment can include flight equipment such as the aircraft, engines, rotable parts, leasehold improvements, operating lease right-of-use assets, as well as associated finite-lived intangible assets and deferred maintenance costs. If actual results differ from the assumptions or estimates used in our analysis or if there are downturns in economic or business conditions, it could have a material adverse impact on cash flows used to determine the fair value of our long-lived asset groups in relation to their carrying values and could result in an impairment loss.
For assets classified as held for sale, an impairment charge is recognized when the estimated fair value less the cost to sell the asset is less than its carrying amount. Fair value is determined using external appraisals or bids
received from independent third parties. To the extent that these estimates are different than the actual selling prices of these assets, we could recognize subsequent impairment losses or gains on the disposition of these assets.
Heavy Maintenance
Except as described in the paragraph below, we account for heavy maintenance costs for airframes and engines using the direct expense method. Under this method, heavy maintenance costs are charged to expense upon induction, based on our best estimate of the costs. When estimating the expected cost for each Heavy Maintenance event, management considers multiple factors, including historical costs and experience, and information provided by third-party maintenance providers. These estimates may be subsequently adjusted for changes and the final determination of actual costs incurred. This method can result in expense volatility between quarterly and annual periods, depending on the number and type of Heavy Maintenance events performed. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Accrued heavy maintenance was $79.6 million and $95.4 million, respectively. If our estimates of Accrued heavy maintenance as of December 31, 2021 would have changed by a hypothetical 10%, we would have recognized a change in Maintenance, materials and repairs expense of $8.0 million in 2021.
We account for Heavy Maintenance costs for airframes and engines used in our Dry Leasing segment and engines used on our 747-8F and 777-200 aircraft using the deferral method. Under this method, we defer the expense recognition of scheduled Heavy Maintenance events, which are amortized over the shorter of the estimated period until the next scheduled Heavy Maintenance event is required or remaining lease term.
Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes are recognized for the tax consequences of reporting items in our income tax returns at different times than the items are reflected in our financial statements. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities that are calculated by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing assets and liabilities. If necessary, deferred income tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to an amount that is determined to be more likely than not recoverable. We must make significant estimates and assumptions about future taxable income and future tax consequences when determining the amount, if any, of the valuation allowance.
We have recorded reserves for income taxes that may become payable in future years. Although management believes that its positions taken on income tax matters are reasonable, actual results could differ or taxing authorities could challenge certain of the positions taken by us, which could result in losses or gains that could be material. To the extent we prevail in matters for which reserves have been established, or are required to pay amounts in excess of our reserves, our effective income tax rate in a given financial statement period could be materially affected. An unfavorable tax settlement in excess of any reserves established would result in an increase in our effective income tax rate in the period of resolution. A favorable tax settlement less than any reserves established would result in a reduction in our effective income tax rate in the period of resolution.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of an acquisition’s purchase price over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but tested for impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each year, or more frequently if certain events or circumstances indicate that an impairment loss may have been incurred. We may elect to perform a qualitative analysis on the reporting unit that has goodwill to determine whether it is more likely than not that fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Under the qualitative approach, we consider various market factors to determine whether events and circumstances have affected the fair value of the reporting unit. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount, or if we elect not to perform a qualitative analysis, we perform a quantitative analysis to determine whether any goodwill impairment exists.
Fair value is determined using a discounted cash flow analysis based on key assumptions including, but not limited to, (i) a projection of revenues, expenses and other cash flows; (ii) terminal period earnings; and (iii) an assumed discount rate. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, the difference is written off as an impairment up to the carrying amount of goodwill.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed a qualitative assessment and determined that it was not necessary to perform a quantitative analysis. If actual results differ from the assumptions used in our qualitative analysis or there are changes in these qualitative factors, such as downturns in economic or business conditions, it could have a material adverse impact on the fair value of the reporting unit in relation to the carrying value of goodwill and could result in an impairment loss.
Legal and Regulatory Matters
We are party to legal and regulatory proceedings with respect to a variety of matters in multiple jurisdictions. We evaluate the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome of these proceedings each quarter. The events that may impact our contingent liabilities are often unique and generally are not predictable. At the time a contingency is identified, we consider all relevant facts as part of our evaluation. We record a liability for a loss when the likelihood of the loss occurring is probable and the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable. Events may arise that were not anticipated and the outcome of a contingency may result in a loss to us that differs from our previously estimated liability. Our judgments are subjective and are based on the status of the legal or regulatory proceedings, the merits of our defenses and consultation with legal counsel.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Financial Statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.