ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion and analysis of the financial condition of AbbVie Inc. (AbbVie or the company). This commentary should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes appearing in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Company Overview
AbbVie is a global, diversified research-based biopharmaceutical company positioned for success with a comprehensive product portfolio that has leadership positions across immunology, hematologic oncology, neuroscience, aesthetics and eye care. AbbVie uses its expertise, dedicated people and unique approach to innovation to develop and market advanced therapies that address some of the world’s most complex and serious diseases.
AbbVie's products are generally sold worldwide directly to wholesalers, distributors, government agencies, health care facilities, specialty pharmacies and independent retailers from AbbVie-owned distribution centers and public warehouses. Certain products (including aesthetic products and devices) are also sold directly to physicians and other licensed healthcare providers. In the United States, AbbVie distributes pharmaceutical products principally through independent wholesale distributors, with some sales directly to retailers, pharmacies, patients or other customers. Outside the United States, AbbVie sells products primarily to customers or through distributors, depending on the market served. Certain products are co-marketed or co-promoted with other companies. AbbVie has approximately 50,000 employees. AbbVie operates as a single global business segment.
2021 Financial Results
AbbVie's strategy has focused on delivering strong financial results, maximizing the benefits of the Allergan acquisition, advancing and investing in its pipeline and returning value to shareholders while ensuring a strong, sustainable growth business over the long term. The company's financial performance in 2021 included delivering worldwide net revenues of $56.2 billion, operating earnings of $17.9 billion, diluted earnings per share of $6.45 and cash flows from operations of $22.8 billion. Worldwide net revenues increased by 23% on a reported basis and 22% on a constant currency basis, reflecting growth across its immunology, hematologic oncology, neuroscience, aesthetics and eye care portfolios as well as a full period of Allergan results in 2021 compared to the prior year.
Diluted earnings per share in 2021 was $6.45 and included the following after-tax costs: (i) $6.4 billion related to the amortization of intangible assets; (ii) $2.7 billion for the change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities; (iii) $948 million for acquired in-process research and development (IPR&D); (iv) $500 million as a result of a collaboration agreement extension with Calico Life Sciences LLC; (v) $307 million for milestones and other research and development (R&D) expenses; (vi) $253 million for charges related to litigation matters; and (vii) $215 million of acquisition and integration expenses. These costs were partially offset by $265 million of certain tax benefits. Additionally, financial results reflected continued funding to support all stages of AbbVie’s pipeline assets and continued investment in AbbVie’s on-market brands.
In October 2021, AbbVie's board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $1.41 per share of common stock payable in February 2022. This reflects an increase of approximately 8.5% over the previous quarterly dividend of $1.30 per share of common stock.
Following the closing of the Allergan acquisition, AbbVie implemented an integration plan designed to reduce costs, integrate and optimize the combined organization. The integration plan is expected to realize approximately $2.5 billion of annual cost synergies in 2022.
2021 Form 10-K |
To achieve these integration objectives, AbbVie expects to incur total cumulative charges of approximately $2 billion through 2022. These costs consist of severance and employee benefit costs (cash severance, non-cash severance, including accelerated equity award compensation expense, retention and other termination benefits) and other integration expenses.
Impact of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
In response to the ongoing public health crisis posed by COVID-19, AbbVie continues to focus on ensuring the safety of employees. Throughout the pandemic, AbbVie has followed health and safety guidance from state and local health authorities and implemented safety measures for those employees who are returning to the workplace.
AbbVie also continues to closely manage manufacturing and supply chain resources around the world to help ensure that patients continue to receive an uninterrupted supply of their medicines. Clinical trial sites are being monitored locally to protect the safety of study participants, staff and employees. While the impact of COVID-19 on AbbVie's operations to date has not been material, AbbVie continues to experience lower new patient starts in certain products and markets. AbbVie expects this matter could continue to negatively impact its results of operations throughout the duration of the pandemic.
The extent to which COVID-19 may impact AbbVie's financial condition and results of operations remains uncertain and is dependent on numerous evolving factors, including the measures being taken by authorities to mitigate against the spread of COVID-19, the emergence of new variants and the availability and successful administration of effective vaccines.
2022 Strategic Objectives
AbbVie's mission is to discover and develop innovative medicines and products that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow while achieving top-tier financial performance through outstanding execution. AbbVie intends to continue to advance its mission in a number of ways, including: (i) maximizing the benefits of a diversified revenue base with multiple long-term growth drivers; (ii) growing revenues by leveraging AbbVie's commercial strength and international infrastructure across therapeutic areas and ensuring strong commercial execution of new product launches; (iii) continuing to invest in and expand its pipeline in support of opportunities in immunology, oncology, aesthetics, neuroscience and eye care as well as continued investment in key on-market products; (iv) expanding operating margins; and (v) returning cash to shareholders via a strong and growing dividend while also reducing debt. In addition, AbbVie anticipates several regulatory submissions and data readouts from key clinical trials in the next 12 months.
AbbVie expects to achieve its strategic objectives through:
•Immunology revenue growth driven by increasing market share and indication expansion of Skyrizi and Rinvoq, as well as Humira U.S. sales growth.
•Hematologic oncology revenue growth driven by increasing market share and indication expansion of Venclexta, as well as maintaining the strong leadership position of Imbruvica.
•Aesthetics revenue growth driven by global expansion and increasing market penetration of Botox and Juvederm Collection.
•Neuroscience revenue growth driven by Vraylar, Botox Therapeutic, Ubrelvy and recently launched Qulipta.
•Sustaining eye care leadership by maximizing AbbVie's current eye care portfolio.
•The favorable impact of pipeline products and indications recently approved or currently under regulatory review where approval is expected in 2022. These products are described in greater detail in the section labeled "Research and Development" included as part of this Item 7.
AbbVie remains committed to driving continued expansion of operating margins and expects to achieve this objective through continued realization of expense synergies from the Allergan acquisition, leverage from revenue growth, productivity initiatives in supply chain and ongoing efficiency programs to optimize manufacturing, commercial infrastructure, administrative costs and general corporate expenses.
| 2021 Form 10-K
Research and Development
Research and innovation are the cornerstones of AbbVie's business as a global biopharmaceutical company. AbbVie's long-term success depends to a great extent on its ability to continue to discover and develop innovative products and acquire or collaborate on compounds currently in development by other biotechnology or pharmaceutical companies.
AbbVie's pipeline currently includes approximately 90 compounds, devices or indications in development individually or under collaboration or license agreements and is focused on such important specialties as immunology, oncology, aesthetics, neuroscience and eye care. Of these programs, more than 50 are in mid- and late-stage development.
The following sections summarize transitions of significant programs from mid-stage development to late-stage development as well as developments in significant late-stage and registration programs. AbbVie expects multiple mid-stage programs to transition into late-stage programs in the next 12 months.
Significant Programs and Developments
Immunology
Skyrizi
•In January 2021, AbbVie announced top-line results from its Phase 3 KEEPsAKE-1 and KEEPsAKE-2 clinical trials of Skyrizi in adults with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA) met the primary and ranked secondary endpoints.
•In January 2021, AbbVie announced top-line results from its Phase 3 ADVANCE and MOTIVATE induction studies of Skyrizi in patients with Crohn’s disease met the primary and key secondary endpoints.
•In April 2021, AbbVie received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of Skyrizi in a single dose pre-filled syringe and pre-filled pen. This approval will reduce the number of injections administered per treatment.
•In June 2021, AbbVie announced top-line results from its Phase 3 FORTIFY study for Skyrizi in patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease met the co-primary endpoints.
•In September 2021, AbbVie submitted a supplemental New Drug Application (sNDA) to the FDA for Skyrizi for the treatment of patients 16 years and older with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease.
•In November 2021, AbbVie submitted a marketing authorization application (MAA) to the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for Skyrizi for the treatment of patients 16 years or older with moderate to severe active Crohn's disease who have had inadequate response, lost response or were intolerant to conventional or biologic therapy.
•In November 2021, AbbVie announced that the European Commission (EC) approved Skyrizi alone or in combination with methotrexate for the treatment of active PsA in adults who have had an inadequate response or who have been intolerant to one or more disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs.
•In January 2022, AbbVie announced that the FDA approved Skyrizi for the treatment of adults with active PsA.
Rinvoq
•In January 2021, AbbVie announced that the EC approved Rinvoq for the treatment of adults with active PsA and ankylosing spondylitis (AS).
•In February 2021, AbbVie announced its Phase 3 U-ACCOMPLISH induction study of Rinvoq for the treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis (UC) met the primary and all ranked secondary endpoints.
•In June 2021, AbbVie announced the FDA will not meet the Prescription Drug User Fee Act action dates for the sNDA of Rinvoq for the treatment of adults with active AS. No formal regulatory action has been taken on the sNDA for Rinvoq in AS.
•In June 2021, AbbVie announced the results from its Phase 3 maintenance study of Rinvoq in patients with UC met the primary and all secondary endpoints.
•In August 2021, AbbVie announced that the EC approved Rinvoq for the treatment of moderate to severe atopic dermatitis (AD) in adults and adolescents 12 years and older who are candidates for systemic therapy.
2021 Form 10-K |
•In September 2021, AbbVie submitted an sNDA to the FDA and an MAA to the EMA for Rinvoq for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active UC.
•In October 2021, AbbVie announced the results from Study 1 of the Phase 3 SELECT-AXIS 2 clinical trial for Rinvoq in patients with active AS and inadequate response to biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs met the primary and all ranked secondary endpoints.
•In October 2021, AbbVie announced the results from Study 2 of the Phase 3 SELECT-AXIS 2 clinical trial for Rinvoq in adults with non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis met the primary and 12 of 14 ranked secondary endpoints.
•In December 2021, AbbVie announced top-line results from its Phase 3 U-EXCEED induction study for Rinvoq in patients with moderate to severe Crohn's disease who had an inadequate response or were intolerant to biologic therapy met the primary and key secondary endpoints.
•In December 2021, AbbVie announced an update to the U.S. Prescribing Information and Medication Guide for Rinvoq for the treatment of adults with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis (RA). This update follows a Drug Safety Communication (DSC) issued by the FDA in September 2021 based on its final review of the post-marketing study evaluating another JAK inhibitor (tofacitinib) in patients with RA. The DSC and this label update apply to the class of systematically administered FDA-approved JAK inhibitors for the treatment of RA and other inflammatory diseases. Based on this class-wide update, the U.S. label for Rinvoq will now include additional information about risks within the Boxed Warnings and Warnings Precautions sections. The indication has also been updated to be indicated for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active RA who have had an inadequate response or intolerance to one or more tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockers.
•In December 2021, AbbVie announced that the FDA approved Rinvoq for the treatment of adults with active PsA who have had an inadequate response or intolerance to one or more TNF blockers.
•In January 2022, AbbVie announced its submission of an sNDA to the FDA and an MAA to the EMA for Rinvoq for the treatment of adults with active nr-axSpA with objective signs of inflammation who have responded inadequately to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
•In January 2022, AbbVie announced that the FDA approved Rinvoq for the treatment of moderate to severe AD in adults and children 12 years of age and older whose disease did not respond to previous treatment and is not well controlled with other pills or injections, including biologic medicines, or when use of other pills or injections is not recommended.
•In February 2022, AbbVie was notified that the EC is requesting the EMA to assess safety concerns associated with JAK inhibitor products authorized in inflammatory diseases and to evaluate the impact of these events on their benefit-risk balance. The assessment covers all JAK inhibitors approved for use in inflammatory diseases. The request is for an opinion from the EMA by September 30, 2022.
Oncology
Imbruvica
•In June 2021, AbbVie announced results from its Phase 3 GLOW study comparing the efficacy and safety of Imbruvica in combination with Venclexta versus chlorambucil plus obinutuzumab for first-line treatment in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) or small lymphocytic lymphoma met its primary endpoint.
Venclexta
•In May 2021, AbbVie received European Commission approval for Venclyxto in combination with a hypomethylating agent for patients with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML) who are ineligible for intensive chemotherapy.
| 2021 Form 10-K
•In July 2021, AbbVie announced that the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation to Venclexta in combination with azacitidine for the potential treatment of adult patients with previously untreated intermediate-, high- and very high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes.
Teliso-V
•In January 2022, AbbVie announced that the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation to investigational telisotuzumab vedotin (Teliso-V) for the treatment of patients with advanced/metastatic epidermal growth factor receptor wild type, nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer with high levels of c-Met overexpression whose disease has progressed on or after platinum-based therapy.
Neuroscience
Botox Therapeutic
•In February 2021, AbbVie received FDA approval of Botox for the treatment of detrusor overactivity associated with a neurological condition in certain pediatric patients 5 years of age and older.
Qulipta
•In September 2021, AbbVie announced that the FDA approved Qulipta (atogepant) for the preventive treatment of episodic migraine in adults.
Vraylar
•In October 2021, AbbVie announced top-line results from two Phase 3 clinical trials, Study 3111-301-001 and Study 3111-302-001, evaluating the efficacy and safety of cariprazine (Vraylar) as an adjunctive treatment for patients with major depressive disorder (MDD). In Study 3111-301-001, Vraylar met its primary endpoint demonstrating statistically significant change from baseline to week six in the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) total score compared with placebo in patients with MDD. In Study 3111-302-001, Vraylar demonstrated numerical improvement in depressive symptoms from baseline to week six in MADRS total score compared with placebo but did not achieve statistical significance. Safety data were consistent with the established safety profile of Vraylar across indications with no new safety signals identified.
ABBV-951
•In October 2021, AbbVie announced that results from its pivotal Phase 3 M15-736 study of ABBV-951 (foslevodopa/foscarbidopa) in patients with advanced Parkinson’s disease met its primary endpoint in a 12-week study.
Eye Care
Vuity
•In October 2021, AbbVie announced that the FDA approved Vuity (pilocarpine HCl ophthalmic solution) for the treatment of presbyopia.
2021 Form 10-K |
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Revenues
The comparisons presented at constant currency rates reflect comparative local currency net revenues at the prior year's foreign exchange rates. This measure provides information on the change in net revenues assuming that foreign currency exchange rates had not changed between the prior and current periods. AbbVie believes that the non-GAAP measure of change in net revenues at constant currency rates, when used in conjunction with the GAAP measure of change in net revenues at actual currency rates, may provide a more complete understanding of the company's operations and can facilitate analysis of the company's results of operations, particularly in evaluating performance from one period to another.
| 2021 Form 10-K
The following table details AbbVie's worldwide net revenues:
2021 Form 10-K |
n/m - Not meaningful
(a)Net revenues include Allergan product revenues after the acquisition closing date of May 8, 2020.
The following discussion and analysis of AbbVie's net revenues by product is presented on a constant currency basis.
Global Humira sales increased 4% in 2021 primarily driven by market growth across therapeutic categories, partially offset by direct biosimilar competition in certain international markets. In the United States, Humira sales increased 8% in 2021 driven by market growth across all indications. This increase was partially offset by slightly lower market share following corresponding market share gains of Skyrizi and Rinvoq. Internationally, Humira revenues decreased 13% in 2021 primarily driven by direct biosimilar competition in certain international markets.
Net revenues for Skyrizi increased 84% in 2021 primarily driven by continued strong volume and market share uptake since launch in 2019 as a treatment for plaque psoriasis as well as market growth over the prior year.
Net revenues for Rinvoq increased by more than 100% in 2021 primarily driven by continued strong volume and market share uptake since launch in 2019 for the treatment of moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis as well as market growth over the prior year. Net revenues were also favorably impacted by recent regulatory approvals and expansion of Rinvoq for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis, atopic dermatitis and ankylosing spondylitis in certain international markets.
| 2021 Form 10-K
Net revenues for Imbruvica represent product revenues in the United States and collaboration revenues outside of the United States related to AbbVie's 50% share of Imbruvica profit. AbbVie's global Imbruvica revenues increased 2% in 2021 as a result of modest favorable pricing in the United States and increased collaboration revenues, partially offset by lower new patient starts due to the COVID-19 pandemic and share loss in the United States.
Net revenues for Venclexta increased 34% in 2021 primarily due to continued expansion of Venclexta for the treatment of patients with first-line CLL, relapsed/refractory CLL and first-line AML.
Net revenues for Botox Cosmetic used in facial aesthetics increased 98% in 2021 due to increased brand investment and strong recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Net revenues were also favorably impacted by a full period of Allergan results in 2021 compared to the prior year.
Net revenues for Juvederm Collection (including Juvederm Ultra XC, Juvederm Voluma XC and other Juvederm products) used in facial aesthetics increased by more than 100% in 2021 due to increased brand investment and strong recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Net revenues were also favorably impacted by a full period of Allergan results in 2021 compared to the prior year.
Net revenues for Botox Therapeutic used primarily in neuroscience and urology therapeutic areas increased 75% in 2021 due to a strong recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Net revenues were also favorably impacted by a full period of Allergan results in 2021 compared to the prior year.
Net revenues for Vraylar for the treatment of schizophrenia, bipolar I disorder and bipolar depression increased 82% in 2021 due to higher market share and market growth. Net revenues were also favorably impacted by a full period of Allergan results in 2021 compared to the prior year.
Net revenues for Ubrelvy for the acute treatment of migraine with or without aura in adults increased by more than 100% in 2021 primarily due to increased volume and market share uptake since launch in 2020.
Net revenues for Mavyret decreased 8% in 2021 primarily driven by the continued disruption of global HCV markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Margin
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenues in 2021 increased from 2020 primarily due to lower amortization of inventory fair value step-up adjustment associated with the Allergan acquisition and favorable changes in product mix, partially offset by higher amortization of intangible assets associated with the Allergan acquisition.
Selling, General and Administrative
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net revenues in 2021 decreased primarily due to lower transaction and integration costs related to the acquisition of Allergan as well as leverage from revenue growth and synergies realized in the period subsequent to completion of the Allergan acquisition.
2021 Form 10-K |
Research and Development and Acquired In-Process Research and Development
R&D expenses as a percentage of net revenues decreased in 2021 primarily due to the increased scale of the combined company and synergies realized for the period subsequent to completion of the Allergan acquisition as well as lower integration costs related to the acquisition of Allergan.
Acquired IPR&D expenses represent initial costs to acquire rights to in-process R&D projects through R&D collaborations, licensing arrangements or other asset acquisitions. Acquired IPR&D expense in 2021 included a charge of $400 million as a result of exercising the company's exclusive right to acquire TeneoOne, an affiliate of Teneobio, Inc., and TNB-383B, a BCMA-targeting immunotherapeutic for the potential treatment of relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma and a charge of $370 million as a result of entering into a collaboration agreement with REGENXBIO Inc. for the development and commercialization of RGX-314, an investigational gene therapy for wet age-related macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy and other chronic retinal diseases. Acquired IPR&D expense in 2020 included a charge of $750 million as a result of entering into a collaboration agreement with Genmab A/S to research, develop and commercialize investigational bispecific antibody therapeutics for the treatment of cancer. Acquired IPR&D expense in 2020 also included a charge of $200 million as a result of entering into a collaboration agreement with I-Mab Biopharma for the development and commercialization of lemzoparlimab for the treatment of multiple cancers. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Other Operating Expense (Income), Net
Other operating expense in 2021 included a $500 million charge related to the extension of the Calico collaboration to discover, develop and bring to market new therapies for patients with age-related diseases, including neurodegeneration and cancer.
Other Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense in 2021 decreased compared to 2020 primarily due to the favorable impact of lower interest rates on the company’s floating rate debt obligations and deleveraging, partially offset by a higher average debt balance associated with the incremental Allergan debt acquired.
Interest income in 2021 decreased compared to 2020 primarily due to a lower average cash and cash equivalents balance as a result of the cash paid for the Allergan acquisition and the unfavorable impact of lower interest rates.
Other expense, net included charges related to changes in fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities of $2.7 billion in 2021 and $5.8 billion in 2020. The fair value of contingent consideration liabilities is impacted by the passage of time and multiple other inputs, including the probability of success of achieving regulatory/commercial milestones, discount rates, the estimated amount of future sales of the acquired products and other market-based factors. In 2021, the change in fair value included the increase in the Skyrizi contingent consideration liability due to higher estimated sales driven by stronger market share uptake, favorable clinical trial results and the passage of time, partially offset by higher discount rates. In 2020, the change in fair value primarily included the increase in the Skyrizi contingent consideration liability due to higher estimated sales driven by stronger market share uptake, lower discount rates, the passage of time and favorable clinical trial results.
| 2021 Form 10-K
Income Tax Expense
The effective income tax rate was 11% in 2021, negative 36% in 2020 and 6% in 2019. The effective income tax rates differed from the statutory tax rate principally due to the impact of foreign operations which reflects the impact of lower income tax rates in locations outside the United States, tax incentives in Puerto Rico and other foreign tax jurisdictions, business development activities, changes in enacted tax rates and laws and related restructuring, tax audit settlements and accretion on contingent consideration. The 2020 effective income tax rate included the recognition of a net tax benefit of $1.7 billion related to changes in tax laws and related restructuring, including certain intra-group transfers of intellectual property and deferred tax remeasurement. The effective tax rates for these periods also reflected the benefit from U.S. tax credits principally related to research and development credits, the orphan drug tax credit and Puerto Rico excise tax credits. The Puerto Rico excise tax credits relate to legislation enacted by Puerto Rico that assesses an excise tax on certain products manufactured in Puerto Rico. The tax is levied on gross inventory purchases from entities in Puerto Rico and is included in cost of products sold in the consolidated statements of earnings. The majority of the tax is creditable for U.S. income tax purposes.
FINANCIAL POSITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Operating cash flows in 2021 increased from 2020. Operating cash flows in 2021 were favorably impacted by higher net revenues of the combined company and lower acquisition-related cash expenses, partially offset by higher income tax payments and the timing of working capital cash flows. Operating cash flows also reflected AbbVie’s contributions to its defined benefit plans of $376 million in 2021 and $367 million in 2020.
Investing cash flows in 2021 included $535 million cash consideration paid to acquire Soliton, Inc. offset by cash acquired, payments made for other acquisitions and investments of $1.4 billion, capital expenditures of $787 million and net purchases of investment securities totaling $21 million. Investing cash flows in 2020 included $39.7 billion cash consideration paid to acquire Allergan offset by cash acquired of $1.5 billion, net sales and maturities of investment securities totaling $1.5 billion, payments made for other acquisitions and investments of $1.4 billion and capital expenditures of $798 million.
Financing cash flows in 2021 included early repayments of $1.8 billion aggregate principal amount of the company's 2.3% principal notes, $1.2 billion aggregate principal amount of the company's 5.0% senior notes and €750 million aggregate principal amount of the company's 0.5% senior Euro notes. Financing cash flows also included the May 2021 repayment of $750 million aggregate principal amount of floating rate senior notes and the November 2021 repayment of $1.3 billion aggregate principal amount of 3.375% senior notes, $1.8 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.15% senior notes and $750 million aggregate principal amount of floating rate senior notes at maturity. Additionally, financing cash flows included repayment of a $1.0 billion floating rate term loan due May 2023 and issuance of a new $1.0 billion floating rate term loan as part of the term loan refinancing in September 2021.
Financing cash flows in 2020 included the issuance of term loans totaling $3.0 billion under the existing $6.0 billion term loan credit agreement which were used to finance the acquisition of Allergan. Subsequent to these borrowings, AbbVie terminated the unused commitments of the lenders under the term loan. Additionally, financing cash flows included the May 2020 repayment of $3.8 billion aggregate principal amount of the company's 2.50% senior notes, the September 2020 repayment of $650 million aggregate principal amount of 3.375% senior notes and the November 2020 repayments of €700 million aggregate principal amount of floating rate senior Euro notes at maturity as well as the $450 million aggregate principal amount of 4.875% senior notes due February 2021.
Financing cash flows also included cash dividend payments of $9.3 billion in 2021 and $7.7 billion in 2020. The increase in cash dividend payments was primarily driven by an increase of the dividend rate and higher outstanding shares following the 286 million shares of AbbVie common stock issued to Allergan shareholders in May 2020.
The company's stock repurchase authorization permits purchases of AbbVie shares from time to time in open-market or private transactions at management’s discretion. The program has no time limit and can be discontinued at any time. Under this authorization, AbbVie repurchased 6 million shares for $670 million in 2021 and 8 million shares for $757 million in 2020. AbbVie's remaining stock repurchase authorization was $2.5 billion as of December 31, 2021.
2021 Form 10-K |
No commercial paper borrowings were issued during 2021. In 2020, the company issued and redeemed commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020. AbbVie may issue additional commercial paper or retire commercial paper to meet liquidity requirements as needed.
Credit Risk
AbbVie monitors economic conditions, the creditworthiness of customers and government regulations and funding, both domestically and abroad. AbbVie regularly communicates with its customers regarding the status of receivable balances, including their payment plans and obtains positive confirmation of the validity of the receivables. AbbVie establishes an allowance for credit losses equal to the estimate of future losses over the contractual life of outstanding accounts receivable. AbbVie may also utilize factoring arrangements to mitigate credit risk, although the receivables included in such arrangements have historically not been a significant amount of total outstanding receivables.
Credit Facility, Access to Capital and Credit Ratings
Credit Facility
AbbVie currently has a $4.0 billion five-year revolving credit facility that matures in August 2024. This amended facility enables the company to borrow funds on an unsecured basis at variable interest rates and contains various covenants. At December 31, 2021, the company was in compliance with all covenants, and commitment fees under the credit facility were insignificant. No amounts were outstanding under the company's credit facility as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Access to Capital
The company intends to fund short-term and long-term financial obligations as they mature through cash on hand, future cash flows from operations or has the ability to issue additional debt. The company's ability to generate cash flows from operations, issue debt or enter into financing arrangements on acceptable terms could be adversely affected if there is a material decline in the demand for the company's products or in the solvency of its customers or suppliers, deterioration in the company's key financial ratios or credit ratings, or other material unfavorable changes in business conditions. At the current time, the company believes it has sufficient financial flexibility to issue debt, enter into other financing arrangements and attract long-term capital on acceptable terms to support the company's growth objectives.
Credit Ratings
There were no changes to the company's credit ratings during 2021. Following the acquisition of Allergan in 2020, S&P Global Ratings revised its ratings outlook to stable from negative and lowered the issuer credit rating by one notch to BBB+ from A- and the short-term rating to A-2 from A-1. There were no changes in Moody's Investor Service of its Baa2 senior unsecured long-term rating and Prime-2 short-term rating with a stable outlook.
Unfavorable changes to the ratings may have an adverse impact on future financing arrangements; however, they would not affect the company’s ability to draw on its credit facility and would not result in an acceleration of scheduled maturities of any of the company’s outstanding debt.
Future Cash Requirements
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes AbbVie's estimated material contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
(a)Includes estimated future interest payments on long-term debt. Interest payments on debt are calculated for future periods using forecasted interest rates in effect at the end of 2021. Projected interest payments include the related effects of interest rate swap agreements. Certain of these projected interest payments may differ in the future based on changes in floating interest rates or other factors or events. The projected interest payments only pertain to obligations and agreements outstanding at December 31, 2021. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the company's debt instruments and Note 11 for additional information on the interest rate swap agreements outstanding at December 31, 2021.
| 2021 Form 10-K
(b)Includes contingent consideration liabilities which are recorded at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet. Potential contingent consideration payments that exceed the fair value recorded on the consolidated balance sheet are not included in the table of contractual obligations. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding these liabilities.
AbbVie enters into certain unconditional purchase obligations and other commitments in the normal course of business. There have been no changes to these commitments that would have a material impact on the company’s ability to meet either short-term or long-term future cash requirements.
Income Taxes
Future income tax cash requirements include a one-time transition tax liability on a mandatory deemed repatriation of previously untaxed earnings of foreign subsidiaries resulting from U.S. tax reform enacted in 2017. The one-time transition tax liability was $3.9 billion as of December 31, 2021 and is payable in five future annual installments.
Liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits totaled $6.0 billion as of December 31, 2021. It is not possible to reliably estimate the timing of the future cash outflows related to these liabilities. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these unrecognized tax benefits.
Quarterly Cash Dividend
On October 29, 2021, AbbVie announced that its board of directors declared an increase in the quarterly cash dividend from $1.30 per share to $1.41 per share beginning with the dividend payable on February 15, 2022 to stockholders of record as of January 14, 2022. This reflects an increase of approximately 8.5% over the previous quarterly rate. The timing, declaration, amount of and payment of any dividends by AbbVie in the future is within the discretion of its board of directors and will depend upon many factors, including AbbVie's financial condition, earnings, capital requirements of its operating subsidiaries, covenants associated with certain of AbbVie's debt service obligations, legal requirements, regulatory constraints, industry practice, ability to access capital markets and other factors deemed relevant by its board of directors.
Collaborations, Licensing and Other Arrangements
AbbVie enters into collaborative, licensing, and other arrangements with third parties that may require future milestone payments to third parties contingent upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory, or commercial milestones. Individually, these arrangements are insignificant in any one annual reporting period. However, if milestones for multiple products covered by these arrangements would happen to be reached in the same reporting period, the aggregate charge to expense could be material to the results of operations in that period. From a business perspective, the payments are viewed as positive because they signify that the product is successfully moving through development and is now generating or is more likely to generate future cash flows from product sales. It is not possible to predict with reasonable certainty whether these milestones will be achieved or the timing for achievement. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these collaboration arrangements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. A summary of the company's significant accounting policies is included in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain of these policies are considered critical as these most significantly impact the company's financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results may vary from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition
AbbVie recognizes revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to the company’s customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration AbbVie expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Sales, value add and other taxes collected concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. AbbVie generates revenue primarily from product sales. For the majority of sales, the company transfers control, invoices the customer and recognizes revenue upon shipment to the customer.
2021 Form 10-K |
Rebates
AbbVie provides rebates to pharmacy benefit managers, state government Medicaid programs, insurance companies that administer Medicare drug plans, wholesalers, group purchasing organizations and other government agencies and private entities.
Rebate and chargeback accruals are accounted for as variable consideration and are recorded as a reduction to revenue in the period the related product is sold. Provisions for rebates and chargebacks totaled $33.9 billion in 2021, $27.0 billion in 2020 and $18.8 billion in 2019. Rebate amounts are typically based upon the volume of purchases using contractual or statutory prices, which may vary by product and by payer. For each type of rebate, the factors used in the calculations of the accrual for that rebate include the identification of the products subject to the rebate, the applicable price terms and the estimated lag time between sale and payment of the rebate, which can be significant.
In order to establish its rebate and chargeback accruals, the company uses both internal and external data to estimate the level of inventory in the distribution channel and the rebate claims processing lag time for each type of rebate. To estimate the rebate percentage or net price, the company tracks sales by product and by customer or payer. The company evaluates inventory data reported by wholesalers, available prescription volume information, product pricing, historical experience and other factors in order to determine the adequacy of its reserves. AbbVie regularly monitors its reserves and records adjustments when rebate trends, rebate programs and contract terms, legislative changes, or other significant events indicate that a change in the reserve is appropriate. Historically, adjustments to rebate accruals have not been material to net earnings.
The following table is an analysis of the three largest accruals for rebates and chargebacks, which comprise approximately 95% of the total consolidated rebate and chargebacks recorded as reductions to revenues in 2021. Remaining rebate provisions charged against gross revenues are not significant in the determination of operating earnings.
(a)Represents rebate accruals and chargeback allowances assumed in the Allergan acquisition.
Cash Discounts and Product Returns
Cash discounts and product returns, which totaled $3.6 billion in 2021, $2.4 billion in 2020 and $1.6 billion in 2019, are accounted for as variable consideration and are recorded as a reduction to revenue in the same period the related product is sold. The reserve for cash discounts is readily determinable because the company's experience of payment history is fairly consistent. Product returns can be reliably estimated based on the company's historical return experience.
Pension and Other Post-Employment Benefits
AbbVie engages outside actuaries to assist in the determination of the obligations and costs under the pension and other post-employment benefit plans that are direct obligations of AbbVie. The valuation of the funded status and the net periodic benefit cost for these plans are calculated using actuarial assumptions. The significant assumptions, which are reviewed annually, include the discount rate, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the health care cost trend rates, and are disclosed in Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
| 2021 Form 10-K
The discount rate is selected based on current market rates on high-quality, fixed-income investments at December 31 each year. AbbVie employs a yield-curve approach for countries where a robust bond market exists. The yield curve is developed using high-quality bonds. The yield-curve approach reflects the plans' specific cash flows (i.e. duration) in calculating the benefit obligations by applying the corresponding individual spot rates along the yield curve. AbbVie reflects the plans' specific cash flows and applies them to the corresponding individual spot rates along the yield curve in calculating the service cost and interest cost portions of expense. For other countries, AbbVie reviews various indices such as corporate bond and government bond benchmarks to estimate the discount rate.
AbbVie's assumed discount rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for defined benefit pension and other post-employment plans as of December 31, 2021. A 50 basis point change in the assumed discount rate would have had the following effects on AbbVie's calculation of net periodic benefit costs in 2022 and projected benefit obligations as of December 31, 2021:
The expected long-term rate of return is based on the asset allocation, historical performance and the current view of expected future returns. AbbVie considers these inputs with a long-term focus to avoid short-term market influences. The current long-term rate of return on plan assets for each plan is supported by the historical performance of the trust's actual and target asset allocation. AbbVie's assumed expected long-term rate of return has a significant effect on the amounts reported for defined benefit pension plans as of December 31, 2021 and will be used in the calculation of net periodic benefit cost in 2022. A one percentage point change in assumed expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would increase or decrease the net period benefit cost of these plans in 2022 by $101 million.
The health care cost trend rate is selected by reviewing historical trends and current views on projected future health care cost increases. The current health care cost trend rate is supported by the historical trend experience of each plan. Assumed health care cost trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for health care plans as of December 31, 2021 and will be used in the calculation of net periodic benefit cost in 2022.
Income Taxes
AbbVie accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Provisions for federal, state and foreign income taxes are calculated on reported pretax earnings based on current tax laws. Deferred taxes are provided using enacted tax rates on the future tax consequences of temporary differences, which are the differences between the financial statement carrying amount of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and the tax benefits of carryforwards. A valuation allowance is established or maintained when, based on currently available information, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Litigation
The company is subject to contingencies, such as various claims, legal proceedings and investigations regarding product liability, intellectual property, commercial, securities and other matters that arise in the normal course of business. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Loss contingency provisions are recorded for probable losses at management's best estimate of a loss, or when a best estimate cannot be made, a minimum loss contingency amount within a probable range is recorded. Accordingly, AbbVie is often initially unable to develop a best estimate of loss and therefore, the minimum amount, which could be zero, is recorded. As information becomes known, either the minimum loss amount is increased, resulting in additional loss provisions, or a best estimate can be made, also resulting in additional loss provisions. Occasionally, a best estimate amount is changed to a lower amount when events result in an expectation of a more favorable outcome than previously expected.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
AbbVie has acquired and may continue to acquire significant intangible assets in connection with business combinations that AbbVie records at fair value. Transactions involving the purchase or sale of intangible assets occur between companies in
2021 Form 10-K |
the pharmaceuticals industry and valuations are usually based on a discounted cash flow analysis incorporating the stage of completion. The discounted cash flow model requires assumptions about the timing and amount of future net cash flows, risk, cost of capital, terminal values and market participants. Each of these factors can significantly affect the value of the intangible asset. IPR&D acquired in a business combination is capitalized as an indefinite-lived intangible asset until regulatory approval is obtained, at which time it is accounted for as a definite-lived asset and amortized over its estimated useful life, or discontinuation, at which point the intangible asset will be written off. IPR&D acquired in transactions that are not business combinations is expensed immediately, unless deemed to have an alternative future use. Payments made to third parties subsequent to regulatory approval are capitalized and amortized over the remaining useful life.
AbbVie reviews the recoverability of definite-lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment annually or when an event occurs that could result in an impairment. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Annually, the company tests its goodwill for impairment by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount. Some of the factors considered in the assessment include general macro-economic conditions, conditions specific to the industry and market, cost factors, the overall financial performance and whether there have been sustained declines in the company's share price. If the company concludes it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative impairment test is performed. AbbVie tests indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount. If the company concludes it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative impairment test is performed.
For its quantitative impairment tests, the company uses an estimated future cash flow approach that requires significant judgment with respect to future volume, revenue and expense growth rates, changes in working capital use, the selection of an appropriate discount rate, asset groupings and other assumptions and estimates. The estimates and assumptions used are consistent with the company's business plans and a market participant's views. The use of alternative estimates and assumptions could increase or decrease the estimated fair value of the assets and could potentially impact the company's results of operations. Actual results may differ from the company's estimates.
Contingent Consideration
The fair value measurements of contingent consideration liabilities are determined as of the acquisition date based on significant unobservable inputs, including the discount rate, estimated probabilities and timing of achieving specified development, regulatory and commercial milestones and the estimated amount of future sales of the acquired products. Contingent consideration liabilities are revalued to fair value at each subsequent reporting date until the related contingency is resolved. The potential contingent consideration payments are estimated by applying a probability-weighted expected payment model for contingent milestone payments and a Monte Carlo simulation model for contingent royalty payments, which are then discounted to present value. Changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities can result from changes to one or a number of inputs, including discount rates, the probabilities of achieving the milestones, the time required to achieve the milestones and estimated future sales. Significant judgment is employed in determining the appropriateness of certain of these inputs, which are disclosed in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Changes to the inputs described above could have a material impact on the company's financial position and results of operations in any given period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on recent accounting pronouncements.
| 2021 Form 10-K