Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a drug and target discovery company harnessing deep learning and synthetic biology to expand the therapeutic potential of proteins. We built our Integrated Drug Creation Platform to identify novel drug targets, discover optimal biotherapeutic candidates, and generate the cell lines to manufacture them in a single efficient process. We believe our approach delivers disruptive efficiency, but more importantly enables our partners to create novel and human/AI-designed new-to-nature biologics (next-generation biologics).
While next-generation biologics have exciting medical potential and are a rapidly growing field of drug development, because their protein architectures (scaffolds or modalities) are biologically foreign, they present challenges for conventional biologic discovery and cell line development methods. These methods typically involve a linear series of steps to screen and select desired molecular parts and reformat them into their final protein scaffold, and subsequent laborious and often unsuccessful generation of a suitable manufacturing cell line. We are transforming the biologic discovery and cell line development process by rapidly screening up to billions of drug candidates in the desired final protein scaffold that goes into patients and in the scalable manufacturing cell line that scales up for clinical and commercial manufacturing.
We couple our powerful deep learning AI models, built to understand and predict determinants of protein function, with our proprietary synthetic biology capabilities, which include high-throughput single cell assays that can evaluate billions of drug sequence variants, each within its production cell line, for target binding affinity, protein quality, and production level (titer). This combination of in silico modeling with wet lab testing allow us to generate immense real-world datasets that we harness to train and refine our deep learning models. These models guide our protein and cell line designs and enable in silico optimization of multiple attributes. In addition, with our “Totient Target” technology, we use machine learning computational methods to evaluate patient tissue samples and, without biological bias, identify disease-relevant fully human antibodies and their disease- and tissue-specific molecular targets. In addition to the direct utility of these antibodies and targets as drug discovery assets, these data comprising antibody-epitope recognition elements expand our AI models’ training sets and may improve predictive capabilities for future discovery campaigns.
Our goal is to become the partner of choice for biologic drug discovery and cell line development. As a technology development company, we generate biologic drug candidates and production cell lines for our partners to develop. Our business model is to establish partnerships with biopharmaceutical companies and use our platform for rapid creation of next-generation biologic drug candidates and production cell lines. We classify our applications into two key categories: Discovery and CLD. We define “Discovery” as any projects for which we are evaluating variants of the protein-of-interest, which includes generation of the production cell line, and we define CLD as a program for which the production cell line alone is the goal of the partnership. Our partners are responsible for preclinical and clinical testing of biologics generated using our platform. We expect our partnerships to provide us with the opportunity to participate in the future success of the biologics generated utilizing our platform, through milestone payments as well as royalties on sales by our partners of any approved products. We aim to assemble economic interests in a diversified portfolio of partners’ next-generation biologic drug candidates across multiple indications.
As of December 31, 2021 we had drug candidates in twelve Active Programs (across eight current partners’ preclinical or clinical pipelines) for which we have negotiated, or expect to negotiate upon completion of certain technology development activities, license agreements with potential downstream milestone payments and royalties. Eight of these Active Programs are focused on developing production cell lines for drug candidates that our partners (Merck & Co., Inc., Xyphos Biotechnology, an Astellas Company (Astellas), Alpha Cancer Technologies, Inc., PhaseBio Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and other undisclosed biotechnology companies) are developing (five preclinical, one Phase 1, one Phase 3, and one animal health). The remaining four Active Programs comprise Discovery applications, including three Discovery programs through our agreement with EQRx and one lead optimization program with Astellas. We define “Active Programs” as programs that are subject to ongoing technology development activities intended to determine if the program can be pursued by our partner for future clinical development, as well as any program for which our
partner obtains and maintains a license to our technology to advance the program after completion of the technology development phase. There is no assurance, however, that our partners will advance any drug candidates that are currently the subject of Active Programs into further preclinical or clinical development or that our partners will elect to license our technologies upon completion of the technology development phase in a timely manner, or at all.
Total revenue was $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was consistent as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to timing of additional project-based milestones achieved and the mix of ongoing programs utilizing our Integrated Drug Creation Platform. Throughout 2020 and 2021, we continued making investments in our operating capacity which enabled us to achieve additional project-based milestones in our technology development agreements. Since our inception in 2011, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development activities, including with respect to our Integrated Drug Creation Platform, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, hiring personnel, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these activities. As a result, we have incurred net losses in each year. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred net losses of $101.0 million and $14.4 million, respectively. Research and development expenses increased by $33.1 million, or 289%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we adjusted the fair value of the warrant liability and the convertible notes through the initial public offering (IPO) and recorded expense of $4.1 million and $30.7 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $191.0 million and cash and cash equivalents totaling $252.6 million.
Prior to our IPO, we financed our operations primarily through private placements of redeemable convertible preferred stock and convertible notes. From the date of our company formation up to the IPO, we have raised aggregate gross proceeds of $230.0 million. In July 2021, we consummated our IPO and issued 14,375,000 shares of common stock, including a full exercise of the overallotment option, for net proceeds of $210.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering related expenses.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses, and we expect such expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, including as we:
•implement an effective business development strategy to drive adoption of our Integrated Drug Creation Platform by new and existing partners;
•continue to engage in research and development efforts and scale our technology development activities to meet potential demand at a reasonable cost;
•develop, acquire, in-license or otherwise obtain technologies that enable us to expand our platform capabilities;
•attract, retain and motivate highly qualified personnel;
•implement operational, financial and management information systems; and
•operate as a public company.
Our corporate headquarters and research and development facilities are located in Vancouver, Washington. In December 2020, we entered into an operating lease, which was subsequently amended in March 2021, for a 77,974 square foot corporate headquarters facility that includes office and laboratory space. During the second quarter of 2021, we relocated our operations to the new facility and completed the majority of our construction activities throughout 2021. We believe our facilities are adequate and suitable for our current needs and that should it be needed, suitable additional or alternative space will be available to accommodate our operations.
Recent Developments
In January 2021, we completed our acquisition of Denovium as part of our strategy to utilize AI technology that includes deep learning computational models of protein function.
In February 2021, Merck Global Health Innovation Fund purchased 254,886 shares of our Series E Preferred Stock for an aggregate price of $5.0 million.
In March 2021, we issued $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible notes (the Convertible Notes) to certain existing and new investors. The Convertible Notes were convertible upon a qualifying financing into shares of our common stock under certain circumstances. In July 2021, the Convertible Notes converted into an aggregate of 9,732,593 shares upon the closing of our IPO, based on 82% of the IPO price of $16.00 per share.
In June 2021, we completed our acquisition of Totient, Inc. (Totient), a discovery company harnessing human immune responses to identify novel antibodies and their therapeutic targets, in exchange for a combination of cash and equity consideration. We paid the former stockholders and noteholders of Totient upfront cash consideration of $40.0 million, subject to customary purchase price adjustments, including consideration in exchange for the cancellation of (i) unexercised outstanding options to purchase shares of Totient common stock, whether vested or unvested, and (ii) outstanding stock appreciation rights previously granted by Totient. Holders of Totient’s Class A common stock also received an aggregate of 2,212,208 shares of our common stock, subject to certain vesting conditions. In addition, Totient’s Class A common stockholders and noteholders are eligible to receive up to an additional $15.0 million in cash upon the achievement of certain milestones. We are currently integrating the acquired technology and team into our business model and partnership strategy.
In July 2021, we completed our IPO under a registration statement in which we issued and sold 14,375,000 shares of our common stock, including the full exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option, at a purchase price of $16.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $210.1 million from the IPO after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. All outstanding preferred stock converted into an aggregate of 46,266,256 shares of common stock and the Convertible Notes converted into an aggregate of 9,732,593 shares of common stock upon completion of the IPO.
In October 2021, we announced a drug discovery collaboration with EQRx, Inc. We will collaborate to jointly engineer and develop several clinical candidates across multiple therapeutic areas, including oncology and immunology. At our option, we may make additional investments at progressive stages of development in exchange for an increased share of product sales.
In January 2022, we announced a research collaboration with Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. (Merck). Under the collaboration, Absci will deploy its Bionic Protein non-standard amino acid technology to produce enzymes tailored to Merck’s biomanufacturing applications. Additionally, Merck has the option to nominate up to three drug discovery targets and enter into a drug discovery collaboration agreement.
COVID-19 Pandemic
As a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced and may continue to experience severe delays and disruptions, including, for example:
•interruption of or delays in receiving products and supplies from third parties;
•limitations on our business operations by local, state and/or federal governments that could impact our ability to conduct our technology development and other activities;
•delays in negotiations with partners and potential partners;
•increases in facilities costs to comply with physical distancing guidance;
•business disruptions caused by workplace, laboratory and office closures and an increased reliance on employees working from home, travel limitations, cyber security and data accessibility, or communication or mass transit disruptions; and
•limitations on employee resources that would otherwise be focused on the conduct of our activities, including because of sickness of employees or their families or the desire of employees to avoid contact with large groups of people.
While these delays continue to cause short-term disruptions, the overall impact to our financial statements is expected to continue to be immaterial.
Furthermore, COVID-19 has adversely affected the broader economy and financial markets, resulting in an economic downturn that could curtail the research and development budgets of our partners, our ability to hire additional personnel and our financing prospects. In addition, the spread of more contagious strains,
such as the Omicron and Delta variants, could cause the COVID-19 pandemic to last longer than expected and could result in the reinstatement of restrictive orders that could disrupt our business, including vaccine mandates. Any of the foregoing could harm our operations and we cannot anticipate all the ways in which our business could be adversely impacted by health epidemics such as COVID-19.
For additional details, see the section titled “Risk Factors.”
LLC Conversion
We were originally formed in August 2011 as an Oregon limited liability company and later converted into a Delaware limited liability company in April 2016 under the name AbSci LLC. In October 2020, we completed a reorganization whereby we were converted from a Delaware limited liability company named AbSci LLC to a Delaware corporation under the name Absci Corporation (the LLC Conversion) and all outstanding membership interests in AbSci LLC were exchanged for equity interests in Absci Corporation. All of the share information referenced throughout this Annual Report has been retroactively adjusted to reflect the change in capital structure.
Key Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations and Future Performance
We believe that our future financial performance will be primarily driven by multiple factors as described below, each of which presents growth opportunities for our business. These factors also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth and improve our results of operations. Our ability to successfully address these challenges is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described in the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors.”
•Establish new partnerships: Our potential to grow revenue and long-term earnings will require us to successfully identify and establish technology development arrangements with new partners. We have been expanding and expect to continue to expand our business development team and our capabilities to find new partners.
•Increase the number of molecules and programs under existing partnerships: The execution of our long term strategy relies substantially on the value our partners believe can be recognized from the product candidates and/or production cell lines that we provide to them. Our continued growth depends on our ability to expand the scope of our existing partnerships and add new molecules for CLD or Discovery partnerships with current partners.
•Successfully complete our technology development activities and enter licensing arrangements with our partners: Our business model depends upon partners licensing the technologies we develop and advancing the drug candidates we generate through clinical development to commercialization. Both our ability to successfully complete technology development activities to meet the needs of our partner, and the partner’s prioritization of the subject program, impact the likelihood and timing of any election by a partner to license the technologies we develop. There is no assurance that a partner will elect to license the technologies we develop.
•Our partners successfully developing and commercializing the drug candidates generated with our technology: Our business model is dependent on the eventual progression of biologic drug candidates discovered or initially developed utilizing our Integrated Drug Creation Platform into clinical trials and commercialization. Given the nature of our relationships with our partners, we do not control the progression, clinical development, regulatory strategy or eventual commercialization, if approved, of these product candidates. As a result, our future success and our potential eligibility to receive milestone payments and royalties are entirely dependent on our partners’ efforts over which we have no control. The timing and scope of any approval that may be required by the FDA, or any other regulatory body, for drugs that are developed based on molecules discovered and/or manufactured using our Integrated Drug Creation Platform technologies can significantly impact our results of operations and future performance.
•Continued significant investments in our research and development of new technologies and platform expansion: We are seeking to further refine and expand our platform and the scope of our capabilities, which may or may not be successful. This includes, but is not limited to, novel target identification, de novo discovery, incorporation of non-standard amino acids (Bionic Protein creation), and application of artificial intelligence across our Integrated Drug Creation Platform. We may in the future also invest significantly in developing our own proprietary lead drug candidates
and advancing them through preclinical validation. We expect to incur significant expenses to advance these research and development efforts or to invest in or acquire complementary technologies, but these efforts may not be successful.
•Drive commercial adoption of our Integrated Drug Creation Platform capabilities: Driving the adoption of our Integrated Drug Creation Platform across existing and new markets will require significant investment. We plan to further invest in research and development to support the expansion of our platform capabilities including new molecules to existing partners or help deliver our platform to new markets.
Key Business Metrics
We are in the process of identifying key business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. Currently, given our stage of development, we believe that the following metrics are the most important for understanding our current business trajectory. These metrics may change or may be substituted for additional or different metrics as our business develops. For example, as our business matures and to the extent drug candidates generated with our technologies enter clinical development, or as we may enter partnerships addressing programs over multiple years, or as certain programs may be discontinued by partners, we anticipate updating these metrics to reflect such changes.
Partners represents the unique number of partners with whom we have executed technology development agreements. We view this metric as an indication of our ability to execute our business development activities and level of our market penetration.
Programs represents the number of molecules we have addressed or are addressing with our platform. We view this metric as an indication of the robustness of our technology and the commercial success of our platform.
Active Programs represents the number of programs that are subject to ongoing technology development activities intended to determine if the program can be pursued by our partner for future clinical development, as well as any program for which our partner obtains and maintains a license to our technology to advance the program after completion of the technology development phase. There is no assurance, however, that our partners will advance any drug candidates that are currently the subject of Active Programs into further preclinical or clinical development or that our partners will elect to license our technologies upon completion of the technology development phase in a timely manner, or at all. In light of the inherent risks and uncertainties associated with drug development, we anticipate that our partners may from time to time abandon or terminate the development of one or more drug candidates generated from our platform. As we are notified of such terminations, we will remove the subject programs from our Active Programs count.
We have not negotiated terms for a sufficient number of royalty- and milestone-bearing licenses to enable us to make accurate predictions regarding our potential revenue and financial performance.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue currently consists primarily of fees earned from our partners in conjunction with technology development agreements (TDAs), which are delineated as technology development revenue in our results of operations. These fees are earned and paid at various points throughout the terms of these agreements including upfront and upon the achievement of specified project-based milestones. In addition, in certain TDAs, we earn success-based fees upon achievement of specified technology goals.
We expect revenue to increase over time as we enter into additional partnership agreements and grant licenses to our partners for the clinical and commercial use of intellectual property rights to the biological assets we create, and as the partners advance product candidates into and through clinical development and commercialization. We expect that our revenue will fluctuate from period to period due to the timing of executing additional partnerships, the uncertainty of the timing of milestone achievements and our dependence on the program decisions of our partners.
KBI BioPharma, Inc. Collaboration Agreement
In December 2019, we executed a four-year Joint Marketing Agreement (JMA) with KBI BioPharma, Inc. (KBI) to co-promote technologies through joint marketing efforts. The JMA provides for a non-refundable upfront payment of $0.8 million and milestone payments of $2.8 million in the aggregate, of which $2.3 million had been received as of December 31, 2021, upon the achievement of specific milestones. Upfront payments that relate to ongoing collaboration efforts required throughout the contract term such as joint marketing are recognized ratably throughout the contract term. We fully constrain revenue associated with the milestone payments until the specified milestones are probable of achievement. Additionally, KBI is obligated to make royalty payments to us during the fourth year of the JMA representing a percentage of its sales generated through the arrangement. Any costs incurred to KBI through the duration of the JMA are recognized as a reduction to collaboration revenue in the period in which they are incurred.
In September 2021, the JMA was amended to shorten the term to approximately three years, while all remaining payments, including potential royalty payments, were replaced with a one-time fee due from KBI in the amount of $0.3 million. The Company determined the remaining services were distinct from those provided prior to the modification and therefore recognizes the total remaining transaction price prospectively over the remaining contractual term.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses include the cost of materials, personnel-related costs (comprised of salaries, benefits and share-based compensation), consulting fees, equipment and allocated facility costs (including occupancy and information technology). These expenses are exclusive of depreciation and amortization. Research and development activities consist of target discovery and technology development for partners, as well as continued development of our Integrated Drug Creation Platform. We derive improvements to our platform from both types of activities. As our research and development efforts apply to our platform broadly and across programs, we have not historically tracked our research and development expenses on a partner-by-partner basis or on a program-by-program basis.
We expect research and development to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we enter into additional partnerships and continue to invest in platform enhancements.
Selling, General, and Administrative
Selling, general, and administrative expenses include personnel-related costs (comprised of salaries, benefits and share-based compensation) for executive, business development, alliance management, legal, finance and other administrative functions. Marketing expenses include costs associated with attending conferences and other promotion efforts of our Integrated Drug Creation Platform. Additionally, these expenses include external legal expenses, accounting and tax service expenses, consulting fees, and allocated facilities costs (including occupancy and information technology). These expenses are exclusive of depreciation and amortization.
We expect our selling costs to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business development efforts, and increase marketing activities to drive awareness and adoption of our platform. We expect selling costs to fluctuate as a percentage of total revenue due to the timing and magnitude of these expenses, and to decrease as a percentage of total revenue in the long term.
We expect general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we increase total headcount and incur costs associated with operating as a public company, including expenses related to legal, accounting, regulatory, maintaining compliance with exchange listing and requirements of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations.
We expect these expenses to increase in absolute dollars and vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue in the near term, and to decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
We have a comprehensive IP portfolio covering the many aspects of our Integrated Drug Creation platform, including those related to our proprietary cell lines and protein expression technologies, non-standard amino acid technology, proprietary screening assays, antibody discovery methods, and deep learning AI models. We regularly file patent applications to protect innovations arising from our research and development. We also hold trademarks and trademark applications in the United States and foreign jurisdictions. Costs to secure and defend our IP are expensed as incurred and are classified as selling, general and administrative expenses.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense consists of the depreciation expense of our property and equipment and amortization of our intangibles. Our equipment is used most actively as part of our lab operations.
We expect depreciation expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to purchase additional lab equipment within our new operating facility.
Other Expenses
Interest Expense
Interest expense, net, consists primarily of interest related to convertible notes, borrowings under our term debt and laboratory equipment leases.
Other Expense, net
Other expenses to date consist primarily of adjustments of our convertible notes and preferred stock warrant liability to fair value and a gain on extinguishment for the forgiveness of our Payroll Protection Plan (PPP) loan.
Results of Operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented (In thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (In thousands, except for percentages):
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was consistent as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 at $4.8 million.
Technology development revenue decreased by $0.1 million, or 3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by a combination of overall program progress, the timing of additional project-based milestones achieved, and the mix of ongoing programs.
Collaboration revenue increased by $0.1 million, or 17%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the September 2021 contract modification which resulted in a shortened term and modified consideration.
Operating Expenses
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased by $33.1 million, or 289%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was generally driven by increased costs associated with increased technology development activity with our partners and increased costs associated with continued platform development. These increased costs were primarily attributable to increased headcount and related personnel costs in the amount of $17.7 million, increased stock-based compensation from the phantom unit exchange and equity grants in the ordinary course in the amount of $4.4 million, increased purchases of supplies and services related to lab operations in the amount of $8.2 million specifically for our technology development agreements and internal research and platform development activities and increased rent, and increases in facility overhead and research and development related administrative expenses of $2.8 million. Increased administrative costs includes asset impairment of $0.8 million, and increased software and professional services costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased by $23.3 million, or 423%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased headcount and related personnel and recruitment costs in the amount of $8.0 million, increased stock-based compensation from the phantom unit exchange and equity grants in the ordinary course in the amount of $5.7 million, increased professional service fees in the amount of $4.2 million, of which, $0.9 million represented transaction costs associated with the Totient acquisition, and increased administrative
costs of $3.0 million. The increases in the administrative and professional service fees are the result of our operating as a public company.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $5.5 million, or 488%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the increased purchases of lab equipment necessary to complete our increased level of technology development agreements and research and development, purchases of property, equipment, and leasehold improvements related to our new corporate headquarters, and the amortization of intangible assets acquired in 2021.
Other Expenses
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $2.8 million, or 441%. We increased borrowings on our term debt in May 2020, which led to an increase in interest expense. In addition, we incurred additional interest expense in connection with finance leases of additional laboratory equipment as we expanded our laboratory capacity from 2020 through 2021. We also recognized increased interest expense related to the convertible promissory notes issued in March 2021 until they were converted into common stock in connection with the IPO.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net, increased by $30.8 million, or 7361%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by fair value adjustments of our convertible notes for $28.0 million, and the change in the preferred stock warrant liability’s fair value in the amount of $4.1 million, offset by recognition of a gain on extinguishment for the forgiveness of our PPP loan in the amount of $0.6 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had $252.6 million of cash and cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020, we had $69.9 million of cash and cash equivalents.
We have incurred net operating losses since inception. As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $191.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $90.1 million. To date, we have funded operations through issuances and sales of equity securities and debt, in addition to revenue generated from our technology development agreements. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our operating expenses, working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months following the date of this filing.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to our ability to raise additional capital through equity or debt financing, our ability to successfully secure additional partnerships under contract with new partners and increase the number of programs covered under contracts with existing partners, the successful preclinical and clinical development by our partners of product candidates generated using our Integrated Drug Creation Platform and the successful commercialization by our partners of any such product candidates that are approved. If we are unable to execute on our business plan and adequately fund operations, or if our business plan requires a level of spending in excess of cash resources, we may be required to negotiate partnerships in which we receive greater near-term payments at the
expense of potential downstream revenue. Alternatively, we may need to seek additional equity or debt financing, which may not be available on terms acceptable to us or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, selling or licensing our assets, making product acquisitions, making capital expenditures, or declaring dividends. If we are unable to generate sufficient revenue or raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects would be adversely affected.
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily from the issuance and sale of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, issuances of equity securities, borrowings under long-term debt agreements, and to a lesser extent, cash flow from operations.
Redeemable convertible preferred stock
Through December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we have raised a total of $104.3 million and $99.4 million, respectively, from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs. In 2020, we issued shares of Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock for net proceeds of $64.7 million. In 2021, we issued additional shares of Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock for net proceeds of $4.9 million. In July 2021, all convertible preferred stock converted into an aggregate of 46,266,256 shares immediately prior to our IPO.
Bridge Bank Loan and Security Agreement
In June 2018, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (LSA) with Bridge Bank (Bank), a division of Western Alliance Bank. We initially borrowed the first tranche of $0.3 million in June 2018. We increased our borrowings to $3.0 million in March 2019, and to $5.0 million in May 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had $3.4 million in outstanding principal under the facility. The loan originally matured in May 2022, at which time all outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest is due and payable. In June 2021, the Company entered into a fifth amendment to the LSA. This amendment modified the term loan’s maturity date to June 16, 2023. This loan is secured by substantially all our tangible assets; intellectual property is excluded from this secured collateral, but is subject to a negative pledge in favor of Bank.
Convertible notes
In March 2021, we issued $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes to certain existing and new investors. In July 2021, the Convertible Notes converted into an aggregate of 9,732,593 shares immediately prior to our IPO, at a price per share calculated based on 82% of the IPO price of $16.00.
Initial Public Offering
In July 2021, we completed our IPO and issued 14.4 million shares of our common stock, including 1.9 million shares pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a price of $16.00 per share and received net proceeds of $210.1 million from the IPO.
Cash Flows
The following summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (In thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $60.6 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $101.0 million adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expense of $6.7 million, stock-based compensation of $10.6 million, gain on extinguishment of our PPP loan of $0.6 million, an increase to our convertible note liability of $30.7 million, an increase to our preferred stock warrant liability of $4.1 million and a net increase in operating assets and liabilities in the amount of $3.1 million.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $11.0 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $14.4 million adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expense of $1.1 million and an increase to our preferred stock warrant liability of $0.5 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $67.4 million. The net cash used resulted primarily from purchases of lab equipment and leasehold improvements of $38.0 million as we expanded our operations and overall capacity and cash paid as part of our acquisitions of Denovium and Totient of $28.1 million, and an investment in equity securities of $1.2 million.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $2.2 million primarily from purchases of lab equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $336.2 million. The net cash provided resulted primarily from total net proceeds of $210.1 million from the IPO, the issuance of Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs, in the amount of $4.9 million, the issuance of $125.0 million of convertible promissory notes in March 2021, and was partially offset by principal payments made for leased equipment under finance leases and the term loan in the amount of $4.1 million.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $71.0 million. The net cash provided resulted primarily from the issuance of Series D redeemable convertible preferred units, net of issuance costs, in the amount of $69.3 million, proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt and notes payable in the amount of $3.2 million and was partially offset by principal payments made for leased equipment under finance leases and the term loan in the amount of $1.6 million.
Income taxes
The Company's effective income tax rate from continuing operations was 8.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The effective income tax rates reflect the impact of non-deductible expenses, state and local taxes and tax credits. When applicable, the income tax provision also includes adjustments from discrete tax items, including the tax impacts of the business combinations for Denovium and Totient for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2: Summary of significant accounting policies to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue as control of our products and services are transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be received in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when or as the performance obligations are satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once control of a good or service has been transferred to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service. Technology development revenue includes revenue associated to the discovery, development and technology readiness phases of technology development agreements. We refer to our customers as “partners” when describing our relationship in an agreement.
Technology development revenue
Our TDAs generally include multiple phases of Discovery and CLD such as target discovery, library design, assay development, strain screening, fermentation optimization, purification, and analytics that all represent a single performance obligation. These agreements may include options for additional goods and services such as readying the technology to transfer to the partner and licensing terms. The transaction prices for these arrangements include fixed and variable consideration for the single performance obligation as well as variable consideration for success-based achievements. Any variable consideration is constrained to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur. Depending on the specific terms of the arrangement, we either recognize revenue over time or at a point in time. While there is no alternative use for the asset created, the agreement’s terms vary as to whether an enforceable right to payment exists for performance completed as of that date. Primarily all of our contracts with our partners include an enforceable right to payment.
We measure progress toward the completion of the performance obligations satisfied over time using an input method based on an overall estimate of the effort incurred to date at each reporting period to satisfy a performance obligation. This method provides an appropriate depiction of completed progress toward fulfilling our performance obligations for each respective arrangement. In certain TDAs that require a portion of the contract consideration to be received in advance at the commencement of the contract, such advance payment is initially recorded as a contract liability.
Business combinations
We utilize the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations and allocate the purchase price of an acquisition to the various tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. We primarily establish fair value using the replacement cost approach or the income approach based upon a discounted cash flow model. The replacement cost approach measures the value of an asset by the cost to reconstruct or replace it with another of like utility. The income approach requires the
use of many assumptions and estimates including future revenues and expenses, as well as discount factors and income tax rates. Other estimates include:
•The use of carrying value as a proxy for fair values of fixed assets and liabilities assumed from the target; and
•Fair values of intangible assets and contingent consideration.
While we use best estimates and assumptions as part of the purchase price allocation process to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the business acquisition date, these estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the purchase price measurement period, which is no more than one year from the business acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. We have recorded adjustments during the period ended December 31, 2021 related to our Totient acquisition. Business combinations also require us to estimate the useful life of certain intangible assets acquired and this estimate requires significant judgment.
Stock-based compensation
Stock-based compensation includes compensation expense for incentive units, restricted stock, and stock option grants to employees and is measured on the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. The fair value of options to purchase common stock are measured using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Company accounts for forfeitures as they occur. Prior to the LLC Conversion, the Company also granted phantom units which due to the presence of an exercise condition contingent upon a liquidity event, the Company determined that it was not probable that the phantom units would become exercisable.
See Note 10: Stock-based compensation to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on form 10-K for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options. Certain of such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation could be materially different.
Determination of the Fair Value of Common Stock
We are required to estimate the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards when performing fair value calculations using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Prior to our common stock being publicly traded, the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards was determined on each grant date by management and approved by our board of directors, considering our most recently available third-party valuation of common shares. All options to purchase shares of our common stock are intended to be granted with an exercise price per share no less than the fair value per share of our common stock underlying those options on the date of grant, based on the information known to us on the date of grant.
Our determination of the value of our common stock was performed using methodologies, approaches and assumptions consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), Audit and Accounting Practice Aid Series: Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (AICPA Practice Aid). In addition, our board of directors considered various objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock, including:
•valuations of our common stock performed by third-party valuation specialists;
•the anticipated capital structure that will directly impact the value of the currently outstanding securities;
•our results of operations and financial position;
•the composition of, and changes to, our management team and board of directors;
•the lack of liquidity of our common stock as a private company;
•our stage of development and business strategy and the material risks related to our business and industry;
•external market conditions affecting the life sciences and biotechnology industry sectors;
•U.S. and global economic conditions;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the holders of our common stock, such as an IPO or a sale of our company, given prevailing market conditions; and
•the market value and volatility of comparable companies.
The AICPA Practice Aid prescribes several valuation approaches for setting the value of an enterprise, such as the cost, income and market approaches, and various methodologies for allocating the value of an enterprise to its common stock. The cost approach establishes the value of an enterprise based on the cost of reproducing or replacing the property less depreciation and functional or economic obsolescence, if present. The income approach establishes the value of an enterprise based on the present value of future cash flows that are reasonably reflective of our future operations, discounting to the present value with an appropriate risk adjusted discount rate or capitalization rate. The market approach is based on the assumption that the value of an asset is equal to the value of a substitute asset with the same characteristics.
In accordance with the AICPA Practice Aid, we considered the various methods for allocating the enterprise value to determine the fair value of our common stock at the valuation date. Under the option pricing method (OPM), shares are valued by creating a series of call options with exercise prices based on the liquidation preferences and conversion terms of each equity class. The value of the common stock is inferred by analyzing these options. The probability weighted expected return method (PWERM) is a scenario-based analysis that estimates the value per share based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns, considering each of the possible outcomes available to us, as well as the economic and control rights of each share class.
Starting in 2020, we used a hybrid method to determine the estimated fair value of our common stock, which included both the OPM and PWERM models.
Following our IPO, estimation of the fair value of our common stock was no longer considered a critical accounting estimate.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2: Summary of significant accounting policies to our Financial Statements “Recently adopted accounting pronouncements and Recently issued accounting pronouncements, not yet adopted” for more information.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933 for complying with new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that we can elect to opt out of the extended transition period at any time, which election is irrevocable. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Subject to certain conditions, as an emerging growth company, we may rely on certain other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements, including without limitation (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing
additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (a) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more; (b) December 31, 2026, the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the completion of our IPO; (c) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (d) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.