Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Arbutus Biopharma Corporation (“Arbutus”, the “Company”, “we”, “us”, and “our”) is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company leveraging its extensive virology expertise to develop novel therapeutics that target specific viral diseases. Our current focus areas include Hepatitis B virus (“HBV”), SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses. In HBV, we are developing an RNA interference (“RNAi”) therapeutic, oral capsid inhibitor, oral PD-L1 inhibitor, and oral RNA destabilizer that we intend to combine to provide a functional cure for patients with chronic HBV infection (“cHBV”) by suppressing viral replication, reducing surface antigen and reawakening the immune system. We believe our lead compound, AB-729, is the only RNAi therapeutic with evidence of immune re-awakening, and is currently being evaluated in multiple phase 2 clinical trials. We have an ongoing drug discovery and development program directed to identifying novel, orally active agents for treating coronaviruses (including SARS-CoV-2). We are also exploring oncology applications for our internal PD-L1 portfolio.
Our product pipeline consists of the following programs:
AB-729, our proprietary subcutaneously-delivered RNAi therapeutic product candidate that suppresses HBsAg expression, which is thought to be a key prerequisite to enable reawakening of a patient’s immune system to respond to HBV, is currently in one ongoing Phase 1a/1b clinical trial and three Phase 2a proof-of-concept clinical trials in combination with other agents with potentially complementary mechanisms of action. Preliminary data from the Phase 1a/1b clinical trial has shown that treatment with AB-729 resulted in meaningful declines in HBsAg while being well tolerated with no serious adverse events (“SAEs”) noted after both single and repeat dosing. Preliminary data also suggests that long-term suppression of HBsAg with AB-729 results in increased HBV-specific immune response.
AB-836, our proprietary next-generation oral capsid inhibitor that suppresses HBV DNA replication, is currently in an ongoing Phase 1a/1b clinical trial where preliminary data from healthy subjects and HBV patients have shown that AB-836 is generally safe and well-tolerated with robust antiviral activity. AB-836 is from a novel chemical series differentiated from competitor compounds and has the potential to provide increased efficacy and an enhanced resistance profile.
AB-101, our oral PD-L1 inhibitor that has the potential to reawaken patients’ HBV-specific immune response by inhibiting PD-L1, is advancing through lead optimization. We are also exploring potential oncology applications for our internal PD-L1 portfolio.
AB-161, our next-generation oral HBV specific RNA destabilizer, is advancing through lead optimization. We have conducted extensive non-clinical safety evaluations with AB-161 that gives us confidence in this molecule’s ability to circumvent the peripheral neuropathy findings seen in non-clinical safety studies with our first-generation oral RNA destabilizer, AB-452.
Our coronavirus program is focused on the discovery and development of new molecular entities for treating coronaviruses (including COVID-19) that address specific viral targets including the nsp12 viral polymerase and the nsp5 viral protease (nucleos(t)ide).
COVID-19 Impact
We continue to monitor the effects of COVID-19, which has caused significant disruptions around the world. A number of countries and other jurisdictions around the world have implemented extreme measures in attempts to slow the spread of the virus. These measures include the closing of businesses and requiring people to stay in their homes, the latter of which raises uncertainty regarding the ability to travel to hospitals in order to participate in clinical trials. Additional measures that have had, and will likely continue to have, a major impact on clinical development, at least in the near-term, include shortages and delays in the supply chain, and prohibitions in certain countries on enrolling patients in new clinical trials. While we have been able to progress with our clinical and pre-clinical activities to date, it is not possible to predict if the COVID-19 pandemic will materially impact our plans and timelines in the future.
Collaborations and Royalty Entitlements
Qilu Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd.
In December 2021, we entered into a technology transfer and exclusive license agreement (the “License Agreement”) with Qilu Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. (“Qilu”), pursuant to which we granted Qilu an exclusive (except as to certain retained rights), sublicensable, royalty-bearing license, under certain intellectual property owned by us, to develop, manufacture and commercialize AB-729, including pharmaceutical products that include AB-729, for the treatment or prevention of hepatitis B in China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan (the “Territory”).
In partial consideration for the rights granted by us, Qilu paid us a one-time upfront cash payment of $40 million on January 5, 2022 and agreed to pay us milestone payments totaling up to $245 million, net of withholding taxes, upon the achievement of certain technology transfer, development, regulatory and commercialization milestones. Qilu also agreed to pay us double digit royalties into the low twenties percent based upon annual net sales of AB-729 in the Territory. The royalties are payable on a product-by-product and region-by-region basis, subject to certain limitations.
Qilu is responsible for all costs related to developing, obtaining regulatory approval for, and commercializing AB-729 for the treatment or prevention of hepatitis B in the Territory. Qilu is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop, seek
regulatory approval for, and commercialize at least one AB-729 product candidate in the Territory. A joint development committee will be established between us and Qilu to coordinate and review the development, manufacturing and commercialization plans. Both parties also agreed to negotiate in good faith the terms and conditions of a supply agreement and
related quality agreement pursuant to which we will manufacture or have manufactured and supply Qilu with all quantities of AB-729 necessary for Qilu to develop and commercialize in the Territory until we have completed manufacturing technology transfer to Qilu and approval of a product manufactured by Qilu, or its designated contract manufacturing organization, by National Medical Products Administration in China for AB-729.
Concurrent with the execution of the License Agreement, we entered into a Share Purchase Agreement (the “Share Purchase Agreement”) with Anchor Life Limited, a company established pursuant to the applicable laws and regulations of Hong Kong and an affiliate of Qilu (the “Investor”), pursuant to which the Investor purchased 3,579,952 of our common shares, without par value (the “Common Shares”), at a purchase price of USD $4.19 per share, which was a 15% premium on the thirty-day average closing price of the Common Shares as of the close of trading on December 10, 2021 (the “Share Transaction”). We
received $15.0 million of gross proceeds from the Share Transaction on January 6, 2022. The Common Shares sold to the Investor in the Share Transaction represented approximately 2.5% of the Common Shares outstanding immediately prior to the execution of the Share Purchase Agreement.
Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and Acuitas Therapeutics, Inc
We have a royalty entitlement on ONPATTRO® (Patisiran) (“ONPATTRO”), a drug developed by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Alnylam”) under a license agreement with us that incorporates our lipid nanoparticle delivery (“LNP”) technology. In July 2019, we received $20 million in gross proceeds before advisory fees from the sale of this royalty interest to Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System (“OMERS”), effective as of January 1, 2019. The royalty interest will revert back to us after OMERS receives $30 million in royalty payments from Alnylam. We also have rights to a second, lower royalty interest on global net sales of ONPATTRO originating from a settlement agreement and subsequent license agreement with Acuitas Therapeutics, Inc. (“Acuitas”). The royalty entitlement from Acuitas has been retained by us and was not part of the royalty entitlement sale to OMERS.
Genevant Sciences, Ltd.
As of December 31, 2021, we owned approximately 16% of the common equity of Genevant Sciences Ltd. (“Genevant”), a company we launched with Roivant Sciences, Ltd. and to which we licensed rights to our lipid nanoparticle ("LNP") and ligand conjugate delivery platforms for RNA-based applications outside of HBV, except to the extent certain rights had already been licensed to other third parties (the “Genevant License”). We retained all rights to our LNP and conjugate delivery platforms for HBV. Under the Genevant License, as amended, if a third party sublicensee of intellectual property licensed by Genevant from us commercializes a sublicensed product, we become entitled to receive a specified percentage of certain revenue that may be received by Genevant for such sublicense, including royalties, commercial milestones and other sales-related revenue, or, if less, tiered low single-digit royalties on net sales of the sublicensed product. The specified percentage is 20% in the case of a mere sublicense (i.e., naked sublicense) by Genevant without additional contribution and 14% in the case of a bona fide collaboration with Genevant.
Refer to “Item 1. Business.” and Note 9 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of our clinical collaborations and other royalty entitlements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Contingent Consideration
The significant accounting policy that we believe to be most critical in fully understanding and evaluating our financial results relates to our contingent consideration. This accounting policy requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions. We believe that the estimates and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable, based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates and assumptions are made. Actual results may differ from our estimates. Our critical accounting estimates affect the calculation of our net income or loss.
In connection with the acquisition of Enantigen Therapeutics, Inc. (“Enantigen”) in October 2014, we have obligations to make potential future payments of up to $102.5 million upon the achievement of certain commercial milestones. The sales milestones are tied to the first commercial sales by us of a product indicated for the treatment of cHBV. These potential contingent payments are recorded as a liability and remeasured to fair value as of each reporting date. In assessing the fair value of the liability, significant judgments are required to be made by management to estimate the probability of program success, the timing and extent of future product sales, appropriate discount rates, and other estimates and assumptions that could materially affect the determination of fair value.
In order to estimate the probability of program success, we evaluate the status and progress of our relevant programs and consider statistics and probabilities related to other relevant programs’ success rates. As our relevant programs have advanced in clinical trials, we updated our assumptions related to probability of success in 2021. For the timing and extent of future product sales, we also consider the status and progress of our relevant programs, future forecasts and other macroeconomic indicators that forecast market conditions. The discount rate at which we calculate the present value of our potential future liability, is based on consideration of market-comparative data, market-based discount rates, and company-specific risk premiums.
As assumptions related to the probability of program success and timing and amount of potential future product sales are highly uncertain due to the unpredictable nature of product development, we assessed the sensitivity of the fair value measurement to changes in assumptions, and determined that changes within a reasonable range would not result in a materially different assessment of fair value.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, our net loss attributable to common shares was $88.4 million, or a loss of $0.83 per basic and diluted common share, as compared to a net loss of $75.9 million, or a loss of $1.00 per basic and diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue
Revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is summarized in the following table:
Revenue consists mainly of royalties received from other companies for sales of products that utilize our licensed technologies.
Total revenue increased $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, due to a $4.1 million increase in license royalty revenue from Alnylam and Acuitas due to the growth of Alnylam’s sales of ONPATTRO.
The royalty interest for ONPATTRO from Alnylam was sold to OMERS, effective as of January 1, 2019, for $20 million in gross proceeds before advisory fees. OMERS will retain this entitlement until it has received $30 million in royalties, at which point 100% of such royalty interest on future global net sales of ONPATTRO will revert back to us. OMERS has assumed the risk of collecting up to $30 million of future royalty payments from Alnylam and we are not obligated to reimburse OMERS if they fail to collect any such future royalties. During the term of this agreement, we recognize non-cash royalty revenue related to the sales of ONPATTRO. From the inception of the royalty sale through December 31, 2021, the Company has recorded an aggregate of $11.2 million of non-cash royalty revenue for royalties earned by OMERS. The royalty interest for ONPATTRO from Acuitas was not part of the royalty sale to OMERS and we have retained the rights to receive those royalties. Revenue contracts are described in more detail in “Item 1. Business.”
Operating expenses
Operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized in the following table:
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, fees paid to clinical research organizations and contract manufacturers, consumables and materials, consulting, and other third party expenses to support our clinical and pre-clinical activities, as well as a portion of stock-based compensation and general overhead costs.
Research and development expenses increased $16.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in expenses related to our ongoing AB-729 clinical trials, including our collaboration with Assembly, an increase in expenses for our ongoing AB-836 Phase 1a/1b clinical trial, and an increase in expenses for our early stage development programs, including our coronavirus program, AB-101 and AB-161.
A significant portion of our research and development expenses are not tracked by project, as they benefit multiple projects or our overall technology platform.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $2.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020, due primarily to an increase in employee compensation costs, stock-based compensation expense, insurance premiums and professional fees.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
In October 2014, Arbutus Inc., our wholly-owned subsidiary, acquired all of the outstanding shares of Enantigen pursuant to a stock purchase agreement. The amount paid to Enantigen’s selling shareholders could be up to an additional $102.5 million in sales performance milestones in connection with the sale of the first commercialized product by us for the treatment of HBV, regardless of whether such product is based upon assets acquired under this agreement, and a low single-digit royalty on net sales of such first commercialized HBV product, up to a maximum royalty payment of $1.0 million.
In general, increases in the fair value of the contingent consideration are related to the progress of our programs as they get closer to triggering these contingent payments. In 2021, the fair value of our contingent consideration liability increased $1.9 million, primarily related to the progression of our programs through clinical trials and our assessment of the probability of commercialization. In 2020, the fair value of our contingent consideration liability increased by $0.5 million, primarily related to the passage of time.
Site consolidation charges
In February 2018, we announced a site consolidation and organizational restructuring to better align our HBV business in Warminster, PA, including closing our Burnaby, Canada facility. Most of the employee-related site consolidation expenses were expensed ratably over the period that employees provided services, which was substantially completed in 2018. Total site consolidation expenses were $5.0 million, which was fully recognized as of December 31, 2020.
Other income (losses)
Other income (losses) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized in the following table:
Interest income
Interest income decreased $0.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to a general decline in market interest rates.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $1.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to a decrease in the non-cash amortization of discount and issuance costs related to the sale of a portion of our ONPATTRO royalty interest to OMERS in July 2019.
Equity investment loss
In July 2020, we participated in the recapitalization of Genevant, led by Roivant, with an equity investment of $2.5 million. We determined that this $2.5 million additional investment in Genevant was funding prior losses and recorded the amount as an equity investment loss in 2020. Due to our loss of significant influence with respect to Genevant as a result of the recapitalization, we discontinued the use of equity method accounting for our interest in Genevant in 2020. Following the recapitalization, we account for our interest in Genevant as equity securities without readily determinable fair values. Accordingly, an estimate of the fair value of the securities is based on the original cost less previously recognized equity method losses, less impairments, plus or minus changes resulting from future observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar Genevant securities. As of December 31, 2021, the carrying value of our investment in Genevant was zero and we owned approximately 16% of the common equity of Genevant.
Foreign exchange gains (losses)
In connection with our site consolidation to Warminster, PA, our Canadian dollar-denominated expenses and cash balances have decreased significantly now that a majority of our business transactions are based in the United States. We continue to incur expenses and hold some cash balances in Canadian dollars, and as such, we will remain subject to risks associated with foreign currency fluctuations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded foreign exchange gains of less than $0.1 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded foreign exchange losses of $0.1 million.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Since our incorporation, we have financed our operations through the sales of equity, debt, revenues from research and development collaborations and licenses with corporate partners, a royalty monetization, interest income on funds available for investment, and government contracts, grants and tax credits.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $109.3 million and investments in marketable securities of $81.7 million, totaling $191.0 million. In January 2022, we received a $40 million upfront payment and a $15 million equity investment from Qilu as part of a technology transfer and exclusive licensing agreement to develop and commercialize AB-729 in the Territory. We had no outstanding debt as of December 31, 2021.
Sources of Liquidity
Sale Agreement
We have an Open Market Sale AgreementSM with Jefferies dated December 20, 2018, as amended by Amendment No. 1, dated December 20, 2019, Amendment No. 2, dated August 7, 2020 and Amendment No. 3, dated March 4, 2021 (as amended, the “Sale Agreement”), under which we may offer and sell common shares, from time to time.
On December 23, 2019, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC (File No. 333-235674) and accompanying base prospectus, declared effective by the SEC on January 10, 2020 (the “January 2020 Registration Statement”), for the offer and sale of up to $150 million of our securities.
On August 28, 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC (File No. 333-248467) and accompanying base prospectus, declared effective by the SEC on October 22, 2020 (the “October 2020 Registration Statement”), for the offer and sale of up to $200 million of our securities. On March 4, 2021, we filed a prospectus supplement with the SEC in connection with the offering of up to an additional $75.0 million of our common shares pursuant to the Sale Agreement under the October 2020 Registration Statement, which we fully utilized during 2021. On October 8, 2021, we filed a prospectus supplement with the SEC (the “October 2021 Prospectus Supplement”) for the offer and sale of up to an additional $75.0 million of our common shares pursuant to the Sale Agreement under the October 2020 Registration Statement.
On November 4, 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC (File No. 333-248467) and accompanying base prospectus, declared effective by the SEC on November 18, 2021 (the “November 2021 Registration Statement”), for the offer and sale of up to $250 million of our securities.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we issued 31,571,036 and 24,728,368 common shares, respectively, under the Sale Agreement, as amended, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $134.7 million and $86.3 million, respectively.
Royalty Entitlements
Additionally, we have a royalty entitlement on ONPATTRO, a drug developed by Alnylam that incorporates our LNP technology and was approved by the FDA and the EMA during the third quarter of 2018 and was launched by Alnylam immediately upon approval in the United States. In July 2019, we sold a portion of this royalty interest to OMERS, effective as of January 1, 2019, for $20 million in gross proceeds before advisory fees. OMERS will retain this entitlement until it has received $30 million in royalties, at which point 100% of such royalty interest on future global net sales of ONPATTRO will revert to us. OMERS has assumed the risk of collecting up to $30 million of future royalty payments from Alnylam and Arbutus is not obligated to reimburse OMERS if they fail to collect any such future royalties. If this royalty entitlement reverts to us, it has the potential to provide an active royalty stream or to be otherwise monetized again in full or in part. In addition to the royalty from the Alnylam LNP license agreement, we are also receiving a second, lower royalty interest on global net sales of ONPATTRO originating from a settlement agreement and subsequent license agreement with Acuitas. The royalty from Acuitas has been retained by us and was not part of the royalty sale to OMERS.
In December 2021, we entered into a technology transfer and exclusive licensing agreement with Qilu pursuant to which we granted Qilu an exclusive (with certain exceptions), sublicensable, royalty-bearing license, under certain intellectual property
owned by us, to develop, manufacture and commercialize AB-729 for the treatment or prevention of hepatitis B in the Territory. In partial consideration for the rights granted by us, Qilu paid us a one-time upfront cash payment of $40 million and made an equity investment of $15.0 million, both received in January 2022, and agreed to pay us milestone payments totaling up to $245 million, net of withholding taxes, upon the achievement of certain technology transfer, development, regulatory and commercialization milestones. Qilu also agreed to pay us double digit royalties into the low twenties percent based upon annual net sales of AB-729 in the Territory.
Cash requirements
We believe that our $191.0 million of cash and investments in marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, plus $55.0 million of gross proceeds received in January 2022 from Qilu as part of our technology transfer and licensing agreement, will be sufficient to fund our operations into the second quarter of 2024 based on our expectation of a net cash burn between $90.0 million and $95.0 million in 2022. In the future, substantial additional funds will be required to continue with the active development of our pipeline products and technologies. In particular, our funding needs may vary depending on a number of factors including:
•the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the medical community and the global economy;
•revenue earned from our legacy collaborative partnerships and licensing agreements, including potential royalty payments from Alnylam’s ONPATTRO;
•revenue earned from ongoing collaborative partnerships, including milestone and royalty payments;
•the potential requirement to make milestone payments related to our legacy agreements;
•the extent to which we continue the development of our product candidates, add new product candidates to our pipeline, or form collaborative relationships or licensing arrangements to advance our product candidates;
•delays in the development of our product candidates due to pre-clinical and clinical findings;
•our decisions to in-license or acquire additional products, product candidates or technology for development;
•our ability to attract and retain development or commercialization partners, and their effectiveness in carrying out the development and ultimate commercialization of one or more of our product candidates;
•whether batches of product candidates that we manufacture fail to meet specifications resulting in clinical trial delays and investigational and remanufacturing costs;
•the decisions, and the timing of decisions, made by health regulatory agencies regarding our technology and product candidates;
•competing products, product candidates and technological and market developments; and
•costs associated with prosecuting and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights, including litigation and arbitration arising in the course of our business activities.
We intend to seek funding to maintain and advance our business from a variety of sources including public or private equity or debt financing, potential monetization transactions, collaborative or licensing arrangements with pharmaceutical companies and government grants and contracts. There can be no assurance that funding will be available at all or on acceptable terms to permit further development of our research and development programs. Further, the continued spread of COVID-19 has also led to severe disruption and volatility in the global capital markets, which could increase our cost of capital and adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets in the future.
If adequate funding is not available, we may be required to delay, reduce or eliminate one or more of our research or development programs or reduce expenses associated with our non-core activities. We may need to obtain funds through arrangements with collaborators or others that may require us to relinquish most or all of our rights to product candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise seek if we were better funded. Insufficient financing may also mean failing to prosecute our patents or relinquishing rights to some of our technologies that we would otherwise develop or commercialize.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities for the periods indicated:
Net cash used in operating activities in 2021 increased $16.1 million compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in research and development payments of approximately $18.2 million, which was due primarily to an increase in research and development expenses for our clinical development and discovery programs.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 decreased by $2.2 million compared to 2020 due primarily to the timing of maturities and acquisitions of investments in marketable securities.
Net cash from financing activities in 2021 increased $50.5 million compared to 2020. Cash provided by financing activities in 2021 consisted primarily of $134.7 million of proceeds from sales of common shares under the Sale Agreement, as amended. Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of $86.3 million of proceeds from sales of common shares under the Sale Agreement, as amended.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board or other standard setting bodies that we adopt as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, we believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations upon adoption.
Please refer to note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.