Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Please see the “Risk Factors” section for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on May 20, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization, or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any specific business-combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, engaged in substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business-combination target. We may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry or sector, but given the experience of our management team, we expect to focus on acquiring a business combination target within the financial services industry and related sectors, including potentially the mobility sector.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our entire activity since inception has been to prepare for our initial public offering, which was consummated on January 19, 2022.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from May 20, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate the IPO, described below. Following our initial public offering, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after the IPO. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,793 which consists of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had no cash. Until the consummation of our initial public offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our sale of the Founder Shares, and unsecured loans of $1,000,227 out of $250,000 available to us from our sponsor as of December 31, 2021. The promissory note in connection with such unsecured loans is non-interest bearing and the aggregate amount of $149,539 outstanding under the promissory note as of January 19, 2022, was fully repaid on February 22, 2022.
On January 19, 2022, we consummated our initial public offering of 30,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), which includes the partial exercise by the underwriters of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,900,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 13,850,000 Private Placement Warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating total gross proceeds of $13,850,000.
Transaction costs amounted to $17,204,107 consisting of $5,760,000 of underwriting discount (net of $240,000 reimbursed by the underwriters) and $944,107 of other offering costs. We have agreed to pay a deferred underwriting fee to the underwriters upon the consummation of our initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO or an aggregate of $10,500,000.
Following the closing of our initial public offering including the sale of over-allotment units, an aggregate of $306,000,000 ($10.20 per Unit) from the net proceeds and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed in a Trust Account (“Trust Account”).
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor has committed to provide us $1,750,000 to fund our expenses relating to investigating and selecting a target business and other working capital requirements. In addition, our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us additional funds as may be required. If we
complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
Through the target identification process, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds, other than as noted above, in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Deferred Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated based on the relative value of the Public and Private Warrants to the proceeds received from the Public Shares sold in the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs allocated to the Public Shares are charged to temporary equity and offering costs allocated to the Public and Private Warrants are charged to stockholder’s equity. As of January 19, 2022, offering costs in the aggregate of $17,204,107, of which an aggregate of $16,699,058 have been charged to temporary equity and an aggregate of $505,049 have been charged to stockholders’ equity.
As of December 31, 2021, there were $361,372 of deferred offering costs recorded in the accompanying audited balance sheet.
Series A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Series A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Series A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Series A common stock (including Series A common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Series A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Series A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. At December 31, 2021, there were no shares of Series A common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding.
Net Loss Per Share
Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding shares of common stock subject to forfeiture by the Sponsor. Weighted average shares were reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 978,750 shares of Series B Common Stock that are subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option is not exercised by the underwriters. At December 31, 2021, we do not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently assessing the impact of adopting ASU 2020-06 on its financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.