Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. Past operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future periods. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Such forward-looking statements include statements about the benefits to be derived from NUPLAZID® (pimavanserin), trofinetide and from our drug candidates, the potential market opportunities for pimavanserin and our drug candidates, our strategy for the commercialization of NUPLAZID, our plans for exploring and developing pimavanserin for indications other than Parkinson’s disease psychosis, our plans and timing with respect to seeking regulatory approvals, the potential commercialization of any of our drug candidates that receive regulatory approval, the progress, timing, results or implications of clinical trials and other development activities involving pimavanserin and our drug candidates, our strategy for discovering, developing and, if approved, commercializing drug candidates, our existing and potential future collaborations, our estimates of future payments, revenues and profitability, our estimates regarding our capital requirements, future expenses and need for additional financing, possible changes in legislation, and other statements that are not historical facts, including statements which may be preceded by the words “believes,” “expects,” “hopes,” “may,” “will,” “plans,” “intends,” “estimates,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “continues,” “seeks,” “aims,” “projects,” “predicts,” “pro forma,” “anticipates,” “potential” or similar words. In addition, statements that “we believe” and similar statements reflect our beliefs and opinions on the relevant subject. These statements are based upon
information available to us as of the date of this report, and while we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain. For forward-looking statements, we claim the protection of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Readers of this report are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of performance. Actual results or events may differ materially from those anticipated in our forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the section captioned “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this report. Information in the following discussion for a yearly period means for the year ended December 31 of the indicated year.
Overview
Background
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of innovative medicines to address unmet medical needs in central nervous system disorders. We have a portfolio of product opportunities led by our novel drug, NUPLAZID (pimavanserin), which was approved by the FDA, in April 2016 for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions associated with PDP. We hold worldwide commercialization rights to pimavanserin. NUPLAZID is available in 34 mg capsules and 10 mg tablets dosage forms.
Since 2021, we have advanced our business and clinical studies through the following events:
•In March 2021, we initiated a Phase 2 study evaluating ACP-044 for the treatment of postoperative pain following bunionectomy surgery.
•In June 2021, we announced publication of open-label extension (OLE) data from patients experiencing hallucinations and delusions associated with PDP. The OLE efficacy analysis showed that patients previously on NUPLAZID 34 mg had a sustained efficacy response, and that patients who had been treated with investigational doses of 8.5 mg and 17 mg or placebo also showed an improvement in the symptoms of psychosis when switched to NUPLAZID 34 mg during OLE.
•In June 2021, we initiated an additional Phase 2 study evaluating ACP-044 for the treatment of pain associated with osteoarthritis.
•In December 2021, we announced positive top-line results from the pivotal Phase 3 LAVENDER study of trofinetide in Rett Syndrome. The study demonstrated a statistically significant improvement over placebo for both co-primary endpoints as well as key secondary endpoint.
•In January 2022, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Stoke to discover, develop and commercialize novel RNA-based medicines for the potential treatment of severe and rare genetic neurodevelopmental diseases of the CNS.
•In February 2022, we resubmitted to the FDA an sNDA for NUPLAZID for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions associated with ADP. In addition, based on the positive results from the Phase 3 LAVENDER study, we plan to submit to the FDA an NDA for trofinetide for the treatment of Rett syndrome around mid-year 2022.
We have incurred substantial operating losses since our inception due in large part to expenditures for our research and development activities and more recently for our sales and marketing activities related to the commercialization of NUPLAZID. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $2.2 billion. We expect to continue to incur operating losses for the next few years as we advance our programs and incur significant development and commercialization costs.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a pandemic resulting from the disease known as COVID-19 caused by a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2. As a result of the pandemic, there have been changes in the practice of medical care and medical education. For example, many health care providers initially expanded their utilization of telemedicine to conduct patient visits, and in many regions within the United States the ability of our commercial and medical field teams to call upon medical clinics, hospitals, long-term care facilities and skilled nursing facilities was restricted or converted to virtual access. We continue to access our customers both in person and virtually. Currently, health care providers are conducting patient visits in-person and through telemedicine and our sales force has been able to call upon medical clinics, hospitals, long-term care facilities and skilled nursing facilities either in person in accordance with applicable regulatory guidance and local policies or virtually. Most medical congresses, an important means for medical education, are being conducted both in person and virtually and enrollment in clinical trials is being assessed based on local COVID-19 conditions and regional regulation and public health guidance.
In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees and our stakeholders, we adopted recommended policies applicable to office-based employees such as working from home, limiting the number of employees on site, and reducing business travel. For our field-based commercial and medical affairs personnel, we have instituted a protocol to assess the safety of employees to conduct in-person interactions on a localized basis in accordance with applicable regulatory guidance and local policies.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have been able to provide an uninterrupted supply of NUPLAZID to patients. We are monitoring our supply chain closely and do not anticipate disruptions in our ability to continue delivering NUPLAZID to patients.
During 2021, sales of NUPLAZID were negatively impacted by ongoing conditions related to the pandemic, including a reduction in patient office visits, continuing reduced occupancy rates at long-term care facilities, and reduced access to healthcare professionals. While we observed incremental improvements in some of these factors during the second half of the year, their levels are still meaningfully below where they were pre-pandemic. It remains difficult to predict the duration of the pandemic’s impact and the pace of recovery, and no assurances can be given that the pandemic will not continue to have additional negative impacts on our business, results of operations, financial condition and prospects.
Financial Operations Overview
Product and Collaborative Revenues
Net product sales consist of sales of NUPLAZID, our first and only commercial product to date. The FDA approved NUPLAZID in April 2016 and we launched the product in the United States in May 2016.
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales consists of third-party manufacturing costs, freight, and indirect overhead costs associated with sales of NUPLAZID. Cost of product sales may also include period costs related to certain inventory manufacturing services, excess or obsolete inventory adjustment charges, unabsorbed manufacturing and overhead costs, and manufacturing variances.
License Fees and Royalties
License fees and royalties consist of milestone payments expensed or capitalized and subsequently amortized under our 2006 license agreement with the Ipsen Group. License fees and royalties also include royalties of 2% due to the Ipsen Group based upon net sales of NUPLAZID. This obligation terminated in October 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses have consisted primarily of fees paid to external service providers, salaries and related personnel expenses, facilities and equipment expenses, and other costs incurred related to pre-commercial product candidates. We charge all research and development expenses to operations as incurred. Our research and development activities have primarily focused on NUPLAZID (pimavanserin) which was approved by the FDA for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions associated with PDP in April 2016. We currently are responsible for all costs incurred in the ongoing development of pimavanserin and we expect to continue to make substantial investments in clinical studies of pimavanserin for indications other than PDP, including schizophrenia. In April 2021, the FDA issued a CRL in response to our sNDA seeking approval of pimavanserin for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions associated with DRP. While we have resubmitted our sNDA to the FDA for pimavanserin for the treatment of ADP, at this time, due to the risks in the regulatory and approval processes, it is difficult to estimate the costs we would incur for any additionally required development activities of pimavanserin in ADP and other subgroups of dementia-related psychosis, including work necessary to support the review of the sNDA. Additionally, in connection with the FDA approval of NUPLAZID, we committed to conduct post-marketing studies, including a randomized, placebo-controlled withdrawal study in patients treated with NUPLAZID and a randomized, placebo-controlled eight-week study or studies in predominantly frail and elderly patients that would add to the NUPLAZID safety database by exposing an aggregate of at least 500 patients to NUPLAZID. We will be responsible for all costs incurred for these post-marketing studies. While we intend to submit a NDA to the FDA for trofinetide for the treatment of Rett syndrome in mid-year 2022, at this time, due to the risks in the regulatory and approval processes, it is difficult to estimate with the costs we would incur for any additionally required development activities to support the submission and review of the NDA. We expect to incur increased research and development expenses as a result of our exclusive worldwide license agreement for the M1 PAM program, including ACP-319, and the research collaboration with Vanderbilt University, as well as our acquisition of CerSci and its ACP-044 product candidate and preclinical programs. We currently are responsible for all costs incurred in the development of trofinetide, ACP-044, ACP-319, the M1 PAM program and other preclinical programs, as well as milestone payments subject to achievement of development milestones.
We use external service providers to manufacture our product candidates and for the majority of the services performed in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of pimavanserin, trofinetide, ACP-044 and ACP-319. Historically, we have used our internal research and development resources, including our employees and discovery infrastructure, across several projects and many of our costs have not been attributable to a specific project. Accordingly, we have not reported our internal research and development costs on a project basis. To the extent that external expenses are not attributable to a specific project, they are included in other early stage programs.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
_____________________
* Includes upfront and milestone consideration as well as transaction costs associated with acquired in-process research and development.
Although NUPLAZID was approved by the FDA for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions associated with PDP, at this time, due to the risks inherent in regulatory requirements and clinical development, we are unable to estimate with certainty the costs we will incur for the ongoing or additional development of pimavanserin in additional indications, including ADP and schizophrenia, and the development of trofinetide, ACP-044, ACP-319 and the M1 PAM program. Due to these same factors, we are unable to determine with any certainty the anticipated completion dates for our current research and development programs. Clinical development and regulatory approval timelines, probability of success, and development costs vary widely. While our current development efforts are primarily focused on advancing the development of pimavanserin in additional indications other than PDP, we anticipate that we will make determinations as to which programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, as well as an ongoing assessment of the commercial potential of each opportunity and our financial position. We cannot forecast with any degree of certainty which product opportunities will be subject to future collaborative or licensing arrangements, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree any such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements. Similarly, we are unable to estimate with certainty the costs we will incur for post-marketing studies that we committed to conduct in connection with FDA approval of NUPLAZID.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase and continue to be substantial as we conduct studies pursuant to our post-marketing commitments and pursue the development of pimavanserin in additional indications other than PDP, including our studies within schizophrenia, the development of ACP-044 for pain management, and the development of ACP-319. The lengthy process of completing clinical trials and supporting development activities and seeking regulatory approval for our product opportunities requires the expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure by us or delay in completing clinical trials, or in obtaining regulatory approvals, could cause our research and development expenses to increase and, in turn, have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for our commercial personnel, including our specialty sales force, our medical education professionals, and our personnel serving in executive, finance, business development, and business operations functions. Also included in selling, general and administrative expenses are fees paid to external service providers to support our commercial activities associated with NUPLAZID, professional fees associated with legal and accounting services, costs associated with patents and patent applications for our intellectual property and charitable donations to independent charitable foundations that support Parkinson’s disease patients generally. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods to support commercial activities associated with NUPLAZID and our further development of pimavanserin in additional indications other than PDP.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A summary of the significant accounting policies is provided in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions and factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Management considers an accounting estimate to be critical if:
•it requires a significant level of estimation uncertainty; and
•changes in the estimate are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
We believe the following critical accounting policies and estimates describe the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statement.
Product Sales, Net
We sale our product through SPs and SDs. SPs dispense product to a patient based on the fulfillment of a prescription and SDs sell product to government facilities, long-term care pharmacies, or in-patient hospital pharmacies. Product shipping and handling costs are included in cost of product sales.
We recognize revenue from product sales at the net sales price (the “transaction price”) which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established and reflects each of these as either a reduction to the related account receivable or as an accrued liability, depending on how the amount payable is settled. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from estimates, we may need to adjust our estimates, which would affect net revenue in the period of adjustment. The following sales discounts and allowances involve a substantial degree of judgment:
Rebates: Allowances for rebates include mandated discounts under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program and the Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit. Rebates are amounts owed after the final dispensing of the product to a benefit plan participant and are based upon contractual agreements with, or statutory requirements pertaining to, Medicaid and Medicare benefit providers. The allowance for rebates is based on statutory discount rates and expected utilization. Our estimates for expected utilization of rebates is based on historical data received from the SPs and SDs since product launch. Rebates are generally invoiced and paid in arrears so that the accrual balance consists of an estimate of the amount expected to be incurred for the current quarter’s activity, plus an accrual balance for prior quarters’ unpaid rebates still estimated to be incurred.
Chargebacks: Chargebacks are discounts and fees that relate to contracts with government and other entities purchasing from the SDs at a discounted price. The SDs charge back to us the difference between the price initially paid by the SDs and the discounted price paid to the SDs by these entities. We also incur group purchasing organization fees for transactions through certain purchasing organizations. We estimate sales with these entities and accrue for anticipated chargebacks and organization fees, based on the applicable contractual terms.
Research and Development Accruals
We estimate certain costs and expenses and accrue for these liabilities as part of our process of preparing financial statements. Examples of areas in which subjective judgments may be required include, among other things, costs associated with services provided by contract organizations for preclinical development, manufacturing of our product candidates and clinical trials, and personnel related expenses. We accrue for costs incurred as the services are being provided by monitoring the status of the trial or services provided, and the invoices received from our external service providers. In the case of clinical trials, a portion of the estimated cost normally relates to the projected cost to treat a patient in the trials, and this cost is recognized based on the number of patients enrolled in the trial. Other indirect costs are generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period of the study. As actual costs become known to us, we adjust our accruals. To date, our estimates have not differed materially from the actual costs incurred. However, subsequent changes in estimates may result in a material change in our accruals, which could also materially affect our balance sheet and results of operations
Stock-Based Compensation
The fair value of each employee stock option and each employee stock purchase plan right granted is estimated on the grant date under the fair value method using the Black-Scholes valuation model, which requires us to make a number of assumptions including the estimated expected life of the award and related volatility. The fair value of restricted stock units is estimated based on the market price of our common stock on the date of grant. The estimated fair values of stock options, purchase plan rights, and regular restricted stock units are then expensed over the vesting period. For restricted stock units requiring satisfaction of both market and service conditions, the estimated fair values are generally expensed over the longest of the explicit, implicit and derived service periods. Performance-based stock awards vest upon the achievement of certain pre-defined company-specific performance-based criteria. Expense related to these performance-based stock awards is generally recognized ratably over the expected performance period once the pre-defined performance-based criteria for vesting becomes probable.
Results of Operations
Fluctuations in Operating Results
Our results of operations have fluctuated significantly from period to period in the past and are likely to continue to do so in the future. We anticipate that our quarterly and annual results of operations will be impacted for the foreseeable future by several factors, including the progress and timing of expenditures related to our commercial activities associated with NUPLAZID and the extent to which we generate revenue from product sales, our development of pimavanserin in additional indications other than PDP, our development of trofinetide, ACP-044, ACP-319, and the M1 PAM program, and the progress and timing of expenditures related to studies of NUPLAZID in PDP pursuant to our post-marketing commitments. Further, we expect our sales allowances to vary from quarter to quarter due to fluctuations in our Medicare Part D Coverage Gap liability and the volume of purchases eligible for government mandated discounts and rebates, as well as changes in discount percentages that may be impacted by potential future price increases and other factors. We cannot predict with certainty what the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our business, results of operations, financial condition and prospects. Due to these fluctuations, we believe that the period-to-period comparisons of our operating results are not a good indication of our future performance.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Product Sales, Net
Net product sales, comprised of NUPLAZID, were $484.1 million and $441.8 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a higher average gross selling price of NUPLAZID in 2021 as compared to 2020 as well as the growth in NUPLAZID unit sales of approximately 3% in 2021 as compared to 2020.
The following table provides a summary of activity with respect to our sales allowances and accruals for the year ended December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales was $10.8 million and $10.2 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, or approximately 2% of net product sales, respectively. The cost of product sales as a percentage of net sales stayed flat during 2021 as compared to 2020.
License Fees and Royalties
License fees and royalties were $8.3 million and $10.3 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and include royalties due to the Ipsen Group of two percent of net sales of NUPLAZID and amortization related to the milestone paid to the Ipsen Group upon FDA approval of NUPLAZID in 2016. The royalty obligation terminated in October 2021 which was the primary reason for the decrease in license fees and royalties during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased to $239.4 million in 2021, including $22.0 million in stock-based compensation, from $319.1 million in 2020, including $31.3 million in stock-based compensation. The decrease in research and development expenses was due to a decrease of $71.2 million in external costs and a decrease of $8.4 million in personnel and related costs resulting from attrition. The decrease in external costs was primarily due to the $52.8 million in upfront consideration and transaction costs paid for the acquisition of CerSci and $10.0 million upfront payment to Vanderbilt University for the M1 PAM program in 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $396.0 million in 2021, including $40.4 million in stock-based compensation, from $388.7 million in 2020, including $50.5 million in stock-based compensation. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase of $16.4 million in personnel and related costs, partially offset by a decrease of $10.1 million in stock compensation expense.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Product Sales, Net
Net product sales, comprised of NUPLAZID, were $441.8 million and $339.1 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to growth in NUPLAZID unit sales of approximately 18% in 2020 as compared to 2019. Also contributing to the increase was a higher average gross selling price of NUPLAZID in 2020 as compared to 2019.
The following table provides a summary of activity with respect to our sales allowances and accruals for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales was $10.2 million and $11.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, or approximately 2% and 3% of net product sales. The cost of product sales as a percentage of net sales decreased during 2020 as compared to 2019 due to higher manufacturing levels, resulting in higher inventory cost absorption and increased sales volume at a higher average gross selling price in 2020.
License Fees and Royalties
License fees and royalties were $10.3 million and $8.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and include royalties due to the Ipsen Group of two percent of net sales of NUPLAZID and amortization related to the milestone paid to the Ipsen Group upon FDA approval of NUPLAZID in 2016. The increase in license fees and royalties was primary due to the increase in sales volume during 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased to $319.1 million in 2020, including $31.3 million in stock-based compensation, from $240.4 million in 2019, including $32.5 million in stock-based compensation. The increase in research and development expenses was due to an increase of $72.9 million in external costs and an increase of $5.8 million in personnel and related costs. The increase in external costs was primarily due to the $52.8 million in upfront consideration and transaction costs paid for the acquisition of CerSci and $10.0 million upfront payment to Vanderbilt University for the M1 PAM program.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $388.7 million in 2020, including $50.5 million in stock-based compensation, from $325.6 million in 2019, including $46.8 million in stock-based compensation. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was due to an increase of $38.0 million in external costs and an increase of $25.1 million in personnel and related costs, including an increase of $3.7 million in stock compensation expense. The increase during the year end December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to increased advertising and promotional costs, dementia-related psychosis launch preparation expenses, as well as an increase in personnel and related costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have funded our operations primarily through sales of our equity securities, payments received under our collaboration agreements, debt financings, interest income, and, since 2016, with revenues from sales of NUPLAZID. We anticipate that the level of cash used in our operations will increase in future periods in order to fund our ongoing and planned commercial activities for NUPLAZID, our ongoing and planned development activities for pimavanserin in additional indications other than PDP, studies to be conducted pursuant to our post-marketing commitments and our ongoing and planned development activities for trofinetide for the treatment of Rett syndrome, ACP-044 for pain management, and for various M1 PAM compounds, including ACP-319, under the agreement with Vanderbilt University. We expect that our cash, cash equivalents, and investment securities will be sufficient to fund our planned operations through at least the next 12 months.
We may require significant additional financing in the future to fund our operations. Our future capital requirements will depend on, and could increase significantly as a result of, many factors, including:
•the progress in, and the costs of, our ongoing and planned development activities for pimavanserin, post-marketing studies for NUPLAZID to be conducted over the next several years, and ongoing and planned commercial activities for NUPLAZID;
•the costs of our development activities for trofinetide;
•the costs of our development activities for ACP-044;
•the costs of our development activities for ACP-319
•the costs of our development activities for the M1 PAM program;
•the costs of commercializing NUPLAZID, including the maintenance and development of our sales and marketing capabilities;
•the costs of establishing, or contracting for, sales and marketing capabilities for other product candidates;
•the amount of U.S. product sales from NUPLAZID;
•the costs of preparing applications for regulatory approvals for NUPLAZID in jurisdictions other than the U.S., and in additional indications other than PDP and for other product candidates, as well as the costs required to support review of such applications;
•the costs of manufacturing and distributing NUPLAZID for commercial use in the U.S.;
•our ability to obtain regulatory approval for, and subsequently generate product sales from, NUPLAZID in jurisdictions other than the U.S. or in additional indications other than PDP, or from trofinetide, ACP-044, ACP-319 and other product candidates;
•the costs of acquiring additional product candidates or research and development programs;
•the scope, prioritization and number of our research and development programs;
•the ability of our collaborators and us to reach the milestones and other events or developments triggering payments under our collaboration or license agreements, or our collaborators’ ability to make payments under these agreements;
•our ability to enter into new collaboration and license agreements;
•the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse collaborators or collaborators are obligated to reimburse us for costs under collaboration agreements;
•the costs involved in filing, prosecuting, enforcing, and defending patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•the costs of maintaining or securing manufacturing arrangements for clinical or commercial production of pimavanserin, trofinetide or other product candidates; and
•the costs associated with litigation, including the costs incurred in defending against any product liability claims that may be brought against us related to NUPLAZID.
Unless and until we can generate significant cash from our operations, we expect to satisfy our future cash needs through our existing cash, cash equivalents and investment securities, public or private sales of our securities, debt financings, strategic collaborations, or by licensing all or a portion of our product candidates or technology. In the past, periods of turmoil and volatility in the financial markets have adversely affected the market capitalizations of many biotechnology companies, and generally made equity and debt financing more difficult to obtain. For example, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility and disruptions, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. These events, coupled with other factors, may limit our access to additional financing in the future. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available when needed, we will be required to delay, reduce the scope of, or eliminate one or more of our research or development programs or our commercialization efforts. We also may be required to relinquish greater or all rights to product candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. Additional funding, if obtained, may significantly dilute existing stockholders and could negatively impact the price of our stock.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements in the short and long term consist of the operational, manufacturing, and capital expenditures, a portion of which contain contractual or other obligations. We plan to fund our material cash requirements with our current financial resources together with our anticipated receipts from product sales. On a long-term basis, we manage future cash requirements relative to our long-term business plans.
Our primary uses of cash and operating expenses relate to paying employees and consultants, administering clinical trials, marketing our products, and providing technology and facility infrastructure to support our operations. We also make investments in our office and laboratory facilities to enable continued expansion of our business.
The following is a summary of our long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
In addition to operating leases, we enter into certain other long-term commitments for goods and services that are outstanding for periods greater than one year. To the extent these long-term commitments are noncancelable, they are reflected in the above table. We also enter into short-term agreements with various vendors and suppliers of goods and services in the normal course of operations through purchase orders or other documentation, or that are undocumented except for an invoice. Such short-term agreements are generally outstanding for periods less than a year and are settled by cash payments upon delivery of goods and services. The nature of the work being conducted under these agreements is such that, in most cases, the services may be stopped on short notice. In such event, we would not be liable for the full amount of the agreement and therefore these amounts are not reflected in the above table.
We have entered into various collaboration, licensing and merger agreements which generally include upfront license fees, development and commercial milestone payments upon achievement of certain clinical and commercial development and annual net sales milestones, as well as royalties calculated as a percentage of product revenues, with rates that vary by agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we may be required to make milestone payments up to $2.2 billion in the aggregate. These payments are contingent upon achieving future development, regulatory and commercial milestones. We are also required to make royalty payments in connection with the sale of products developed under those agreements. We have not included any such milestone or royalty payments in the above table. In January 2022, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Stoke to discover, develop and commercialize novel RNA-based medicines for the potential treatment of severe and rare genetic neurodevelopmental diseases of the CNS. Under the terms of the agreement, we may be required to pay up to $907.5 million in milestone payments based on the achievement of certain clinical and commercial development and annual net sales milestones.
Cash Flows
At December 31, 2021, we had $520.7 million in cash, cash equivalents, and investment securities, compared to $632.0 million at December 31, 2020. This $111.3 million decrease in cash, cash equivalents, and investment securities during 2021 was primarily due to net cash used in operating activities, offset in part by cash proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options.
Net cash used in operating activities decreased to $125.7 million in 2021 compared to $136.2 million in 2020 and $151.1 million in 2019. The decrease in net cash used in operating activities in 2021 relative to 2020 was due to an increase in our net revenues as well as decreased research and development costs and sales and marketing costs. The decrease in net cash used in operating activities in 2020 relative to 2019 was due to an increase in our net revenues, partially offset by additional research and development costs, including the upfront license fees and payments and upfront and closing costs paid for the acquisition of CerSci, and sales and marketing costs.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $71.1 million in 2021 compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $192.5 million in 2020 and net cash used in investing activities of $165.8 million in 2019. The increase in net cash used in investing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to increased net purchases of investment securities. The increase in net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to increased net maturities of investment securities.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased to $18.2 million in 2021 compared to $81 million in 2020 and $371.8 million in 2019. The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 relative to 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in proceeds resulting from the exercise of employee stock options. The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 relative to 2019 was attributable primarily to the follow-on public offering in September 2019, which resulted in net proceeds of $271.5 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
To date, we have not had any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which are established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in these relationships.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 15 of Part IV, “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”