Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on December 7, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest dividends on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence and transaction expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $9,716,757, which consists of operational costs of $7,625,385 and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,115,071, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $23,699.
For the period from December 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,000, which consists of operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 8, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 30,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,466,667 Private
Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8,200,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,521,788. Net loss of $9,716,757 was affected by dividends earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $23,699, and the change in fair value of the warrant liabilities of $2,115,071. Net changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $5,675,203 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from December 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $1,000 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $1,000 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $345,023,699 (including approximately $23,699 of interest income) consisting of mutual funds which invest primarily in U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $189,608. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
Through the target identification process, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination. On August 9, 2021, the Sponsor has signed a Commitment Letter to provide up to $1,315,000 in working capital loans if required. On November 11, 2021, the Sponsor has amended the August 9, 2021, Commitment Letter to provide $1,055,000 in working capital loans in addition to the previously provided $1,315,000.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of $189,608 not held in the Trust Account and available for working capital purposes and accrued liabilities of $5,941,857.
The Company will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from its Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. The Company’s officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, the Company may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through March 8, 2023, the date that the Company will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with ASC Topic 205-40 Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern, the Company has until March 8, 2023, to consummate a Business Combination. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date and an extension not requested by the Sponsor, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Although the Company intends to consummate a Business Combination on or before March 8, 2023, it is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. Management has determined that the liquidity condition, coupled with the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and an extension is not requested by the Sponsor, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s plan is to complete a business combination or obtain an extension on or prior to March 8, 2023, however it is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination or obtain an extension by this time. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after March 8, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay Atlantic Coastal Acquisition Management LLC a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on March 1, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred $100,000 in fees for these services, of which such amount is included in accrued expenses in the accompanying December 31, 2021, balance sheet.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $12,075,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D and 7F under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The Private Warrants and the Public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a lattice Model, specifically a binomial lattice model incorporating the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein methodology. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not
solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net (loss) income Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating income (loss) per common share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06 to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022, and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.