ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors discussed in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Since January 30, 2017, following a change of control, we have been engaged in the business of developing and marketing nutritional products that promote wellness and a healthy lifestyle. Our business to date has involved the purchase of products from three suppliers in Taiwan and the sale of these products to four unrelated customers, one of which accounted for all of our sales in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We did not have any sales during the third quarter of 2021, the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 and the first three quarters of 2019. We sell product in bulk to companies who may use our products as ingredients in their products or sell the products they purchase from us to their own customers.
All of our sales to date have been sales of cordyceps related products except that, in in the quarter ended June 30, 2018, we sold metallothionein MT-3 elizer, a product that we do not currently sell. Cordyceps is a fungus that is used in traditional Chinese medicine. Cordyceps sinensis has been described as a medicine in old Chinese medical books and Tibetan medicine. It is a rare combination of a caterpillar and a fungus and found at altitudes above 4500m in Sikkim. We may also seek to market other products which we see as complimentary to our present products; however, we have not entered into negotiations with respect to the distribution of other products, and we cannot assure you that we will be able to market any other products.
All of our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 represents sales to three customers and one customer, respectively. During 2021, our three customers accounted for was 58.5%, 33.2% and 8.3%. Our sole customer for 2020 was the smallest of the three customers for 2021.
We believe that our failure to sell products in the third quarter of 2021 and second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 resulted substantially from the COVID - 19 pandemic and actions taken by governments to address the pandemic, as well as a continuation of downturn in the market in the PRC for cordyseps products as well as the political conditions in Hong Kong, and we cannot assure you that the market will improve. We also cannot assure you the political instability in Hong Kong will not affect our sales, since our customers in 2017 and 2018 were Hong Kong based customers who sold their products in the PRC and none of these customers has made purchases from us since the quarter ended December 31, 2018. We cannot assure you that these factors will not affect our ability to generate revenues in the future and, to the extent that any of these factors affects our ability to generate revenue, we may not be able to continue in business.
At present, we have no full-time employees. Our only employee is our chief executive officer who work for us on a part-time basis. We face significant risks in implementing our business plan, as described under Item 1.Business - Our Business and Proposed Business, including, but not limited to, our ability to raise the necessary financing either through the sale of debt or equity securities or through a loan facility, our ability to increase our customer base and supply chain, our ability to increase our gross margins, our ability to hire and retain qualified research and development, marketing and administrative personnel, our ability to develop products and to market in the United States and other western markets any products we may develop, our ability to comply with any government regulations relating to the manufacture, distribution and marketing any products we develop. We cannot assure you that we can or will develop any products or generate revenue or profits in the future.
Our statement of operation reflects the amortization of common stock issued to consultants in connection with our proposed chicken feed product. We issued a total of 12,282,000 shares of common stock to consultants as stock grants pursuant to agreements with the consultants in May and August 2021. The agreements provide for the consultants to perform services described in the contracts for the two-year period commencing the date of the agreements. The shares were valued at $31,424,800, based on the market price of the common stock on the respective dates of the agreements, and is being amortized over two-year period starting from the date of the agreement using the straight-line method. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded stock-based compensation of $7,651,417 and had deferred stock compensation of $23,773,383 as of December 31, 2021 which will be recognized over the balance of the agreements
We require funds for our operations. At December 31, 2021, we had $95,248 in cash, $598,000 in accounts receivables, which have been collected as of the date of this annual report, and no inventory. Although we may seek to raise funds in the equity market, we have no agreements or understandings with respect to any funding and we can give no assurance as to the availability or terms of any such financing. Because of our financial condition, the lack of sales in the four out of eight quarters in 2021 and 2020, our reliance of sales primarily of one product, along with the absence of an active market for our stock and our market capitalization in relation to our financial performance, together with risk related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the political and legal situation in Hong Kong, it may be difficult for us to raise funds in the equity market, and, if we are able to raise funds our stockholders may suffer significant dilution.
To the extent that we implement our business plan, we anticipate that we will incur marketing and other expenses without any assurance that such expenses will generate any significant revenue or net income. Because of our cash position, we may use equity-based compensation for our employees and independent contractors. Because of our low cash position, we may rely on loans from stockholders or related parties, although we do not have any agreements or understandings at this time and we may issue equity to attract employees and consultants to help us develop our business plan.
Effects of COVID-19
Since our products are purchased by customers in Taiwan and Hong Kong primarily as one ingredient of a product to be sold to their customers, our business has been and may continue to be impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions taken by the governments of the PRC, Hong Kong and Taiwan as well as any other countries in which we may seek to sell products, as they effect manufacturers and their customers.
•
The effect of COVID-19 on the ability of our customers and potential customers to manufacture products.
•
The financial health of our potential customers.
•
Since our customers use our products as an ingredient in their products, the inability of the customer to obtain other ingredients may affect their willingness or ability to purchase our product.
•
The ability of our customers to ship their products to China and the ability of their customers to distribute product to retail markets.
•
The willingness or ability of the ultimate purchasers in the PRC and any other countries to which our customers sell products to purchase products with our ingredients and their perception as to whether the products may have beneficial effects to them.
•
The extent to which any quarantine which may be imposed affects the willingness or ability of consumers to purchase products with our ingredients.
•
The perceived benefit, if any, to consumers of products with our ingredients.
•
The extent to which the purchase of products with our ingredients is a low priority item for a population whose disposable income may have decreased as a result of COVID-19 and the steps taken by governments to curb the spread of infection.
Inflation and Supply Chain Disruption
After years of relatively low inflation, during the past year, countries throughout the world, including Asia, have be subject to inflation at a rate significantly higher than in recent years. The slowdown resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and steps taken by governments to address the pandemic, including the recent lockdown in a number of Chinese provinces and cities, have created major supply chain disruptions. Although we did not purchase any inventory in 2021, expect that both the inflationary pressures and supply chain disruption that affect other industries will affect us. These factors may result in delays in receipt of products we order, and increased costs which we may not be able to pass on to consumers. The recent Russian invasion of Ukraine has also exacerbated the inflationary and supply chain issues. We cannot assure you that our business will not be materially impair by inflationary and supply chain disruption.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had revenue of $1,197,500, representing sales to three customers. We had no revenue for the third quarter of 2021. Our gross profit was $259,500, and our gross margin was 21.7%. We had operating expenses of $7,953,078, representing research and development expenses of $5,285,175 and selling, general and administrative expenses of $2,667,903, which included stock-based compensation of $7,651,417 paid to consultant working on research and development and marketing and related expense relating to our proposed chicken feed product. As a result of the foregoing, we had a net loss of $7,697,828, or $(0.14) per share (basic and diluted).
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had revenue of $687,964, representing sales to one customer in the first quarter of the year. Our gross profit was $159,404, and our gross margin was 23.2%. We had operating expenses of $289,867, primarily professional fees relating to our status as a public company and rent expense, interest expense of $5,082 and a net loss before income tax credit $135,545, an income tax credit of $18,092, and a net loss of $117,453, or $(0.00) per share (basic and diluted).
We imputed interest at the rate of 4% on the advances made to us by a stockholder in the amount of $4,250 and $5,082 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Because of our dependence on a few customers, and we had three customers in 2020 and 2021, our revenue in any quarter is dependent upon both the timing of orders from customers and the delivery of products from our suppliers.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table sets forth information relating to our working capital at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following is a summary of the statements of cash flows for the years ended December 30, 2021 and 2020:
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected the net loss of $7,697,828, decreased primarily by stock-based compensation of $7,651,417, decrease in inventories of $938,000, increased by an increase in accounts receivable of $598,000.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected the net loss of $117,453, decreased primarily by an increase in inventory of $71,440, including an inventory deposit of $12,000.
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $222,210 represented repayments of loans to a minority stockholder of $241,851 and advances from the minority stockholder of $19,641.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 represented advances from related parties of $216,672.
Going Concern
Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. We had minimal cash as of December 31, 2021, had limited gross profit and incurred a loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and past few years. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Although we propose to fund our operations through sales of cordyceps related products and we are looking to develop our chicken feed product, to date our sales have not been significant, we have not generated sales in four quarters during 2021 and 2020, and we do not have any new product which will be able to be marketed in the near future, if at all. Because of the lack of sales and the absence of any active trading market for our common stock, our financial condition and our lack of an operating history, we will have difficulty raising funds in the equity market on reasonable, if any, terms, and we have had to on advances from a minority stockholder and our officer. If we cannot generate revenue from our products, we may not be able to continue in business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. The estimates and judgments will also affect the reported amounts for certain revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these good faith estimates and judgments.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718. For employee and non-employee stock-based awards, we calculate the fair value of the award on the date of grant using the option-pricing model for stock options and the quoted price of its common stock for unrestricted shares; the expense is recognized over the service period for awards expected to vest. We consider many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, employee class and historical experience.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed all recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and do not believe the future adoption of any such pronouncements may be expected to cause a material impact on our financial statements.