Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements, including the related notes thereto, appearing at the end of this filing. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ significantly from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause future results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Discussion and analysis of our fiscal year 2020, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2021 financial performance to 2020, have been omitted from this section and may be found under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 and filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC) on May 7, 2021. Our fiscal year ends on the last day of February, and our fiscal quarters end on May 31, August 31, November 30, and the last day of February.
Overview
We provide personalized, technology-enabled solutions that help people better understand, navigate, and utilize the healthcare system and their workplace benefits. Our customers are primarily employers that deploy Accolade solutions in order to provide employees and their families (our “members”) a single place to turn for their health, healthcare, and benefits needs. We also offer expert medical opinion services to employer customers and virtual primary care and mental health support, both directly to consumers and to employer customers. Our innovative platform combines open, cloud-based intelligent technology with multimodal support from a team of empathetic and knowledgeable Accolade Health Assistants and clinicians, including registered nurses, physician medical directors, pharmacists, behavioral health specialists, women’s health specialists, case management specialists, expert medical opinion providers, and virtual primary care physicians. We leverage our integrated capabilities, connectivity with providers and the broader healthcare ecosystem, and longitudinal data to engage across the entire member population, rather than focusing solely on high-cost claimants or those with chronic conditions. Our goal is to build trusted relationships with our members that ultimately position us to deliver personalized recommendations and interventions. We believe that our platform dramatically improves the member experience, encourages better health outcomes, and lowers costs for both our members and our customers.
Accolade Total Health and Benefits has historically been our most comprehensive offering and most closely aligns to our “Premier” solution on which the company was founded and from which the majority of our revenues are derived today. Our technology platform enabled us to unbundle aspects of this comprehensive offering to create two additional standalone offerings: Accolade Total Benefits (focused on member benefits engagement) and Accolade Total Care (focused on guiding members to high-quality, cost-effective providers). Following our acquisition of 2nd.MD in March 2021, we began offering customers expert medical consultation (primarily for high-complexity, high-cost conditions) as a standalone service as well as a capability that can be incorporated into other core offerings. Following our acquisition of PlushCare in June 2021, we began offering virtual primary care and mental health services directly to consumers and commercial customers. We have further leveraged our technology platform to develop add-on offerings and to integrate acquired solutions that target specific challenges faced by our customers.
In September 2021, we announced new solutions and new naming for the solutions described above. The new solutions - Accolade One and Accolade Care - combine the capabilities of Accolade’s historical navigation and advocacy solutions with our acquired primary care, mental health, and expert medical opinion services, augmented by artificial intelligence, machine learning, and data-driven recommendations. The new solutions are in their early stages of implementation, with initial customer implementations beginning in January 2022. Additionally, we announced new solution bundles incorporating all of our existing solutions to reflect the evolution and maturation of our offering portfolio. With these changes, our current offerings include:
● Accolade Expert MD - Expert medical consultations that connect patients to highly qualified condition-specific specialists for both adult and pediatric care
● Accolade Care - Integrated primary care and mental health support
● Core and Plus - A benefits navigation and care solution designed to work with our customers’ existing benefits ecosystem, incorporating elements of all Accolade solutions including Advocacy, Accolade Expert MD, Accolade Care, and the Accolade partner ecosystem. Different offering configurations may also include member services, provider services, and an expanded set of clinical programs that address case and disease management to maximize member engagement and return on investment.
● Accolade One - A value-based option that includes all of the Accolade solutions and the Accolade partner ecosystem with a pricing structure that includes a higher portion of revenues associated with outcomes-based measures
We were founded in 2007 and launched our initial offering in 2009. We have seen significant growth in recent years since the changes to our executive management team in 2015 and the subsequent investments we have made in product, technology, sales, and distribution. As of February 28, 2022, we had over 600 employer customers comprising
more than 10 million members. Our customers represent a diversified set of industries, including media, technology, financial services, transportation, energy, and retail. Additionally, as of February 28, 2022, we had more than 100,000 consumers subscribed to virtual primary care services through our PlushCare solution.
In March 2021, we acquired 2nd.MD, a leading expert second opinion consultation and health care decision support company based in Houston, Texas. 2nd.MD provides a service that allows members to access board-certified national experts across the country for high-value consultations in a real-time video call or by phone in order to provide the member with a rapid second opinion on their medical condition enabling the member to make more informed decisions regarding significant and high-cost care decisions, such as whether to have surgery or elect to have a specific treatment. Under the terms of the agreement, we provided cash consideration of $226.1 million and issued 2,822,242 shares of our common stock at closing. We will issue 1,977,343 additional shares of our common stock to the selling shareholders of 2nd.MD subsequent to February 28, 2022 based on the resolution of contingent consideration under the terms of the agreement.
In June 2021, we acquired PlushCare, a provider of virtual primary care and mental health support. The addition of a primary care team extends our ability to improve clinical health outcomes for members and deliver additional cost savings for employers. Under the terms of the agreement, we provided cash consideration of $33.9 million and issued 7,144,393 shares of our common stock at closing. We will issue 1,327,445 additional shares of our common stock to the selling shareholders of PlushCare subsequent to February 28, 2022 based on the resolution of contingent consideration under the terms of the agreement. An additional 102,111 shares are withheld pending the resolution of a litigation matter.
In September 2021, we acquired substantially all the assets of HealthReveal, Inc. (HealthReveal). HealthReveal is a clinical artificial intelligence company focused on ensuring patients receive optimal, personalized chronic care to preempt adverse outcomes. Under the terms of the agreement, we issued 252,808 shares of common stock as consideration at closing. We may issue up to 28,089 additional shares of common stock that are subject to an indemnity holdback, and these shares will be released 18 months following the closing.
For the fiscal years ended February 28, 2022 and 2021, our total revenue was $310.0 million and $170.4 million, respectively, representing 82% year-over-year growth for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021. For the fiscal years ended February 28, 2022 and 2021, our net losses were $123.1 million and $50.7 million, respectively.
Our Business Model
We provide our solutions primarily to employers that deploy Accolade offerings to our members and to consumers who directly purchase our PlushCare virtual primary care services. We earn revenue from providing personalized health guidance solutions, expert medical opinion services, virtual primary care services, and mental health support to the members of our employer customers' health plans and to members of fully insured plans offered via health insurance companies. Our advocacy solutions are priced based on a recurring per-member-per-month (PMPM) fee, typically consisting of both a base fee and a performance-based fee component. As a result, generally, a portion of our potential revenue is variable, subject to our achievement of performance metrics and the realization of savings in healthcare spend by our customers resulting from the utilization of our solutions. We typically achieve a substantial portion of the contractual performance metrics and realization in savings of healthcare spend. We also provide expert medical opinion services, which are typically charged on a PMPM or case rate basis, and virtual primary care and mental health support, which are typically priced on a fee per visit basis for consumers and a visit fee basis or PMPM plus visit fee basis for employer customers.
The primary cost of delivering our service includes the personnel costs of Accolade Health Assistants and clinicians, including registered nurses, physician medical directors, pharmacists, behavioral health specialists, women's health specialists, case management specialists, expert medical opinion providers and virtual primary care physicians, as well as software and tools for telephony, workforce management, business analytics, allocated overhead costs, and other expenses related to delivery and implementation of our solutions. As we support more customers with an increasing number of members over time, we expect that our support costs per member will decline due to economies of scale and improved operational efficiencies driven by continued enhancements of our technology platform and capabilities. We
have experienced and expect to continue to achieve operational efficiencies realized from continued enhancements of our technology platform and capabilities.
We employ a multipronged go-to-market strategy to increase adoption of our solutions to new and existing customers. We principally sell our solutions through our direct salesforce which is stratified by account size (i.e., strategic (more than 35,000 employees), enterprise (5,000 to 35,000 employees), and mid-market (500 to 5,000 employees)), region, and existing versus prospective customer. Our sales team possesses deep domain expertise in health benefits management and brings substantial experience selling to key decision makers within our current and prospective customer organizations (human resource officers, CFOs, benefits executives, consultants, and brokers). We believe the effectiveness of our sales organization is evidenced by growing adoption of our platform by large strategic customers, recent traction with enterprise and mid-market customers and demonstrated demand for add-on offerings from existing customers.
We have chosen to invest significantly in growing our customer base, and plan to continue both adding new customers and expanding our relationships with existing customers, which we believe will allow us to increase margins over time. When a customer renews their contract or purchases additional solutions or enhancements, the value realized from that customer increases because we generally do not incur significant incremental acquisition or implementation costs for the renewal or expansion. We believe that as our customer base grows and a higher percentage of our revenue is attributable to renewals and upsells or cross-sells to existing customers, relative to acquisition of new customers, associated sales and marketing expenses and other upfront costs will decrease as a percentage of revenue.
In addition, we have strategically curated our offering portfolio to ensure we have a compelling value proposition at an appropriate price point that resonates with each identified customer segment. Based on our experience, the opportunity to cross-sell is meaningfully enhanced once a customer has been on-boarded onto our platform and has benefited from a measurable and compelling return on their investment. Our customer success team provides strategic insights, point solution recommendations, and day-to-day account support to our customers. They are focused on existing customer retention, cross-sell, and upsell.
We maintain relationships with a range of third parties, including brokers, agents, benefits consultants, carriers, third-party administrators, trusted suppliers, and co-marketing and co-selling partners. These third parties provide an important source of referrals for our sales organization. We also selectively form strategic alliances to further drive customer acquisition and adoption of our solutions. We believe the breadth of our go-to-market and distribution strategy enables us to reach customers of nearly every size and across markets.
We have demonstrated a consistent track record of product and technology innovation over time as evidenced by continuous improvement of our platform and new offerings. This innovation is driven by feedback we receive from our customers, industry experts, and the market generally. Our technology platform has enabled us to unbundle aspects of our core navigation capability to create various offerings for our customers, while integrating capabilities from our recent acquisitions to deliver our Personalized Healthcare solution that combines our core navigation with expert medical consultations and virtual primary care and mental health support. Our investments in product and technology have been focused on increasing the value we provide via our personalized member health guidance solutions and expanding the market segments we can serve with a portfolio of offerings and associated price points.
COVID-19 Update
COVID-19 has created uncertainty for Accolade's employees, members, and customers. We consider the impact of the pandemic on our business by evaluating the health of our operations, any changes to our revenue outlook, and the degree to which perceptions of and interest in Accolade solutions have evolved during this unprecedented time. We measure our performance through several key metrics, including but not limited to customer satisfaction, member engagement, and health assistant availability. As gauged by these core performance metrics, service levels have been high, and member engagement and satisfaction have remained strong. To ensure we could address our members' many COVID-19-related concerns, our operations and clinical leaders trained our frontline teams on evidence-based guidelines and continue to equip them with relevant resources to help them ably serve under these exceptional circumstances.
While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations to date, the future impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our customers and our sales cycles, impact on our marketing efforts, and any decreases of workforce or benefits spending by our customers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. We have a diverse set of customers across a variety of industries. We may experience increased member attrition to the extent our existing customers reduce their respective workforces in response to changes in economic conditions. Any layoffs or reductions in employee headcounts by our employer customers would result in a reduction in our base and variable PMPM fees. When customer headcount reductions occur, we may not experience the impact of changes to our customers’ headcounts immediately because employees that are on furlough or are receiving continued health coverage pursuant to COBRA may still have access to our services during such periods and would be included in our member count.
We believe our value proposition now resonates with an even broader audience of employers as they turn their focus to safely reopening their workplaces and managing the ongoing health and well-being of employees and their families. To directly address the former, we developed Accolade COVID Response Care, a solution that allows employers of all sizes to leverage Accolade’s platform to support employee education, testing, care plans, contact tracing, and return-to-work clearance. On the latter, we believe that the current disruptions to traditional care consumption have reinforced the need for navigation services, and that projected increases in healthcare costs (due to some combination of COVID-19-related testing and care, complications stemming from neglected non-COVID conditions, pent-up demand for elective services, and strain on individuals’ mental health) prompt the need for solutions such as ours that bend the cost curve, and improve health outcomes, by driving good utilization up and wasteful utilization down.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
The following factors have been important to our business and we expect them to impact our business, results of operations, and financial condition in future periods:
Growth and Retention of Our Customer Base
We believe there is a substantial opportunity to further grow our customer base in our large and under-penetrated market through our sales and marketing strategy. Across our existing customer base and as we acquire new customers, we intend to expand and deepen these relationships. As we build trust through our proven model, we seek to cross-sell our add-on offerings, such as Trusted Supplier Program, COVID Response Care and Mental Health Integrated Care. We plan to continue to invest in sales and marketing in order to grow our customer base and increase sales to existing customers. Any investments we make in our sales and marketing organization will occur in advance of experiencing any benefits from such investments, so it may be difficult for us to determine if we are efficiently allocating our resources in these areas.
Adoption of Current and Future Solutions
We are constantly innovating to enhance our model and develop new offerings. Our ability to act as a trusted advisor to our members and customers positions us to identify new opportunities for additional offerings that can meet their existing and emerging needs. Our open technology platform also allows us to efficiently add new offerings and applications on top of our existing technology stack, which we have demonstrated with the roll-out of Accolade Total Benefits and Accolade Total Care, as well as our add-on offerings, Accolade Boost, our Trusted Supplier Program, Accolade COVID Response Care, and Mental Health Integrated Care that target specific challenges faced by our customers. Our open technology platform is instrumental for integration of the capabilities acquired through our acquisitions of 2nd.MD and PlushCare. We believe that as we expand our customer base and enter into new markets, we will be adept at identifying and deploying innovative new solutions whether developed internally or through acquisitions. In September 2021, we announced two new solutions - Accolade One and Accolade Care - that combine some or all of the elements of Accolade’s historical solutions and the acquired capabilities from 2nd.MD and PlushCare. The new solutions are in their early stages of implementation, with initial customer launches in January 2022.
Achievement of Performance-Based Revenue
In most of our contracts, a portion of our potential fee is variable, subject to our achievement of performance metrics and the realization of savings in healthcare spend by our customers resulting from the utilization of our solutions, and thus we might record higher revenue in some quarters compared to others. Examples of performance metrics included in our customer contracts are achievement of specified member engagement levels, member satisfaction levels, and various operational metrics. Although we have earned over 90% of the aggregate maximum potential revenue under our contracts (measured on the corresponding calendar year basis) in fiscal years 2022 and 2021, our revenue and financial results in the future may vary as a result of our ability to earn this performance-based revenue. In addition, because our customers typically pay both the base PMPM fees and variable PMPM fees in advance on a periodic basis, any required refund as a result of our failure to earn the performance-based revenue could have a negative impact on cash flows.
Investments in Technology
Significant investments in our technology platform have enhanced our capabilities with respect to how we engage with our members and deliver our solutions and care interventions. By leveraging our technology in areas such as machine learning, predictive analytics, and multimodal communication, we believe we can generate more efficiencies in our operating model while simultaneously improving our ability to deliver better health outcomes and lower costs for both our members and our customers. We will continue to invest in our technology platform to empower our Accolade Health Assistants, our clinicians, and our members to further improve and optimize efficiencies in our operating model. However, our investments in our technology platform may be more expensive or take longer to develop than we expect and may not result in operational efficiencies.
Key Metrics
We regularly monitor a number of financial and operating metrics in order to measure our current performance and estimate our future performance.
Annual Contract Value (ACV) - We believe ACV provides investors with useful information on period-to-period performance as evaluated by management, comparison with our past financial performance, and a view toward potential future financial performance. To calculate ACV, we treat each type of contract as detailed below.
Advocacy customers
ACV for advocacy customers represents the annualized value of our in-force contracts as of the measurement date, including base contractual revenue and the amount of performance-based variable revenue we expect to realize in the following fiscal year based on the number of members as of the measurement date and using a straight-line averaging of PMPM fees over the lives of the contracts. Over the past two complete fiscal years, we have realized in excess of 90% of the maximum contract value across our book of business. The ACV amounts included above for advocacy customers reflect 95% of the total revenue opportunity, consistent with the percentages realized in recent years. We also include the expected revenue share to be earned from ecosystem product partner arrangements. A large customer that indicated it would end its relationship with us following calendar year 2022 was included in advocacy ACV as of February 28, 2022 and 2021 and is not expected to be included in ACV as of February 28, 2023.
As required by GAAP, we recognize performance-based revenue over the minimum term of the applicable contract. In some cases, especially with regard to revenue associated with the realization of healthcare cost savings, revenue may be recognized in a fiscal period later than the period in which the required metric was achieved. Conversely, a fiscal period's revenue may include the recognition of revenue related to the achievement in prior periods of performance metrics and healthcare cost savings. For purposes of calculating ACV, we assume that all customer contracts expiring during the following fiscal year will renew on the same terms.
Expert Medical Opinion Customers
As a result of our acquisition of 2nd.MD in March 2021, ACV as of February 28, 2022 includes expert medical opinion customers. Pricing for expert medical opinion customers are either PMPM or per case. For contracts with PMPM pricing, we calculate ACV as the number of members multiplied by the applicable annualized rate. For contracts with case rate pricing, we calculate ACV as the expected utilization during the following fiscal year multiplied by the applicable per case rate.
Direct to Consumer Customers
We do not include any consumer subscription revenue or consumer virtual primary care visit fees in ACV, as these arrangements are generally terminable within 30 days by the consumer.
Gross Dollar Retention Rate (GDR) - Our ability to increase revenue depends in large part on our ability to retain our existing customers and their associated ACV. We typically enjoy a high rate of customer retention. For example, our GDR was 98% and 99% for the fiscal years ended February 28, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We monitor GDR specifically as it relates to our employer customers, as our employer customers represent our primary strategic focus and today account for approximately 98% of our ACV. We calculate GDR for a period by starting with the sum of the ACV from all employer customers as of the beginning of such period (beginning of period ACV); we then subtract the ACV associated with terminated employer customers during the period and divide the result by the beginning of period ACV. Due to a recent notice from a large customer indicating that it would end its relationship with us following calendar year 2022 and a to be negotiated transition services period, we expect a lower GDR in fiscal 2023 as compared to prior fiscal years.
Basis of Presentation and Components of Revenue and Expenses
We operate our business through a single reportable segment. We operate on a fiscal year ending at the end of February of each year, and our fiscal quarters end on May 31, August 31, November 30, and the last day of February.
Revenue
We earn revenue from providing personalized health guidance solutions (advocacy), expert medical opinion services, virtual primary care services, and mental health support services to the members of our employer customers' health plans and to members of fully insured plans offered via health insurance companies. We also earn revenue from providing virtual primary care services and mental health support services directly to consumers. Our advocacy solutions are priced based on a recurring PMPM fee and frequently include both a base PMPM fee based on eligible members and a performance-based component. As a result, a portion of our potential fee is typically variable, subject to our achievement of performance metrics, the realization of savings in healthcare spend by our customers resulting from the utilization of our solutions, and the number of eligible members during the respective period. Our expert medical opinion services are typically charged on a PMPM or case rate basis, and our virtual primary care and mental health support services are typically priced on a fee per visit basis for consumers and a visit fee basis or PMPM plus visit fee basis for employer customers.
Cost of Revenue, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Our cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization, consists primarily of personnel costs including salaries, wages, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense and benefits, as well as software and tools for telephony,
workforce management, business analytics, allocated overhead costs, and other expenses related to delivery and implementation of our personalized technology-enabled solutions, expert medical opinion services, virtual primary care services, and mental health support.
Operating Expenses
Product and technology. Product and technology expenses include costs to build new offerings, add new features to our existing solutions, and to manage, operate, and ensure the reliability and scalability of our existing technology platform. Product and technology expenses consist of personnel expenses, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and benefits for employees and contractors for our engineering, product, and design teams, and allocated overhead costs, as well as costs of software and tools for business analytics, data management, and IT applications that are not directly associated with delivery of our solutions to customers. We expect product and technology expenses to increase in absolute dollars but decrease as a percentage of revenue over time.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel expenses, including sales commissions for our direct sales force and our market and business development workforce, as well as digital marketing costs, promotional costs, customer conferences, public relations, other marketing events, and allocated overhead costs. Personnel expenses include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and benefits for employees and contractors. We expect sales and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars but remain stable as a percentage of revenue over time.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist of personnel expenses and related expenses for our executive, finance and accounting, human resources, legal, and corporate organizations. Personnel expenses include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and benefits for employees and contractors. In addition, general and administrative expenses include external legal, accounting, and other professional fees, as well as tools for financial and human capital management, and allocated overhead costs. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we incur costs associated with being a public company, but decrease as a percentage of revenue over time.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses are primarily attributable to our capital investments and consist of fixed asset depreciation, amortization of intangibles considered to have definite lives, and amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs.
Results of Operations
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated:
(1) The stock-based compensation expense included above was as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operation data expressed as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended February 28, 2022 and 2021
Revenue
Revenue increased $139.7 million, or 82%, to $310.0 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2022, referred to as fiscal 2022, as compared to $170.4 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, referred to as fiscal 2021. The increase was attributable to growth in the number of customers served during fiscal 2022, as compared to fiscal 2021, driven by both organic growth and growth related to the acquisitions of 2nd.MD and PlushCare, which contributed approximately $48.8 million and $44.4 million in revenues during fiscal 2022, respectively.
Cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization
Cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization increased $75.3 million, or 80%, to $169.0 million for fiscal 2022, as compared to $93.7 million for fiscal 2021. The increase was attributable primarily to cost of revenue incurred by 2nd.MD and PlushCare as well as an increase in personnel and related costs to serve the customer base which grew in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021.
Operating expenses
Product and technology. Product and technology expense increased $33.7 million, or 67%, to $83.7 million for fiscal 2022, as compared to $50.0 million for fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily driven by increases in personnel added via the 2nd.MD and PlushCare acquisitions, along with the addition of personnel in product development, technology, and product management to support the development of new and existing offerings in connection with the expansion of our business.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expense increased $53.1 million, or 157%, to $86.8 million for fiscal 2022, as compared to $33.7 million for fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily driven by increases in personnel added via the 2nd.MD and PlushCare acquisitions, digital marketing costs associated with customer acquisition spend related to PlushCare, along with an increase in the size of our direct sales force, account management, marketing, and supporting functions associated with the expansion of our business.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense increased $67.5 million, or 214%, to $99.1 million for fiscal 2022, as compared to $31.6 million for fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily due to the addition of general and administrative costs from the 2nd.MD and PlushCare businesses, $13.2 million of acquisition and integration-related costs incurred in fiscal 2022, and costs to operate as a public company.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense increased $34.4 million, or 419%, to $42.6 million for fiscal 2022, as compared to $8.2 million for fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily due to amortization of intangible assets acquired from 2nd.MD and PlushCare during fiscal 2022.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration. This operating expense represents the change in the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities associated with the 2nd.MD and PlushCare acquisitions. For fiscal 2022, the change in fair value of contingent consideration decreased primarily due to a decrease in our stock price.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net decreased $0.8 million, or 22%, to $2.9 million for fiscal 2022, as compared to $3.7 million for fiscal 2021. The decrease was primarily due to interest associated with our term loan and revolving credit agreement in fiscal 2021 that did not exist in fiscal 2022, partially offset by interest associated with the Convertible Senior Notes in fiscal 2022.
Certain Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use the following non-GAAP financial measures to help us evaluate trends, establish budgets, measure the effectiveness and efficiency of our operations, and determine employee incentives.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin
Adjusted Gross Profit is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as revenue less cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization, and excluding stock-based compensation. We define Adjusted Gross Margin as our Adjusted Gross Profit divided by our revenue. We expect Adjusted Gross Margin to continue to improve over time to the extent that we are able to gain efficiencies through technology and successfully cross-sell and upsell our current and future offerings. However, our ability to improve Adjusted Gross Margin over time is not guaranteed and will be impacted by the factors affecting our performance discussed above and the risks outlined in the section titled “Risk Factors.” We believe Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin are useful to investors, as they eliminate the impact of certain non-cash expenses and allow a direct comparison of these measures between periods without the impact of non-cash expenses and certain other nonrecurring operating expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as net loss adjusted to exclude interest expense (net), income tax expense (benefit), depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, acquisition and integration-related costs, and change in fair value of contingent consideration. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides investors with useful information on period-to-period performance as evaluated by management and comparison with our past financial performance. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful in evaluating our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry, as this measure generally eliminates the effects of certain items that may vary from company to company for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Gross Margin and Adjusted EBITDA have certain limitations, including that they exclude the impact of certain non-cash charges, such as depreciation and amortization, whereas underlying assets may need to be replaced and result in cash capital expenditures, and stock-based compensation expense, which is a recurring charge. These non-GAAP financial measures may also not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies because they may not calculate such measures in the same manner, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures. In evaluating these non-GAAP financial measures, you should be aware that in the future we expect to incur expenses similar to the adjustments in this presentation. Our presentation of non-GAAP financial measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these expenses or any unusual or nonrecurring items. When evaluating our performance, you should consider these non-GAAP financial measures alongside other financial performance measures, including the most directly comparable GAAP measures set forth in the reconciliation
tables below and our other GAAP results. The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the calculation of our Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin:
Gross margin, excluding depreciation and amortization, for fiscal 2022 increased to 45.5% from 45.0% for fiscal 2021 and Adjusted Gross Margin for fiscal 2022 increased to 46.5% from 45.6% for fiscal 2021. These increases were driven primarily by (i) higher margin offering mix and (ii) cost efficiencies realized through enhancements of our technology platform and workflows for fiscal 2022.
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, a reconciliation of our Adjusted EBITDA to our net loss:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash and cash equivalents of $365.9 million as of February 28, 2022. Our cash equivalents are comprised primarily of cash and money market accounts held at banks and U.S. treasury bills with original maturities of less than three months.
Our Debt Arrangements
In March 2021, we issued an aggregate of $287.5 million principal amount of 0.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the Notes), including the exercise in full by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase up to an additional $37.5 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes, pursuant to an Indenture dated as of March 29, 2021 (the Indenture), between us and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The Notes bear interest at a rate of 0.50% per annum, payable semiannually in arrears on April 1 and October 1 of each year, beginning on October 1, 2021. The
Notes mature on April 1, 2026, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased. The Notes are convertible into cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election.
We currently have a revolving credit facility (2019 Revolver), which we entered into in July 2019. The 2019 Revolver provides for a senior secured revolving line of credit in the amount of up to $80.0 million, with borrowing availability subject to certain monthly recurring revenue calculations. The interest rate on any outstanding borrowings is at LIBOR plus 350 basis points (prior to December 31, 2021) or the lending institution's base rate plus 250 basis points, subject to certain floors, and interest payments are to be made in installments of one, two, or three months as chosen by us. We also have an outstanding letter of credit to serve as an office landlord security deposit in the amount of $1.1 million. This letter of credit is secured through the revolving credit facility, thus reducing the capacity of the revolving credit facility to $78.9 million.
During March 2020, we borrowed the available capacity of $48.7 million to increase our cash position given the uncertainty in the overall business environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During July 2020, we repaid the 2019 Revolver in full, including all outstanding interest. The 2019 Revolver expires in July 2022.
The 2019 Revolver contains a liquidity covenant calculated based on cash on hand plus available borrowings under the 2019 Revolver, a revenue covenant and certain reporting covenants. On August 21, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the 2019 Revolver which revised the terms of the revenue covenant and imposed minimum LIBOR and Base Rate levels. On September 11, 2020, we entered into another amendment to the 2019 Revolver which modified the allocation requirements of our cash to be held at each of the two lenders participating in the 2019 Revolver. On November 6, 2020, we entered into another amendment to the 2019 Revolver which increased the capacity from $50.0 million to $80.0 million. On March 2, 2021, we entered into another amendment to the 2019 Revolver in association with the acquisition of 2nd.MD and amended certain revenue covenants. On March 23, 2021, we entered into another amendment to the 2019 Revolver in association with the convertible senior notes offering. On May 26, 2021, we entered into another amendment to the 2019 Revolver in association with the acquisition of PlushCare which modified certain reporting covenants.
We were in compliance with all such applicable covenants as of February 28, 2022, and believe we are in compliance as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We do not expect to need to draw on the 2019 Revolver, but our access to draw on the 2019 Revolver could be limited in the future if we do not have enough monthly recurring revenues to cover the borrowing availability calculations.
Material Cash Requirements
As of February 28, 2022, our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations, which we expect to fund through available cash, future cash generated from operations, and our existing financing arrangements, are as follows:
● Principal and interest obligations on convertible debt - As discussed in detail above, the $287.5 million principal amount of the Notes matures on April 1, 2026. See Our Debt Arrangements above and Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements for more details.
● Operating leases - We have entered into operating leases, primarily for office space. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for more details.
● Other purchase obligations - We have entered into certain arrangements that include obligations to make significant future purchases. The majority of these purchases are not expected to be made over the next 12 months. See Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements for more details.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities.
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $37.1 million to $62.4 million during fiscal 2022 from $25.2 million during fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher net loss, which included $13.2 million in acquisition and integration-related charges, as well as changes in accounts receivable and accrued compensation, partially offset by changes in deferred revenue and due to customers.
Investing Activities.
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $261.2 million to $263.6 million during fiscal 2022 from $2.4 million during fiscal 2021, primarily due to cash paid for the acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of 2nd.MD and PlushCare in fiscal 2022.
Financing Activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $170.5 million to $257.9 million during fiscal 2022 from $428.4 million during fiscal 2021, primarily due to the absence of proceeds from our public offerings which occurred in the prior year and the purchase of capped calls associated with the Convertible Senior Notes, partially offset by the issuance of the Convertible Senior Notes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other purposes. We did not have any other off-balance sheet arrangements, except to the extent reflected under “- Material Cash Requirements” above and in Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses, as well as related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations. as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements located elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have listed below our critical accounting estimates that we believe to have the
greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Historically, our assumptions, judgments, and estimates relative to our critical accounting estimates have not differed materially from actual results.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue by providing customers access to our advocacy, expert medical opinion, and virtual primary care and mental health support services, as well as through utilization of our expert medical opinion and virtual primary care and mental health support services that were acquired through the acquisitions of 2nd.MD and PlushCare. Contracts with customers that include expert medical opinion or virtual primary care and mental health support services may contain either an access fee, a utilization-based fee, or both.
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, we recognize revenue when control of the promised services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those services. Accordingly, we determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
● identification of the contract, or contracts with a customer;
● identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
● determination of the transaction price;
● allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contracts; and
● recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
At contract inception, we assess the type of services being provided and assess the performance obligations in the contract. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine the standalone selling prices based on overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors, using an expected cost plus margin approach. We considered the variable consideration allocation exception in ASC 606 and concluded that such exception for allocating variable consideration to distinct performance obligations or distinct time periods within a series was not met primarily due to variability in per-member-per-month (PMPM) pricing.
The majority of fees earned by us is considered to be variable consideration due to both the uncertainty regarding the total number of members, consultations or visits for which we will invoice the customer, as well as the variable PMPM fees that are dependent upon the achievement of performance metrics and/or healthcare cost savings. Performance metrics are measured monthly, quarterly, or annually, and with respect to the achievement of healthcare cost savings targets, annually (typically measured on a calendar year basis). Accordingly, at contract inception and on an ongoing basis, as part of our estimate of the transaction price, we determine whether any such fees should be constrained, and we include the estimated consideration for those fees to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur (and is therefore considered to be unconstrained). On an ongoing basis, we reassess our estimates for variable consideration, which can change based upon our assessment of the achievement of performance metrics and healthcare cost savings, as well as the number of members, consultations, or visits.
Access Fees
We generate revenue primarily from contracts with customers to access our advocacy, expert medical opinion, and virtual primary care and mental health support services. We price access fees primarily using a recurring PMPM fee,
typically with a portion of the fee calculated as the product of a fixed rate times the number of members (fixed PMPM fee), plus a variable PMPM fee calculated as the product of a variable rate times the number of members (variable PMPM fee). The fees associated with the variable PMPM fee can be earned through the achievement of performance metrics and/or the realization of healthcare cost savings resulting from the use of our services. Collectively, the fixed PMPM fee and variable PMPM fee are referred to as the total PMPM fee. Our PMPM pricing varies by contract. In certain contracts, the maximum total PMPM fee varies during the contract term (total PMPM rate increases or decreases annually), while in other contracts, the total PMPM maximum fee is consistent over the term, yet the fixed and variable portions vary. For example, in certain contracts the fixed PMPM fee increases on an annual basis while the variable PMPM fee decreases on an annual basis, resulting in the same total PMPM fee throughout the term of the contract. The PMPM fees for expert medical opinion and virtual primary care and mental health support services may be tiered based upon the customer’s utilization.
Access to our services represents a single stand-ready performance obligation. Our contracts include stand-ready services to provide eligible participants with access to our services and to perform an unspecified quantity of interactions with members during the contract period. Accordingly, our services are generally viewed as stand-ready performance obligations comprised of a series of distinct daily services that are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer. Generally, we satisfy these performance obligations over time and recognize revenue related to our services as the services are provided using a measure of progress based upon the actual number of members eligible for the service during the respective period as a percentage of the estimated members expected to be eligible for the service over the term of the contract. We believe a measure of progress based on the number of members is the most appropriate measurement of control of the services being transferred to the customer as the amount of internal resources necessary to stand ready is directly correlated to the number of members who can use the services.
For the majority of expert medical opinion services, we satisfy these performance obligations over time and recognize revenue in the amount of consideration for which we have the right to invoice using the as-invoiced practical expedient. Access fees also include access to our virtual primary care and mental health support services sold directly to consumers on a monthly or yearly fixed fee subscription basis. For these services, we satisfy these stand-ready performance obligations over time and recognize revenue ratably over the subscription period.
Utilization-based fees
We also generate revenue when members utilize the expert medical opinion and virtual primary care and mental health support services that are billed based on utilization. Many, but not all, contracts with customers contain utilization-based fees. For any utilization-based fees, we satisfy these performance obligations over time and recognize revenue in the amount of consideration for which we have the right to invoice using the as-invoiced practical expedient for any consultations or visits sold to enterprise customers as well as any non-insured consultations or visits related to virtual primary care and mental health support services sold directly to consumers. For any consultations or visits that are paid through insurance claims, we recognize revenue as the consultations and visits occur in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected based upon then-current prices and historical experience from insurance payors.
Stock-Based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of our stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the fair value of our underlying common stock (prior to our IPO), the expected term of stock options, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock, the most critical of which, prior to our IPO, was the estimated fair value of common stock. The assumptions used in our option pricing model represent our best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The resulting fair value, net of actual forfeitures, is recognized on a straight-line basis over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award.
Prior to our IPO, our board of directors periodically estimated the fair value of the Company’s common stock considering, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our preferred and common stock prepared by an
unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issues as Compensation. Since the closing of the IPO, our board of directors has determined the per share fair value of the Company’s common stock based on the closing price as reported by the Nasdaq Global Select Market on the date of grant.
The subjective assumption used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model, other than the fair value of our common stock (prior to our IPO), is estimated as follows:
● Expected volatility. Since a public market for our common stock did not exist prior to our IPO in July 2020 and, therefore, we do not have an extensive trading history of our common stock, we estimated the expected volatility based on the volatility of similar publicly-held entities (guideline companies) over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards. In evaluating the similarity of guideline companies to us, we considered factors such as industry, stage of life cycle, size, and financial leverage. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or similar guideline companies to estimate the expected volatility until sufficient historical information regarding the volatility of the share price of our common stock becomes available.
We are required to estimate the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards when performing fair value calculations.
Accounting for Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquired business over the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. As of February 28, 2022, we had $577.9 million of goodwill recorded on our consolidated balance sheet. For the purposes of impairment testing, we have determined that we have one reporting unit. We perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If that is the case, we perform a quantitative impairment test. We test our goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, or more frequently whenever an event or change in circumstances indicates that the asset may be impaired. In performing our evaluation, we assess qualitative factors such as overall financial performance of our reporting unit, anticipated changes in industry and market structure, and the competitive and regulatory environment. No indicators of impairment were identified during the fiscal year ended February 28, 2022 that required us to perform an interim assessment or recoverability test.
Realizability of Long-Lived Assets. We assess the realizability of our long-lived assets and related intangible assets, other than goodwill, quarterly, or sooner should events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying values of such assets may not be recoverable. We consider the following factors important in determining when to perform an impairment review: significant under-performance of a business or product line relative to budget; shifts in business strategies which affect the continued uses of the assets; significant negative industry or economic trends; and the results of past impairment reviews. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we assess recoverability of these assets.
We assess recoverability of these assets by comparing the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If impairment indicators were present based on our undiscounted cash flow models, which include assumptions regarding projected cash flows, we would perform a discounted cash flow analysis to assess impairments on long-lived assets. Variances in these assumptions could have a significant impact on our conclusion as to whether an asset is impaired or the amount of any impairment charge. Impairment charges, if any, result in situations where any fair values of these assets are less than their carrying values.
In addition to our recoverability assessments, we routinely review the remaining estimated useful lives of our long-lived assets. Any reduction in the useful life assumption will result in increased depreciation and amortization expense in the quarter when such determinations are made, as well as in subsequent quarters.
We will continue to evaluate the values of our long-lived assets in accordance with applicable accounting rules. As changes in business conditions and our assumptions occur, we may be required to record impairment charges.
Business Combinations and Contingent Consideration
We account for acquisitions in a business combination under the U.S. GAAP business combinations guidance. This accounting requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized at their fair values as of the acquisition date. Any excess purchase consideration over the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. The results of acquired businesses are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition. Acquisition-related costs are not considered part of the purchase consideration and are accounted for as operating expenses as incurred.
We account for contingent consideration in accordance with applicable guidance provided within the business combination accounting rules. As part of our consideration for the 2nd.MD and PlushCare acquisitions, we are contractually obligated to pay certain consideration resulting from the outcome of future events. Therefore, we are required to update our assumptions each reporting period, based on new developments, and record such contingent consideration liabilities at fair value until the contingency is resolved. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities are recognized each reporting period and included in our consolidated statements of operations.
Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination requires significant management judgment and estimates, including determining appropriate discount rates and useful lives, selecting valuation methodologies, and estimating future revenues, expenses, and cash flows. In valuing the contingent consideration, the probability of the occurrence of future events is a critical estimate. We may engage third-party valuation specialists to assist with determining the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and contingent consideration. These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and if different estimates were used the purchase price for the acquisition could be allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed differently from the allocation that we have made. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates, and if such events occur we may be required to record a charge against the value ascribed to an acquired asset or an increase in the amounts recorded for liabilities assumed.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For more information on recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 in the accompanying Notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Prior to February 28, 2022, we were an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012. Based on the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates as of August 31, 2021, we have met the conditions to be deemed a “large accelerated filer” as of February 28, 2022 and are consequently no longer an emerging growth company as of that date and for purposes of filing this Annual Report on Form 10-K.