Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying financial statements and the related footnotes thereto.
Overview
We are a pharmaceutical company focused on the acquisition, development, and commercialization of therapies for serious rare and life-threatening diseases with significant unmet medical needs. Our pipeline includes four programs: ACER-001 (sodium phenylbutyrate) for the treatment of various inborn errors of metabolism, including urea cycle disorders (“UCDs”) and Maple Syrup Urine Disease (“MSUD”); ACER-801 (osanetant) for the treatment of induced vasomotor symptoms (“iVMS”); EDSIVO™ (celiprolol) for the treatment of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (“vEDS”) in patients with a confirmed type III collagen (COL3A1) mutation; and ACER-2820 (emetine), a host-directed therapy against a variety of viruses, including cytomegalovirus, zika, dengue, ebola, and COVID-19. Each of our product candidates is believed to present comparatively de-risked profile, having one or more of a favorable safety profile, clinical proof-of-concept data, mechanistic differentiation, and/or accelerated pathways for development through specific programs and procedures established by the United States (“U.S.”) Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”).
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”), which contemplate our continuation as a going concern. We have not established a source of product sales revenues and, as such, have been dependent on funding operations through the sale of equity securities and through collaboration agreements. Since inception, we have experienced significant losses and incurred negative cash flows from operations. We have an accumulated deficit of $114.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and expect to incur further losses over the foreseeable future as we develop our business. We have spent, and expect to continue to spend, a substantial amount of funds in connection with implementing our business strategy, including our planned product development efforts and potential precommercial activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $12.7 million and current liabilities of $29.1 million, which include $15.8 million associated with deferred collaboration funding, as well as a $9.3 million liability related to the legal costs for the securities class action and the stockholder derivative actions settlements and legal costs, for which we have also recorded an asset of an equal amount representing the recovery from our insurance carriers. Our cash and cash equivalents available at December 31, 2021, plus the $5.0 million second tranche of the Second Development Payment received on January 14, 2022 per the Collaboration Agreement with Relief, are expected to fund our currently anticipated operating and capital requirements into mid-2022, excluding support for planned ACER-001 (MSUD), ACER-801 and EDSIVOTM clinical trials.
We will need to raise additional capital to fund continued operations beyond mid-2022 because neither FDA approval nor subsequent product revenues are assured. We may not be successful in our efforts to raise additional funds or achieve profitable operations. We continue to explore potential opportunities and alternatives to obtain the additional resources that will be necessary to support our ongoing operations beyond mid-2022, including raising additional capital through either private or public equity or debt financing, or non-dilutive funding, as well as using our ATM facility and/or our remaining $12.1 million equity line facility entered into on April 30, 2020 with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”). Due to the SEC’s “baby shelf rules,” which prohibit companies with a public float of less than $75 million from issuing securities under a shelf registration statement in excess of one-third of such company’s public float in a 12-month period, we are only able to issue a limited number of shares under our ATM facility which aggregate to no more than one-third of our public float at this time. Additionally, there can be no assurance that we will be able to receive the entire obligation amount from Lincoln Park because the purchase agreement contains limitations, restrictions, requirements, events of default and other provisions that could limit our ability to cause Lincoln Park to buy common stock from us. From May 19, 2020 through the date of this report, we have raised gross proceeds of $10.0 million from the ATM facility and gross proceeds of $2.9 million from the agreement with Lincoln Park. As of December 31, 2021, $40.0 million remained available under our ATM facility.
On March 19, 2021, we entered into the Collaboration Agreement with Relief providing for the development and commercialization of ACER-001 for the treatment of various inborn errors of metabolism, including for the treatment of UCDs and MSUD. The Collaboration Agreement is the culmination of the option agreement (the “Option Agreement,” together the “Agreements”) previously entered into between us and Relief on January 25, 2021. Pursuant to the Agreements, we received from Relief an upfront non-refundable payment of $1.0 million and a reimbursement payment of $14.0 million. Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, Relief committed to pay us Development Payments of up to $20.0 million for U.S. development and commercial launch costs for the UCDs and MSUD indications. During the three months ended June 30 ,2021, we received from Relief the $10.0 million First Development Payment. We were contractually entitled to receive from Relief an additional $10.0 million Second Development Payment conditioned upon FDA’s acceptance of an NDA for ACER-001 in a UCD for filing and review. This acceptance was received on October 4, 2021. On October 6, 2021, we entered into a Waiver and Agreement with Relief to amend the timing for the Second Development Payment. We received the Second Development Payment in two $5.0 million tranches on each of October 12, 2021 and January 14, 2022. We could also receive a total of $6.0 million in milestone payments based on the first European marketing approvals of ACER-001 for a UCD and MSUD. There is no guarantee that ACER-001 will receive regulatory authority approval in any territory, or become commercially available for the indications under investigation. The terms of the Agreements are further described in Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates later in this section and in the Revenue Recognition and Accounting for Collaboration Agreements section of Note 2 to our financial statements.
If we are unable to obtain additional funding to support our current or proposed activities and operations, we may not be able to continue our operations as proposed, which may require us to suspend or terminate any ongoing development activities, modify our business plan, curtail various aspects of our operations, cease operations, or seek relief under applicable bankruptcy laws. In such event, our stockholders may lose a substantial portion or even all of their investment.
These factors individually and collectively raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for at least 12 months from the date these financial statements are available, or March 2, 2022. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments or classifications that may result from our possible inability to continue as a going concern.
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize any of our product candidates.
Our revenues to date consist of activities in connection with a collaboration agreement, including a license of intellectual property. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the timing of contractually specified milestones, if at all, the timing and amount of payments relating to such milestones, as well as the extent to which any products are approved and successfully commercialized.
If our product candidates are not developed in a timely manner, if regulatory approval is not obtained for them, or if such product candidates are not commercialized, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs associated with the development of our product candidates. Our research and development expenses include:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation;
•
external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations, consultants, and our scientific advisors; and
•
license fees and other direct costs of acquiring intellectual property.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received.
At any time, we are working on multiple programs. Our internal resources, employees, and infrastructure are not directly tied to any one research or drug discovery project and are typically deployed across multiple projects.
Since our inception in December 2013, we have spent a total of $66.7 million in research and development expenses through December 31, 2021. Of that amount, $33.2 million was directly related to EDSIVOTM; $21.3 million was directly related to ACER-001, offset by $6.1 million of collaboration funding; $5.8 million was directly related to ACER-801; $5.2 million was directly related to ACER-2820; and $1.2 million was related to other development activities.
We expect our research and development expenses to be substantial for the foreseeable future as we continue to conduct our ongoing regulatory activities, initiate new preclinical and clinical trials, and build upon our pipeline. The process of conducting clinical trials and preclinical studies necessary to obtain regulatory approval, preparing to seek regulatory approval, and preparing for commercialization in the event of regulatory approval, is costly and time-consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for any of our product candidates.
Successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain and may not result in approved products. Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to our ability to enter into new strategic alliances with respect to each program or potential product candidate, the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, the timing and ability to obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates (if any), and ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise additional capital and may seek to do so through public or private equity or debt financings, government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements or a combination of these approaches. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our product candidates, pursue regulatory approvals, and operate our business as planned.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation; external precommercial costs; and professional fees for legal, business consulting, auditing, and tax services. We expect that general and administrative expenses will be substantial in the future.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income and of gains and losses resulting from the revaluation of assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. We earn interest income from interest-bearing
accounts and money market funds, which we classify as cash and cash equivalents. We record as part of other income (expense), net, transaction gains and losses on foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities when they are revalued each period due to changes in underlying exchange rates. We also record gain on extinguishment of debt as part of other income (expense), net.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving our judgments and estimates. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we have updated our critical accounting policies to include revenue recognition and collaboration agreements.
Revenue Recognition and Accounting for Collaboration Agreements
Our revenues are generated from a single collaboration agreement which included the sale of a license of intellectual property. We analyze our collaboration agreements to assess whether they are within the scope of ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (ASC 808) to determine whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards that are dependent on the commercial success of such activities. To the extent the arrangement is within the scope of ASC 808, we assess whether aspects of the arrangement between us and the collaboration partner are within the scope of other accounting literature. If we conclude that some or all aspects of the arrangement represent a transaction with a customer, we account for those aspects of the arrangement within the scope of ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606). If we conclude that some or all aspects of the arrangement are within the scope of ASC 808 and do not represent a transaction with a customer, we recognize our share of the allocation of the shared costs incurred with respect to the jointly conducted activities as a component of the related expense in the period incurred. Pursuant to ASC 606, a customer is a party that has contracted with an entity to obtain goods or services that are an output of the entity’s ordinary activities in exchange for consideration. Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. If we conclude a counter-party to a transaction is not a customer or otherwise not within the scope of ASC 606 or ASC 808, we consider the guidance in other accounting literature as applicable or by analogy to account for such transaction.
We determine the units of account within the Collaboration Agreement utilizing the guidance in ASC 606 to determine which promised goods or services are distinct. In order for a promised good or service to be considered “distinct” under ASC 606, the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (i.e., the good or service is capable of being distinct), and the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (i.e., the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract).
For any units of account that fall within the scope of ASC 606, where the other party is a customer, we evaluate the separate performance obligation(s) under each contract, determine the transaction price, allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation considering the estimated stand-alone selling prices of the services and recognize revenue upon the satisfaction of such obligations at a point in time or over time dependent on the satisfaction of one of the following criteria: (1) the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the economic benefits provided by the vendor’s performance; (2) the vendor creates or enhances an asset controlled by the customer; and (3) the vendor’s performance does not create an asset for which the vendor has an alternative use and the vendor has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date.
Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved.
Revenue for a sales-based or usage-based royalty promised in exchange for a license of intellectual property is recognized only when (or as) the later of the following events occurs: (i) the subsequent sale or usage occurs, or (ii) the performance obligation to which some or all of the sales-based or usage-based royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
On January 25, 2021, we entered into the Option Agreement with Relief pursuant to which we granted Relief an exclusive option (the “Exclusivity Option”) to pursue a potential collaboration and license arrangement with us for the development, regulatory approval and commercialization of ACER-001 for the treatment of various inborn errors of metabolism, including UCDs and MSUD. The Option Agreement provided a period of time up to June 30, 2021 for the parties to perform additional due diligence and to work toward negotiation and execution of a definitive agreement with respect to the potential collaboration for ACER-001. In consideration for the grant of the Exclusivity Option, (i) we received from Relief an upfront nonrefundable payment of $1.0 million, (ii) Relief provided to us a 12-month secured loan in the principal amount of $4.0 million, as evidenced by a Promissory Note (the “Note”) issued by Acer to Relief, and (iii) we granted to Relief a security interest in all of its assets to secure performance of the Note, as evidenced by a Security Agreement (the “Security Agreement”). The Note was repayable in one lump sum within 12 months from issuance and bore interest at a rate equal to 6% per annum. If a definitive agreement with respect to the potential collaboration had not been executed by the parties on or before June 30, 2021, the Exclusivity Option would have terminated and the Note would have been repayable by us upon maturity.
On March 19, 2021, we entered into the Collaboration Agreement with Relief providing for the development and commercialization of ACER-001 for the treatment of various inborn errors of metabolism, including for the treatment of UCDs and MSUD. We received a $10.0 million cash payment from Relief ($14.0 million “Reimbursement Payment,” offset by repayment of the $4.0 million outstanding balance of the Note, plus interest earned through the date of the Collaboration Agreement, from Relief to us). Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, Relief committed to pay us up to an additional $20.0 million for U.S. development and commercial launch costs for the UCDs and MSUD indications (the “Development Payments”). During the three months ended June 30, 2021, we received from Relief the $10.0 million First Development Payment. We were contractually entitled to receive from Relief an additional $10.0 million Second Development Payment conditioned upon FDA’s acceptance of an NDA for ACER-001 in a UCD for filing and review. This acceptance was received on October 4, 2021. On October 6, 2021, we entered into a Waiver and Agreement with Relief to amend the timing for the Second Development Payment. We received the Second Development Payment in two $5.0 million tranches on each of October 12, 2021 and January 14, 2022. Further, we retained development and commercialization rights in the U.S., Canada, Brazil, Turkey and Japan (“Acer Territory”). The companies will split net profits from the Acer Territory 60%:40% in favor of Relief. Relief licensed the rights for the rest of the world (“Relief Territory”), where we will receive from Relief a 15% royalty on all net sales received in Relief Territory. We could also receive a total of $6.0 million in milestone payments based on the first European (EU) marketing approvals of ACER-001 for a UCD and MSUD. There is no guarantee that ACER-001 will receive regulatory authority approval in any territory, or become commercially available for the indications under investigation.
We assessed these agreements in accordance with the authoritative literature and concluded that they meet the definition of a collaborative arrangement per ASC 808. For certain parts of the Collaboration Agreement, we concluded that Relief represented a customer while for other parts of the Collaboration Agreement Relief did not represent a customer. The units of account of the Collaboration Agreement where Relief does not represent a customer are outside of the scope of ASC 606. We also determined that the development and commercialization services and Relief’s right to 60% profit in Acer Territory is within the scope of ASC 730, with regard to funded research and development arrangements.
We concluded the promised goods and services contained in the Collaboration Agreement represented two distinct units of account consisting of a license in Relief Territory, and a combined promise for the development and commercialization of ACER-001 in Acer Territory and the payment of 60% net profit from that territory (together, the “Services”). The stand-alone selling price was estimated for each distinct unit of account.
We determined that the transaction price at the outset of the Collaboration Agreement would amount to $25.0 million, including the Option Fee of $1.0 million, the Reimbursement Payment of $14.0 million, and the First Development Payment of $10.0 million. We concluded that, consistent with the evaluation of variable consideration, using the most likely amount approach, the Second Development Payment as well as the milestone payments for EU marketing approvals should be fully constrained until the contingency associated with each payment has been resolved and our NDA is accepted for review by FDA, and Relief receives EU marketing approval, respectively.
Since ASC 808 does not provide recognition and measurement guidance for collaborative arrangements, we applied the principles of ASC 606 for those units of account where Relief is a customer and ASC 730-20 for the funded research and development activities. The license revenue was recognized at the point where we determined control was transferred to the customer. The combined unit of account for the Services will be recognized over the service period through the anticipated date of first commercial sale of the ACER-001 approved product in the U.S. We also determined that the Services would be satisfied over time as measured using actual costs incurred by us toward the identified development and commercialization services agreed to between the parties up to the point of first commercial sale of the ACER-001 product. Research and development expense and general and administrative expense, as they relate to activities governed by the Collaboration Agreement, incurred in satisfying the Services unit-of-account will be recognized as contra-expense within their respective categories, consistent with the presentation guidance in ASC Topic 730, Research and Development (ASC 730).
We recognize as receivable under the Collaboration Agreement consideration, which is deemed unconditional, or when only the passage of time is required before payment of that consideration is due. Amounts receivable under the Collaboration Agreement plus payments received from Relief, net of the amount recorded as license revenue and as offsets to research and development expenses and to general and administrative expenses, are reported as deferred collaboration funding.
At December 31, 2021, we recognized as a receivable the $5.0 million second tranche of the Second Development Payment. At December 31, 2021, the amount of deferred collaboration funding associated with unsatisfied promises under the Collaboration Agreement amounted to $24.5 million. We have recorded $15.8 million as a current liability, which equates to our estimate of remaining spending under the Collaboration Agreement which would occur within a 12-month period and prior to the date of the first commercial sale of ACER-001. The remaining balance of $8.7 million is recorded as a non-current liability and represents the estimated amount that would be taken against future net profit payments made to Relief should they occur. We expect to recognize this deferred collaboration funding as we incur expenses associated with performing the Services up to the date of first commercial sale in Acer Territory and through the end of the effective date of the Collaboration Agreement. At December 31, 2021, deferred collaboration funding was composed of $35.0 million received or receivable from Relief, offset by $1.3 million recognized as license revenue, $5.8 million recorded as an offset to research and development expenses, and $3.4 million recorded as an offset to general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price (consideration paid plus net liabilities assumed) of an acquired business over the fair value of the underlying net tangible and intangible assets. We evaluate the recoverability of goodwill according to Accounting Standards Update No. 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350) annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of goodwill might be impaired. We may opt to perform a qualitative assessment or a quantitative impairment test to determine whether goodwill is impaired. Our goodwill is allocated to a single reporting unit. If we were to determine based on a qualitative assessment that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value, a quantitative impairment test would then be performed. The quantitative impairment test compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a goodwill impairment would be recognized for the difference.
In-process Research and Development
In-process research and development (“IPRD”) represents the value of the three G-protein-coupled receptor targets from the GPCR Target Pools of Anchor that we obtained the rights to in the March 20, 2015, acquisition of Anchor. IPRD was recorded at fair value in conjunction with the Anchor acquisition during 2015 and is an indefinite-lived intangible asset. As such, it is tested at least annually for impairment. We determined that the asset was impaired as of December 31, 2020 and wrote off the value of the IPRD accordingly.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense related to stock options under our 2018 Stock Incentive Plan, our 2013 Stock Incentive Plan, as amended, and our 2010 Stock Incentive Plan, as amended and restated, by estimating the fair value of each stock option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes model, which involves making the selection of inputs such as expected volatility of our stock, the anticipated term of the option, and a risk-free interest rate. The establishment of these inputs inherently require judgment and estimates and can change from time to time depending on market factors and actual experience. We recognize stock-based compensation expense for stock options and restricted stock units on a straight-line basis over the vesting term.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and include compensation and related benefits, license fees and outside contracted research and manufacturing consultants. We sometimes make nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities. These payments are capitalized and recorded as an expense in the period that we receive the goods or when the services are performed.
Clinical Trial and Preclinical Study Expenses
We make estimates of prepaid and/or accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on certain facts and circumstances at that time. Our accrued expenses for preclinical studies and clinical trials are based on estimates of costs incurred for services provided by contract research organizations (“CRO”), manufacturing organizations, and for other trial- and study-related activities. Payments under our agreements with external service providers depend on a number of factors such as site initiation, patient screening, enrollment, delivery of reports, and other events. In accruing for these activities, we obtain information from various sources and estimate the level of effort or expense allocated to each period. Adjustments to our research and development expenses may be necessary in future periods as our estimates change. As these activities are generally material to our overall financial statements, subsequent changes in estimates may result in a material change in our accruals. No material changes in estimates were recognized in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our accounts payable and accrued expenses included $0.2 million and $1.8 million, respectively, for costs associated with preclinical or clinical study expense.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
We recognized revenue of $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the license of intellectual property as part of the Collaboration Agreement with Relief.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $6.5 million, net of collaboration funding of $6.1 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease of $5.3 million was primarily due to the recognition of $6.1 million of the collaboration funding from the Collaboration Agreement with Relief, as well as a decrease in contract research expenses, partially offset by increases in employee-related expenses, regulatory and filing fees, and expenses for consulting and professional services. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were comprised of $6.9 million related to ACER-001, offset by $6.1 million of collaboration funding; $2.5 million related to ACER-801; $1.3 million related to EDSIVOTM; $0.9 million related to ACER-2820; and $1.0 million related to other development activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $10.7 million, net of collaboration funding of $3.2 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease of $0.3 million was primarily due to the recognition of $3.2 million of the collaboration funding from the Collaboration Agreement with Relief as well as a decrease in legal and consulting expenses, partially offset by increases in employee-related expenses and in precommercial activities.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net of $0.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to a gain on extinguishment of debt related to forgiveness of a PPP loan and to foreign currency gain. Other expense of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to foreign currency loss.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. From inception to December 31, 2021, we have raised net cash proceeds of $95.5 million, primarily from common stock offerings, private placements of convertible preferred stock, debt financings, and collaboration agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we had $12.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and current liabilities aggregating to $29.1 million, which include $15.8 million associated with deferred collaboration funding, as well as a $9.2 million liability related to the securities class action and stockholder derivative actions settlements and legal costs, for which we have also recorded an asset of an equal amount representing the recovery from our insurance carriers. Our net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $15.4 million and $22.9 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $114.5 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $16.9 million was primarily the result of a $20.6 million increase in deferred collaboration funding related to cash received from Relief, pursuant to the Agreements as well as to a decrease in net loss, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable and decreases in accrued expenses and accounts payable. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we have recorded in other current liabilities a $9.2 million liability related to the securities class action and stockholder derivative actions settlements and legal costs, for which we have also recorded in other current assets an asset of an equal amount representing the recovery from our insurance carriers.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was related to the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 pertained to the $4.0 million received from the secured loan from Relief, which was settled net against the Reimbursement Payment received from Relief in connection with the Collaboration Agreement, as well as to $3.1 million proceeds from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs, comprised of $2.6 million proceeds from our ATM facility and $0.5 million proceeds from our equity line facility entered into with Lincoln Park. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds of $10.2 million from the issuance of common stock, comprised of $6.9 million net proceeds from our ATM facility, $2.4 million proceeds from our equity line facility entered into with Lincoln Park, and $0.9 million proceeds from a private placement of shares of our common stock.
Future Capital Requirements
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize any of our product candidates. At the same time, we expect to continue to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing development and manufacturing activities, particularly as we continue the research, development, manufacture and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of any of our product candidates and thereafter successfully commercializing any such product candidates, we anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $12.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and current liabilities of $29.1 million, which include $15.8 million associated with deferred collaboration funding, as well as a $9.2 million liability related to the securities class action and the stockholder derivative actions settlements and legal costs, for which we have also recorded an asset of an equal amount representing the recovery from our insurance carriers. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents available at December 31, 2021, plus the $5.0 million second tranche of the Second Development Payment received on January 14, 2022 per the Collaboration Agreement with Relief, will be sufficient to fund our currently anticipated operating and capital requirements into mid-2022, excluding support for planned ACER-001 (MSUD), ACER-801 and EDSIVOTM clinical trials.
On March 19, 2021, we entered into the Collaboration Agreement with Relief providing for the development and commercialization of ACER-001 for the treatment of various inborn errors of metabolism, including for the treatment of UCDs and MSUD. We received a $10.0 million cash payment from Relief ($14.0 million “Reimbursement Payment,” offset by repayment of the $4.0 million outstanding balance of the Note, plus interest earned through the date of the Collaboration Agreement, from Relief to us). Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, Relief committed to pay us up to an additional $20.0 million for U.S. development and commercial launch costs for the UCDs and MSUD indications (the “Development Payments”). During the three months ended June 30, 2021, we received from Relief the $10.0 million First Development Payment. We were contractually entitled to receive from Relief an additional $10.0 million Second Development Payment conditioned upon FDA’s acceptance of an NDA for ACER-001 in a UCD for filing and review. This acceptance was received on October 4, 2021. On October 6, 2021, we entered into a Waiver and Agreement with Relief to amend the timing for the Second Development Payment. We received the Second Development Payment in two $5.0 million tranches on each of October 12, 2021 and January 14, 2022. Further, we retained development and commercialization rights in the U.S., Canada, Brazil, Turkey and Japan (“Acer Territory”). The companies will split net profits from the Acer Territory 60%:40% in favor of Relief. Relief licensed the rights for the rest of the world (“Relief Territory”), where we will receive from Relief a 15% royalty on all net sales received in Relief Territory. There is no guarantee that ACER-001 will receive regulatory authority approval in any territory or become commercially available for the indications under investigation. We could also receive a total of $6.0 million in milestone payments based on the first European marketing approvals of ACER-001 for a UCD and MSUD. In connection with the cancellation of the $4.0 million promissory note executed by us in favor of Relief on January 25, 2021, Relief released its security interest in all of our assets.
On July 24, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement for the sale and issuance of an aggregate of 244,998 shares of our common stock, for an aggregate purchase price of $0.9 million, in a Private Placement transaction with certain directors, officers, and employees at a price per share of $3.50. The shares of common stock issued in the Private Placement constitute “restricted securities” under the federal securities laws and are subject to a minimum six-month holding period. The proceeds from the Private Placement will be used by us for working capital and general corporate purposes.
On April 30, 2020, we entered into a $15.0 million equity line purchase agreement and registration rights agreement with Lincoln Park pursuant to which we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park an aggregate of up to $15.0 million in shares of our common stock, subject to certain conditions and limitations. Under the terms and subject to the conditions of the purchase agreement, Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase up to an aggregate of $15.0 million in shares of common stock (subject to certain limitations) from time to time over a 36-month period commencing on June 8, 2020, with $12.1 million obligation remaining as of December 31, 2021. We may direct Lincoln Park, at our sole discretion and subject to certain conditions, to purchase up to 50,000 shares of common stock in regular purchases, increasing to amounts of up to 100,000 shares depending upon the closing sale price of our common
stock. In addition, we may direct Lincoln Park to purchase additional amounts as accelerated purchases or as additional accelerated purchases. The purchase price of shares of common stock related to this future funding will be based upon the market price of our common stock preceding the time of sale as computed under purchase agreement. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to receive the entire obligation amount from Lincoln Park because the purchase agreement contains limitations, restrictions, requirements, events of default and other provisions that could limit our ability to cause Lincoln Park to buy common stock from us. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 900,000 shares of common stock under our purchase agreement with Lincoln Park at a weighted average gross sale price of $2.64 per share, resulting in proceeds of $2.4 million. Proceeds, net of $0.2 million of offering costs, were $2.2 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold an additional 200,000 shares of common stock under the purchase agreement at a weighted average sale price of $2.47 per share, resulting in additional proceeds of $0.5 million.
On March 18, 2020, we entered into an amended and restated sales agreement with JonesTrading and Roth Capital. This agreement provides a facility for the offer and sale of shares of common stock from time to time depending upon market demand, in transactions deemed to be an “at-the-market” (“ATM”) offering. We will need to keep current our shelf registration statement and the offering prospectus relating to the ATM facility, in addition to providing certain periodic deliverables under the sales agreement, in order to use such facility. Due to the SEC’s “baby shelf rules,” which prohibit companies with a public float of less than $75 million from issuing securities under a shelf registration statement in excess of one-third of such company’s public float in a 12-month period, we are only able to issue a limited number of shares which aggregate no more than one-third of our public float using our shelf registration statement at this time. From May 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 1,838,957 shares of common stock at an average gross sale price of $3.9228 per share, for gross proceeds of $7.2 million. Proceeds, net of $0.3 million of fees and offering costs were $6.9 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, during multiple trading days, we sold an aggregate of 877,107 additional shares of common stock through the ATM facility at an average gross sale price of $3.1692 per share, for gross proceeds of $2.8 million. Proceeds for the year ended December 31, 2021, net of $0.2 million fees and offering costs, were $2.6 million.
Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
•
any continued development and potential commercialization of ACER-001 beyond mid-2022
•
any continued development, including the initiation of one or more clinical trials for ACER-801
•
any continued development, including the initiation of the DiSCOVER pivotal clinical trial for EDSIVO™
•
our ability to obtain adequate levels of financing to meet our operating plan
•
the costs associated with filing, outcome, and timing of regulatory approvals
•
the terms and timing of any strategic alliance, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish
•
the cost and timing of hiring any new employees to support our business operations
•
the costs and timing of having clinical supplies of our product candidates manufactured
•
the initiation and progress of ongoing preclinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates
•
the costs involved in patent filing, prosecution, and enforcement
•
the number of programs we pursue
•
any development of ACER-2820 we may choose to pursue (although any such development will depend upon the availability of non-dilutive financing)
We will continue to require substantial additional capital to continue our clinical development and pursuit of regulatory approval activities. Accordingly, we will need to raise substantial additional capital to continue to fund our operations. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our development, regulatory conditions and requirements, and commercialization efforts. Failure to raise capital as and when needed, on favorable terms or at all, would have a negative impact on our
financial condition and our ability to develop our product candidates, pursue regulatory approvals, potentially commercialize (if approved) our product candidates, and operate our business as planned.
We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for at least the foreseeable future as we initiate and continue the clinical development of, seek regulatory approval for, and potentially commercialize (if approved) our product candidates. In addition, operating as a publicly-traded company involves upgrading financial information systems and incurring costs associated with operating as a public company. We expect that our operating losses will fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year due to the timing of clinical development programs, efforts to achieve regulatory approval and planning for potential commercialization (if approved) of our product candidates.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product sales revenue to finance our cash requirements, which would require us to obtain regulatory approval for and successfully commercialize one or more of our product candidates, we expect to finance our future cash needs primarily through the issuance of additional equity and potentially through borrowing, non-dilutive funding, and strategic alliances. Other than the equity line purchase agreement we entered into with Lincoln Park, which is subject to certain limitations and conditions, and our ATM facility, we do not maintain any lines of credit or have any sources of debt or equity capital committed for funding.
We continue to explore potential opportunities and alternatives to obtain the additional resources that will be necessary to support our ongoing operations beyond the next 12 months, including raising additional capital through either private or public equity or debt financing, or non-dilutive funding, as well as using our ATM facility and/or our equity line facility. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the issuance of additional equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
If we are unable to raise additional funds through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, such as non-dilutive funding or strategic collaborations, when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or pursuit of regulatory approval efforts or provide rights to develop and market product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and, if applicable, market ourselves. Further, if we are unable to obtain additional funding to support our current or proposed activities and operations, we may not be able to continue our operations as proposed, which may require us to suspend or terminate any ongoing development activities, modify our business plan, curtail various aspects of our operations, cease operations, or seek relief under applicable bankruptcy laws. In such event, our stockholders may lose a substantial portion or even all of their investment.
Contractual Commitments
License Agreements
In April 2014, we obtained exclusive rights to patents and certain other intellectual property relating to ACER-001 for the treatment of inborn errors of BCAA metabolism, including MSUD, and preclinical and clinical data, through an exclusive license agreement with Baylor College of Medicine (“BCM”). Under the terms of the agreement, as amended, we have worldwide exclusive rights to develop, manufacture, use, sell and import products incorporating the licensed intellectual property. The license agreement requires us to make upfront and annual payments to BCM, reimburse certain of BCM’s legal costs, make payments upon achievement of defined milestones, and pay low single-digit percent royalties on net sales of any developed product over the royalty term.
In June 2016, we entered into an agreement with Aventis Pharma SA (now Sanofi) granting us the exclusive access and exclusive right to use the data included in the marketing authorization application dossier filed with and approved by the MHRA in 1986 for the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension pursuant to the UK regulatory approval procedure, for the sole purpose of allowing us to further develop, manufacture, register and commercialize
celiprolol in the U.S. and Brazil for the treatment of EDS, Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. We have paid in full for the exclusive access and right to use the data. Subsequently we amended our agreement with Sanofi to provide the same rights to data access and use for potential marketing approval in all of North and South America.
In August 2016, we entered into an agreement with AP-HP granting us the exclusive worldwide rights to access and use data from a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open trial related to the use of celiprolol for the treatment of vEDS. We utilized this clinical data to support an NDA filing for EDSIVOTM for the treatment of vEDS. The agreement requires us to make certain upfront payments to AP-HP, reimburse certain of AP-HP’s costs, make payments upon achievement of defined milestones and pay low single-digit percent royalties on net sales of celiprolol over the royalty term.
In September 2018, we entered into an additional agreement with AP-HP to acquire the exclusive worldwide intellectual property rights to three European patent applications relating to certain uses of celiprolol including (i) the optimal dose of celiprolol in treating vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (“vEDS”) patients, (ii) the use of celiprolol during pregnancy, and (iii) the use of celiprolol to treat kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (type VI). Pursuant to the agreement, we will reimburse AP-HP for certain costs and will pay annual maintenance fee payments. Subject to a minimum royalty amount, we will also pay royalty payments on annual net sales of celiprolol during the royalty term in the low single digit percent range, depending upon whether there is a valid claim of a licensed patent. Under the agreement, we will control and pay the costs of ongoing patent prosecution and maintenance for the licensed applications. We subsequently filed three U.S. patent applications on this subject matter in October 2018. We may choose to limit our pursuit of patent applications to specific territories, in which case AP-HP would have the right to revise our territorial license rights accordingly.
In December 2018, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with Sanofi granting us worldwide rights to ACER-801, a clinical-stage, selective, non-peptide tachykinin NK3 receptor antagonist. The agreement requires us to make certain upfront payments to Sanofi, make payments upon achievement of defined development and sales milestones and pay royalties on net sales of ACER-801 over the royalty term. We plan to initially pursue development of ACER-801 as a potential treatment for iVMS.
On March 19, 2021, we entered into the Collaboration Agreement with Relief providing for the development and commercialization of ACER-001 for the treatment of various inborn errors of metabolism, including for the treatment of UCDs and MSUD. The Collaboration Agreement is the culmination of the Option Agreement previously entered into between us and Relief on January 25, 2021, which provided Relief with an exclusive period of time up to June 30, 2021 for the parties to enter into a mutually acceptable definitive agreement with respect to the potential collaboration and license arrangements. In consideration for the grant of the exclusivity option, (i) we received from Relief an upfront non-refundable payment of $1.0 million, (ii) Relief provided to us a 12-month secured loan in the principal amount of $4.0 million with interest at a rate equal to 6% per annum, as evidenced by a promissory note we issued to Relief, and (iii) we granted Relief a security interest in all of our assets to secure performance of the promissory note, as evidenced by a security agreement. Upon signing the Collaboration Agreement, we received a $10.0 million cash payment from Relief (the $14.0 million Reimbursement Payment, offset by repayment of the $4.0 million outstanding balance of the prior loan, plus interest, from Relief to us). Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, Relief committed to pay us Development Payments of up to $20.0 million for U.S. development and commercial launch costs for the UCDs and MSUD indications. During the three months ended June 30, 2021, we received from Relief the $10.0 million First Development Payment. We were contractually entitled to receive from Relief an additional $10.0 million Second Development Payment conditioned upon FDA’s acceptance of an NDA for ACER-001 in a UCD for filing and review. This acceptance was received on October 4, 2021. On October 6, 2021, we entered into a Waiver and Agreement with Relief to amend the timing for the Second Development Payment. We received the Second Development Payment in two $5.0 million tranches on each of October 12, 2021 and January 14, 2022. Further, we retained development and commercialization rights in the U.S., Canada, Brazil, Turkey and Japan. The companies will split net profits from our territories 60%:40% in favor of Relief. Relief licensed the rights for the rest of the world, where we will receive from Relief a 15% royalty on all net sales received by Relief in Relief’s territories. We could also receive a total of $6.0 million in milestone payments based on the first European marketing approvals of ACER-001 for a UCD and MSUD. There is no guarantee that ACER-001 will receive regulatory authority approval in any territory or become commercially available for the indications under investigation. In connection with cancellation of the $4.0 million promissory note executed by us in favor of Relief on January 25, 2021, Relief released its security interest in all of our assets.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Inflation
We believe that inflation has not had a material impact on our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 since inflation rates have generally remained at relatively low levels and our operations are not otherwise uniquely affected by inflation concerns.