Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company discovering and developing allogeneic gamma delta T cell therapies for cancer. We are advancing a pipeline of “off-the-shelf” gamma delta T cells, engineered with chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) and T cell receptor-like antibodies (TCRL), to enhance selective tumor targeting, facilitate innate and adaptive anti-tumor immune response, and improve persistence for durable activity in patients. Our approach to activate, engineer and manufacture allogeneic gamma delta T cell product candidates derived from the peripheral blood cells of unrelated donors allows us to generate new product candidates in a rapid and cost-efficient manner.
Our lead product candidate, ADI-001, a first-in-class allogeneic gamma delta T cell therapy expressing a CAR targeting CD20, is in an ongoing Phase 1 study for the treatment of Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma (NHL). Our pipeline also includes ADI-002, an allogeneic gamma delta CAR-T cell therapy expressing a GPC3-targeted CAR and a cell intrinsic soluble form of interluiken-15 (IL-15), for the treatment of solid tumors In addition, we are engaged in discovery and preclinical stage activities directed to expansion of our pipeline of product candidates for both hematological malignancies and solid tumors.
Our proprietary engineering and manufacturing process begins with isolating and expanding gamma delta T cells from the blood of unrelated donors, and results in the potential to treat up to 1,000 patients per batch depending on dosing and the CAR target. The potential to administer product candidates based on gamma delta T cells to patients without inducing a graft versus host immune response could mean that our products can potentially be used as “off-the-shelf” therapies. This is in contrast to products based on alpha beta T cells, which either must be manufactured for each patient from his or her own T cells, or require significant gene editing to manufacture if the T cells are derived from donors that are unrelated to the patient. Based on what we believe is the unique potential of these cells and associated modifications, we are initially developing product candidates in oncology, both for hematological malignancies and for solid tumors. In October 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) cleared our Investigational New Drug (IND) application for ADI-001, our lead product candidate, for the treatment of Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (NHL). In March 2021, we initiated the first-in-human clinical trial to assess safety and efficacy of ADI-001 in NHL patients. The Phase 1 study for ADI-001 will enroll up to 80 late-stage NHL patients at a number of cancer centers across the United States. The study includes a dose escalation portion followed by dose expansion cohorts to explore the activity of ADI-001 in multiple subtypes of NHL. In December 2021, we announced positive interim clinical data from the initial dose escalation portion of this study.
Recent Developments
Public Offerings and Private Placement
In February 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 10,575,513 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to an additional 1,344,743 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $13.00 per share. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses were approximately $128.8 million.
In connection with the February 2021 offering, we also entered into a stock purchase agreement with certain existing investors to purchase 1,153,840 shares of our common stock for $15.0 million at a price per share equal to the public offering price, with an initial closing for certain investors held simultaneously with the closing of the offering and a subsequent closing for certain additional investors. We received the full proceeds from the sale and did not pay any underwriting discounts or commissions with respect to the shares of common stock that sold in the concurrent private placement. Pursuant to the terms of the private placement, we subsequently filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-256088), dated May 21, 2021, pursuant to which we registered the Private Placement Shares. We have agreed to maintain the effectiveness of the registration statement until such time as all Private Placement Shares covered by the registration statements have been sold or may be sold under Rule 144 without manner of sale restrictions or volume limitations, subject to certain exceptions.
In December 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 7,187,500 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to an additional 937,500 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $14.00 per share. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses were approximately $94.2 million.
At-the-Market (ATM) Offering
On March 12, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement (the 2021 Sales Agreement) with JonesTrading Institutional Services (the Agent), pursuant to which we could sell, from time to time, at our option, up to an aggregate of $75.0 million of shares of our common stock, through the Agent, as our sales agent. No shares were sold under the 2021 Sales Agreement as of December 31, 2021. In connection with the 2021 Sales Agreement, we terminated a prior ATM program with Evercore Group L.L.C. and H.C. Wainwright & Co., L.L.C.
Loan Agreement
On October 21, 2021, we amended our Loan and Security Agreement (the Loan Agreement) with Pacific Western Bank (PacWest)(the Loan Amendment) under which PacWest will provide one or more Term Loans, as well as Non-Formula Ancillary Services which shall not exceed $5.5 million in the aggregate. Non-Formula Ancillary Services are defined as automated clearinghouse transactions, corporate credit card services, letters of credit, or other treasury management services. The aggregate sum of the outstanding Term Loans and Non-Formula Ancillary Services shall at no time exceed $15.0 million, which each Term Loan to be in an amount of not less than $1.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding Non-Formula Ancillary Services of $4.4 million. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, the Company has $10.6 million available under the Term Loan. Pursuant to the Loan Amendment, the interest rate for the Term Loans shall be set at an annual rate equal to the greater of (i) 0.25% above the Prime Rate then in effect and (ii) 4.25%.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we were in compliance with such covenants and had no indebtedness outstanding under the Loan Agreement.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was reported in China. The spread of COVID-19 from China to other countries has resulted in the World Health Organization (WHO) declaring the outbreak of COVID-19 as a “pandemic,” or a worldwide spread of a new disease, on March 11, 2020. Since then, COVID-19 has spread globally and new variants of the virus have emerged. Many countries around the world have imposed quarantines and restrictions on travel and mass gatherings to slow the spread of the virus and have closed non-essential businesses. The continued spread of COVID-19, despite progress in vaccination efforts, has resulted in significant governmental measures being implemented to control the spread of COVID-19 and its variants. These measures may result in a period of business, supply, and drug product manufacturing disruption, and in reduced operations, any of which could materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we tasked members of our Executive Leadership team, Human Resources, Facilities and Operations and Employee Communications to develop guidelines and processes intended to raise awareness of new health and well-being protocols and potentially helpful practices for cross-functional teamwork for our employees. We implemented remote working and shift scheduling, provided our team members practical recommendations based on guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, State of California Department of Health Care Services, State of Massachusetts Department of Public Health, OSHA and other regional government entities. In addition, we are committed to updating these recommendations and communicating new pertinent information when available. While doing so we are sensitive to ensuring any guidance provided may vary by locality based on government orders and regulations.
Thus far we have not experienced a significant disruption or delay in our operations as it relates to the clinical development of our drug candidates. However, we anticipate that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may create difficulties in our clinical trials for a variety of reasons, including future regulations regarding, or the inability or unwillingness of patients to, travel to participate in clinical trials, or to participate in clinical trials that are administered in medical facilities that also treat COVID-19, potential delays in the FDA’s review and approval processes and/or shortages of medical supplies that may force medical professionals to focus on non-clinical procedures, including treatment of COVID-19. The duration and ultimate impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on clinical trials generally, and on our trials particularly, is currently unknown.
In addition, the spread of COVID-19, which has caused a broad impact globally, may materially affect us economically. While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, a widespread pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 and its variants could materially affect our business. Possible effects may also include absenteeism in our labor workforce, unavailability of products and supplies used in operations, and a decline in value of assets held by us, including property and equipment, and marketable debt securities.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale and do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates, which we expect will not be for at least several years, if ever. Our revenues to date are generated from our License and Collaboration Agreement with Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Regeneron) and the agreement referred to as the “Regeneron Agreement”. The primary purpose of the Regeneron Agreement is to establish a strategic relationship to identify and validate appropriate targets and work together to develop a pipeline of engineered immune cell products (Collaboration ICPs) for the selected targets. The Regeneron Agreement provides for the following: (i) licenses to our technology, (ii) research and development services, (iii) services or obligations in connection with participation in the research committee, (iv) information sharing, and (v) manufacturing services to manufacture of Collaboration ICPs for the research programs. The Regeneron Agreement provides Regeneron an option to obtain an exclusive, royalty-bearing development and commercial license under our intellectual property to develop and commercialize the optioned Collaboration ICPs ready for an IND submission.
We received a non-refundable upfront payment of $25.0 million from Regeneron upon execution of the Regeneron Agreement on July 29, 2016 and have received an aggregate of $20.0 million of additional payments for research funding from Regeneron as of December 31, 2020. In addition, Regeneron may have to pay us additional amounts in the future consisting of up to an aggregate of $80.0 million of option exercise fees for a certain number of Collaboration ICPs. On January 28, 2022, we received a payment of $20.0 million from Regeneron for exercise of its option to license exclusive rights to ADI-002 and Regeneron potentially has additional options to other Collaboration ICP targets under the Regeneron Agreement. We declined to exercise our option to co-fund the development of ADI-002 with Regeneron, and accordingly, Regeneron must also pay us high single digit royalties as a percentage of net sales for ADI-002 or any other optioned ICPs to targets for which it has exclusive rights and low single digit royalties as a percentage of net sales on any non-ICP product comprising a target generated by us through the use of Regeneron’s proprietary mice. We must pay Regeneron mid-single to low double digit royalties as a percentage of net sales of Collaboration ICPs to targets for which we have exercised exclusive rights, and low to mid-single digit royalties as a percentage of net sales of targeting moieties generated from our license to use Regeneron’s proprietary mice. Royalties are payable until the longer of the expiration or invalidity of the licensed patent rights or 12 years from first commercial sale.
We use a cost-based input method to measure proportional performance and to calculate the corresponding amount of revenue to recognize under the Regeneron Agreement. In applying the cost-based input method of revenue recognition, we use actual costs incurred relative to budgeted costs to fulfill the combined performance obligation. Revenue is recognized based on actual costs incurred as a percentage of total budgeted costs as we complete our performance obligations over the research term of five years. A cost-based input method of revenue recognition requires us to estimate costs to complete our performance obligations, which requires significant judgment to evaluate assumptions related to cost estimates. The cumulative effect of revisions to estimated costs to complete our performance obligations is recorded in the period in which changes are identified and amounts can be reasonably estimated.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses, which consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the development of our product candidates, are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•employee related costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expenses for research and development employees;
•costs incurred under agreements with consultants, contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) and contract research organizations (CROs);
•lab materials, supplies, and maintenance of equipment used for research and development activities; and
•allocated facility-related costs, such as rent, utilities, insurance, repairs and maintenance, depreciation and amortization, information technology costs and general support services.
We do not allocate our costs by product candidate, as a significant amount of research and development expenses are not tracked by product candidate, and we believe the allocation of such costs would be arbitrary and would not provide a meaningful assessment as we have used our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple product candidate research and development programs.
We are focusing substantially all of our resources on the development of our product candidates. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of our product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from sales of our product candidates. The duration, costs, and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•the scope, rate of progress and expense of clinical trials and other research and development activities;
•clinical trial results;
•uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rate or design;
•significant and changing government regulation;
•the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals;
•the FDA’s or other regulatory authority’s influence on clinical trial design;
•establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•commercializing product candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for product candidates;
•continued applicable safety profiles of the products following approval; and
•retention of key research and development personnel.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could significantly change the costs, timing and viability associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA, or another regulatory authority, were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that it currently anticipates will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. Furthermore, we are unable to predict when or if our product candidates will receive regulatory approval with any certainty.
We are focusing substantially all of our resources on the development of our product candidates. We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially during the next few years, as we seek to initiate clinical trials for our product candidates, complete our clinical program, pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates and prepare for a possible commercial launch. Predicting the timing or the cost to complete our clinical program or validation of our commercial manufacturing and supply processes is difficult and delays may occur because of many factors, including factors outside of our control. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. Furthermore, we are unable to predict when or if our product candidates will receive regulatory approval with any certainty.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist principally of payroll and personnel expenses, including salaries and bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation expenses, professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting and tax services, allocated overhead expenses, including rent, equipment, depreciation, information technology costs and utilities, and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase for the foreseeable future due to anticipated expenses related to the Merger and future expenses related to operating as a public company, including expenses related to personnel costs, expanded infrastructure and higher consulting, legal and accounting services costs associated with complying with the applicable Nasdaq and SEC requirements, investor relations costs and director and officer insurance premiums.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and marketable debt securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of the non-cash amortization of costs incurred in connection with the Loan Agreement entered into with PacWest in April 2020, and subsequently amended in October 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
In 2020, other income (expense), net primarily consists of changes in the fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability and redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability prior to their conversion to warrants to purchase common stock upon closing of the Merger. In 2021, other income (expense), net primarily consists of state franchise and capital taxes not related to income.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
* Not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue decreased by $8.2 million, or 46%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 resulting from the decrease in revenue recognized under the Regeneron Agreement. This decrease in revenue was primarily due to our achievement of a milestone under the Regeneron Agreement in June 2020 relating to the selection of a clinical candidate for ADI-002. This resulted in an increase in the transaction price of $10.0 million and recognition of an additional cumulative catch-up of revenue of $5.0 million in June 2020.
Research and development
(1) Employee related costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation expenses for research and development employees.
(2) Allocated facility-related costs, such as rent, utilities, insurance, repairs and maintenance, depreciation and amortization, information technology costs and general support services.
Research and development expenses increased by $14.6 million, or 43%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase of $5.8 million in personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits, and bonuses due to increases in headcount of employees involved in research and development activities, as well as an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $3.1 million due to higher option grant activity. In addition, there was an increase of $3.7 million in fees incurred for CRO, CMO, consultants, and other externally sponsored research and $4.9 million increase in facility and other expenses. This increase was primarily due to ramping up of clinical development activities related to ADI-001, our leading product candidate.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased by $0.5 million, or 2%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a decrease of $6.3 million in professional fees primarily related to decreases of $5.1 million in legal fees and $1.7 million in audit fees, due to higher expenses associated with the Merger in 2020.
These decreases in professional fees were offset by an increase of $0.5 million in other professional fees consisting of investor relations, IT management, and other enterprise solutions. In addition, the decreases in general and administrative expenses were offset by a $3.1 million increase in payroll and personnel expenses, which includes salaries, benefits, bonuses, and temporary contractor fees due to higher stock-based compensation expenses of $4.2 million caused by increased option grant activity and higher salaries and benefits of $1.0 million reduced by lower temporary contractor fees of $2.2 million.
Further, there was an increase of $2.8 million in facilities and other expenses, primarily related to rent, depreciation costs, and director and officer liability insurance.
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $0.7 million, or 88%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to the decrease in average balance of marketable debt securities in 2021 and decrease in interest rates, which lowered return on investments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by less than $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 due to the non-cash amortization of costs incurred in connection with the Loan Agreement that was entered in April 2020 and subsequently amended in October 2021.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net decreased by $0.3 million, or 36%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a realized gain recognized in 2020 related to a change in fair value of the redeemable preferred stock warrant liability prior to their conversion to warrants to purchase common stock upon closing of the Merger in September 2020 offset by $0.2 million related to the derecognition of fixed assets related to the sublease of the Boston lease in August 2021, $0.6 million of franchise taxes, and less than $0.1 million of realized loss due to foreign exchange.
Income tax expense (benefit)
We recognized an income tax benefit of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the income tax benefit of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The reduction in benefit relates to the nature of discrete tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the recognition of a net operating loss carryback under the CARES Act. Income tax benefit of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the tax effect of the reduction in the deferred tax liability associated with the basis differences from in-process research and development (IPR&D).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $277.5 million. Our net losses were $62.0 million and $36.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Sources of Liquidity
Since our formation in 2014, we have funded our operations with an aggregate of $116.3 million in gross cash proceeds from the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock and an aggregate of $45.0 million received to date from Regeneron under the Regeneron Agreement. In September 2020, following the closing of the Merger, all outstanding shares of the redeemable
convertible preferred stock converted into 12,048,671 shares of common stock. We also acquired $64.1 million of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash owned by resTORbio, as part of the Merger.
In February 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 10,575,513 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to an additional 1,344,743 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $13.00 per share. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses were approximately $128.8 million. In connection with the offering, we also entered into a stock purchase agreement with certain existing investors to purchase 1,153,840 shares of our common stock for $15.0 million at a price per share equal to the public offering price, with an initial closing for certain investors held simultaneously with the closing of the offering and a subsequent closing for certain additional investors.
In December 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 7,187,500 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to an additional 937,500 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $14.00 per share. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses were approximately $94.2 million.
Loan Agreement
On October 21, 2021, we amended the Loan Agreement with PacWest (the Loan Amendment) under which PacWest will provide one or more Term Loans, as well as Non-Formula Ancillary Services which shall not exceed $5.5 million in the aggregate. Non-Formula Ancillary Services are defined as automated clearinghouse transactions, corporate credit card services, letters of credit, or other treasury management services. The aggregate sum of the outstanding Term Loans and Non-Formula Ancillary Services shall at no time exceed $15.0 million, which each Term Loan to be in an amount of not less than $1.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding Non-Formula Ancillary Services of $4.4 million. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, the Company has $10.6 million available under the Term Loan. Pursuant to the Loan Amendment, the interest rate for the Term Loans shall be set at an annual rate equal to the greater of (i) 0.25% above the Prime Rate then in effect and (ii) 4.25%.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we were in compliance with such covenants and had no indebtedness outstanding under the Loan Agreement.
At-the-Market (ATM) Offering
On March 12, 2021, we entered into the 2021 Sales Agreement with the Agent, pursuant to which we could sell, from time to time, at our option, up to an aggregate of $75.0 million of shares of our common stock, through the Agent, as our sales agent. No shares were sold under the 2021 Sales Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
Future Funding Requirements
We have incurred losses since inception and have incurred losses of $62.0 million and $36.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $168.3 million.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $277.5 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient for us to continue as a going concern for at least 12 months from the issuance date of our consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could deplete our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the risks and uncertainties associated with research, development, and commercialization of product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements.
All of our revenue to date is generated from the Regeneron Agreement, which is a collaboration and license agreement. We do not expect to generate any significant product revenue until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our product candidates or enter into additional collaborative agreements with third parties, and we do not know when, or if, either will occur. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates and begin to commercialize any approved products. We are subject to all of the risks typically related to the development of new product candidates, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays, and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business.
We will continue to require additional capital to develop our product candidates and fund operations for the foreseeable future. We may seek to raise capital through private or public equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with
corporate sources, or through other sources of financing. We anticipate that we will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements for which will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, timing, rate of progress and costs of our drug discovery efforts, preclinical development activities, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the number and scope of clinical programs we decide to pursue;
•the cost, timing and outcome of preparing for and undergoing regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the scope and costs of development and commercial manufacturing activities;
•the cost and timing associated with commercializing our product candidates, if they receive marketing approval;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of our product candidates and, ultimately, the sale of our products, following FDA approval;
•our implementation of operational, financial and management systems;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on United States and global economic conditions that may impact our ability to access capital on terms anticipated, or at all; and
•the post-merger costs associated with being a public company.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we will continue to require additional capital to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials or we may also be required to sell or license to other rights to our product candidates in certain territories or indications that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves. If we are required to enter into collaborations and other arrangements to supplement our funds, we may have to give up certain rights that limit our ability to develop and commercialize our product candidates or may have other terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders, which could materially affect our business and financial condition.
See the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The use of cash in all periods resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in components of working capital. The increases in cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were primarily due to increased external research and development expenses as we continue to develop our product candidates, and increased internal and external expenses related to the initiation of our Phase 1 clinical trial. Higher costs associated with increased employee headcount related to expanded development activities also contributed to the increase in cash used in operating activities.
These factors were partially offset by lower professional services costs in 2021. Non-cash charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 also include $12.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The changes in prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable, and accrued and other liabilities resulted from the timing of payments to our service providers.
We currently lease an office space in Boston, MA under a non-cancellable operating lease (the Boston Lease), with an expiration date of July 31, 2026. The Boston Lease was amended on April 1, 2019, to relocate into a premises in the same building with additional space. The initial annual base rent for this lease was $0.6 million and increases 2% annually. On July 19, 2021, we subleased the office space in Boston, MA. The term of the sublease started on September 1, 2021 and will end on July 30, 2026. The aggregate base rent due to us under the Sublease Agreement is approximately $3.5 million. Pursuant to the Sublease Agreement, we agreed to transfer certain furniture located in the subleased premises to the sublessee for $1.00. We remain liable for the lease payments under the Boston Lease.
We also have an office facility in Menlo Park, CA under a non-cancellable operating lease (the Menlo Park Lease), with an expiration date of March 31, 2022 (subject to any optional extension). This lease was amended on June 25, 2021 to extend the term of lease from March 31, 2022 to June 30, 2022 and replace the previously leased premises (known as 173 and 175-177 Jefferson Drive) with a nearby premises (known as 235 Constitution Drive). The lease commenced on July 15, 2021 and expires on June 30, 2022. In connection with these changes, we incur monthly rent payments ranging from $87,286 to $89,904, increasing over the remaining term of the lease. This lease was amended on September 30, 2019 to include additional office space, with an expiration date of March 31, 2022 (subject to any optional extension). The initial annual base rent for the Menlo Park Lease is an aggregate of $1.0 million, and such amount will increase 3% annually. On October 28, 2018, we executed an additional non-cancelable lease agreement for a new office and laboratory facility in Redwood City, CA (the Redwood City Lease), with an expiration date of February 28, 2030. The initial annual base rent for the Redwood City Lease is an aggregate of $1.3 million, and such amount will increase 3% annually.
On July 30, 2021, we entered a short-term lease agreement with the Boston Properties, Inc. for a temporary office space located at 200 Clarendon Street, Boston, MA. The initial lease term commenced on July 30, 2021 and expire on November 30, 2021. In October 2021, we extended the lease term to March 31, 2022 and most recently, in February 2022, extended the lease term to July 31, 2022. The base rent is less than $0.1 million per month.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of purchases of property and equipment of $13.0 million related to the construction of our new building in Redwood City, CA, partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable debt securities of $10.3 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $115.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of cash and restricted cash acquired in connection with the Merger of $64.1 million, proceeds from maturities of marketable debt securities of $57.8 million, partially offset by purchases of marketable debt securities of $5.7 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.0 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $242.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was related to net cash proceeds received from our public offerings and concurrent private placement in February 2021 and December 2021 of $238.1 million, and cash proceeds of $4.8 million from exercise of stock options and purchases under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP), offset by debt issuance costs of approximately $0.2 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to cash proceeds of $0.5 million from exercise of stock options partly offset by payment of debt issuance costs of $0.2 million.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and could have a material impact on our reported results. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the Notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments and estimates we use in preparing our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
We earn all of our revenue in connection with our license and collaboration agreement with Regeneron, which allows Regeneron to utilize our technology and know-how to develop product candidates.
For elements of collaboration arrangements that are accounted for pursuant to ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, we identify the performance obligations and allocate the total consideration we expect to receive on a relative standalone selling price basis to each performance obligation. Key assumptions to determine the standalone selling price may include forecasted revenues, development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, the expected number of targets or indications expected to be pursued, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success.
We recognize revenue associated with each performance obligation as the control over the promised goods or services transfer to our collaboration partner which occurs either at a point in time or over time. If control transfers over time, revenue is recognized by using a method of measuring progress that best depicts the transfer of goods or services, for example based on actual costs incurred relative to total forecasted costs to be incurred over the period the transfer of goods or services occurs. We evaluate the measure of progress and related inputs each reporting period and any resulting adjustments to revenue are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis. Revenue to be recognized is equal to the total transaction price multiplied by the ratio of actual expense incurred divided by total forecasted expense.
Accrued CMO, CRO, and Research and Development Expenses
We have entered into various agreements with CMOs and CROs. Our research and development accruals are estimated based on the level of services performed, progress of the studies, including the phase or completion of events, and contracted costs. The estimated costs of research and development provided, but not yet invoiced, are included in accrued and other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments made to CMOs and CROs under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets on the consolidated balance sheets until the services are rendered. To date, our estimated accruals have not differed materially from the actual costs.
Stock-Based Compensation
We use a fair value-based method to account for all stock-based compensation arrangements with employees and non-employees, including stock options and restricted stock awards. Our determination of the fair value of stock options on the date of grant utilizes the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of the option granted is recognized on a straight-line basis over the period during which an optionee is required to provide services in exchange for the option award, known as the requisite service period, which usually is the vesting period. For awards that have a performance condition, the Company recognizes compensation expense based on its assessment of the probability that the performance condition will be achieved, using an accelerated attribution model, over the explicit or implicit service period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. In determining fair value of the stock options granted, we use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions. These assumptions include estimating the length of time employees will retain their vested stock options before exercising them (expected term), the estimated volatility of our common stock price over the expected term (expected volatility), risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. Changes in the following assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized; and the resulting change in fair value, if any, is recognized in our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss during the period the related services are rendered. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. Changes in the following assumptions can materially affect the estimate of the fair value of stock-based compensation:
•Expected Term - The expected term is calculated using the simplified method which is used when there is insufficient historical data about exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method is based on the vesting period and the contractual term for each grant, or for each vesting-tranche for awards with graded vesting. The mid-point between the vesting date and the maximum contractual expiration date is used as the expected term under this method. For awards with multiple vesting-tranches, the times from grant until the mid-points for each of the tranches may be averaged to provide an overall expected term.
•Expected Volatility - The Company has limited trading history. As such, the expected volatility was determined by examining the historical volatilities of a peer group of comparable publicly traded companies in biotechnology and pharmaceutical related industries to be representative of our expected future stock price volatility. For purposes of identifying these peer companies, we consider the industry, stage of development, size and financial leverage of potential comparable companies. For each grant, we measure historical volatility over a period equivalent to the expected term.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield currently available on United States Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equivalent to the expected term of the stock award.
•Expected Dividend Rate - We have not paid and does not anticipate paying dividends in the near future. Accordingly, we estimate the dividend yield to be zero.
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to our Merger, the estimated fair value of the common stock underlying our stock options and stock awards was determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with assistance from management and external appraisers. All options to purchase shares of our common stock were intended to be exercisable at a price per share not less than the per-share fair value of our common stock underlying those options on the date of grant. The approach to estimate the fair value of our common stock was consistent with the methods outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (Practice Aid). Subsequent to the Merger, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the closing market price.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the JOBS Act) was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company (EGC), can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an EGC can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We have elected to use the extended transition period for new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company; however, we may adopt certain new or revised accounting standards early. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (2) the date we qualify as a large accelerated filer, with at least $700.0 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering, which would be December 31, 2023.
We are also a smaller reporting company meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See the section titled “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.