Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion includes forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on us. There can be no assurance that future developments affecting us will be those that we have anticipated. See the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report. Our actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those set forth in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Overview
Our mission is to advance the benefits of sustainable air mobility. Our goal is to move people throughout the world’s cities in a quick, safe, sustainable, and cost-effective manner. To accomplish this goal, we are designing and developing an eVTOL aircraft for use in future UAM networks.
Our eVTOL aircraft will be fully electric and will emit zero emissions during operations. The goal of our eVTOL aircraft design is to maximize safety while minimizing operating costs and noise. We look to accomplish that goal through the use of a distributed electric propulsion system with inherent redundancy and far fewer parts than a typical internal combustion propulsion system found in similarly sized aircraft or rotorcraft today. The reduced number of parts not only translates into fewer critical parts on the aircraft from a safety perspective, but will also significantly reduce the maintenance requirements versus internal combustion propulsion systems found in similarly sized aircraft and rotorcraft today.
We have optimized our eVTOL aircraft design for both manufacturing and certification by using advancements in key enabling technologies such as high-energy batteries, high-performance electric motors, an advanced fly-by-wire flight control system, and a lightweight and efficient aircraft structure.
The development of an eVTOL aircraft that meets our business requirements demands significant design and development efforts on all facets of the aircraft. We believe that by bringing together a mix of talent with both eVTOL and traditional commercial aerospace backgrounds we are building a team that will allow us to move through the design, development, and certification of our eVTOL aircraft with the FAA in an efficient manner, thus allowing us to achieve our end goal of bringing to market our eVTOL aircraft.
Our Planned Lines of Business
Upon receipt of all necessary FAA certifications and any other government approvals necessary for us to manufacture and operate our aircraft, we intend to operate two complementary lines of business. Our core focus is Archer UAM with our secondary focus being Archer Direct.
Archer UAM
We plan to operate our own UAM ecosystem initially in select major U.S. cities, such as Los Angeles and Miami. Our UAM ecosystem will operate using our eVTOL aircraft, which is currently in development. We project that the cost to manufacture and operate our eVTOL aircraft will be such that it will be able to enter the UAM ride-sharing market at a price point that is competitive with ground-based ride sharing services today. We will continue to evaluate our go-to-market strategy based on, among other things, estimated demand, readiness of the required infrastructure, and the scale of our UAM aircraft fleet.
Archer Direct
We also plan to selectively sell a certain amount of our eVTOL aircraft to third parties. We have entered into a Purchase Agreement with United for the conditional purchase of up to $1 billion worth of aircraft, with an option for another $500.0 million worth of aircraft. We will look to determine the right mix of selling our eVTOL aircraft versus using them as part of our UAM ecosystem based on, among other factors, our capital needs, our volume of manufacturing, our ability to ramp Archer UAM operations, and the purchase demand from our Archer Direct customers.
To date, we have not generated any revenue from either of these planned categories, as we continue to design, develop, and seek the governmental approvals necessary to operate our eVTOL aircraft and Archer UAM. We will use the net proceeds from the Business Combination for the foreseeable future to continue to fund our efforts to bring our eVTOL aircraft to market. The amount and timing of any future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of the design and development of our aircraft and manufacturing operations, as well as our progress in obtaining necessary FAA certifications and other government approvals. For example, any significant delays in obtaining such FAA certifications and other government approvals will likely require us to raise additional capital above our existing cash on hand and delay our generation of revenues.
Business Combination
On the Closing Date, Legacy Archer, Atlas, and Merger Sub, consummated the closing of the Business Combination Agreement, following approval at the Special Meeting. Unless otherwise specified or unless the context otherwise requires, references herein to Legacy Archer refer to Archer prior to the Business Combination and references herein to “New Archer” refer to Archer following the Business Combination.
Pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement, a business combination of Legacy Archer and Atlas was effected by the Merger. Following the consummation of the Merger on the Closing Date, the Surviving Entity changed its name from Archer Aviation Inc. to Archer Aviation Operating Corp., and Atlas changed its name from Atlas Crest Investment Corp. to Archer Aviation Inc. and it became the successor registrant with the SEC. Prior to the closing of the Business Combination, the Class A common stock and public warrants of Atlas were listed on the NYSE under the symbols “ACIC” and “ACIC WS,” respectively. New Archer Class A common stock and public warrants are currently listed on the NYSE under the symbols “ACHR” and “ACHR WS,” respectively.
Additionally, in connection with the PIPE Financing, certain investors had agreed to subscribe for and purchase an aggregate of up to $600.0 million of Class A common stock of the combined company. The PIPE Financing was consummated substantially concurrent with the closing of the Merger.
The Business Combination generated gross cash proceeds of $857.6 million, including $600.0 million proceeds from the PIPE Financing. Total direct and incremental transaction costs aggregated $81.8 million, of which $10.9 million were expensed as part of the Business Combination, $55.8 million were recorded to APIC as equity issuance costs, and the remaining $15.1 million was settled through the issuance of shares of New Archer Class A common stock.
The Merger was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Atlas was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, the financial statements of Archer represent the continuation of the financial statements of Legacy Archer, with the Merger reflected as the equivalent of Archer issuing common stock for the net assets of Atlas, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Atlas were recognized as of the Closing at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Operations prior to the Merger are those of Legacy Archer and Legacy Archer’s operations are the only ongoing operations of Archer.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a global pandemic. The rapid spread of COVID-19 caused volatility and disruption in financial markets and prompted governments and businesses to take unprecedented measures such as travel restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve due to, among other reasons, the emergence of additional variants or strains of COVID-19. As such, the full magnitude of the pandemic’s effect on our financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations is uncertain. Management continues to actively monitor our financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce, but currently does not anticipate any material impairments as a result of COVID-19 and will continue to evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on an ongoing basis. See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for more information.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We are still working to design, develop, certify, and bring up manufacturing of our eVTOL aircraft and thus have not generated any revenues from either of our planned lines of business. We do not expect to begin generating significant revenues until we are able to complete the design, development, certification, and bring up of manufacturing of our eVTOL aircraft.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development activities represent a significant part of our business. Our research and development efforts focus on the design and development of our eVTOL aircraft, including certain of the systems that are used in it. As part of those activities, we continue to work closely with the FAA towards our goal of achieving certification of our eVTOL aircraft on an efficient timeline. Research and development expenses consist of personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation) for employees focused on research and development activities, costs associated with building prototype aircraft, other related costs, depreciation, and an allocation of general overhead. We expect research and development expenses to increase significantly as we progress towards the certification and manufacturing of our eVTOL aircraft.
We cannot determine with certainty the timing, duration or the costs necessary to complete the design, development, certification, and manufacturing bring up of our eVTOL aircraft due to the inherently unpredictable nature of our research and development activities. Development timelines, the probability of success, and development costs may differ materially from expectations.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation) for employees associated with administrative services such as finance, legal, human resources, information technology, other related costs, depreciation, and an allocation of our general overhead. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as a result of operating as a publicly traded company, including expenses to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to publicly traded companies, as well as additional expenses customary for a publicly traded company, such as directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting and legal fees and expenses.
At this time, we are unable to estimate the costs of defending the ongoing Wisk litigation or any potential settlement or award of damages related thereto and thus, we have not established any related reserves. For a description of our material pending legal proceedings, see Note 9 - Commitments and Contingencies of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Other Warrant Expense
Other warrant expense consists entirely of non-cash expense related to the vesting of warrants issued in conjunction with the execution of the Purchase Agreement and Warrant Agreement with United (the “United Warrant Agreement”).
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists of miscellaneous income and expense items, including the change in fair value of our warrant liabilities. Interest expense primarily consists of interest on notes payable net of interest income from money market accounts.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $43.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $25.8 million in personnel-related expenses due to significantly increasing our workforce during 2021. Warrant expense increased $7.0 million due to a manufacturing consulting agreement we entered into in July 2021 with FCA Italy S.p.A. In addition, there was an increase of $6.7 million pertaining to tools and materials to support our increased research and development activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $173.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $118.1 million in stock compensation expense related to the vesting of a certain portion of restricted stock units granted to our founders immediately prior to closing of the Business Combination pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Business Combination Agreement (the “Founder Grants”). Legal fees and expenses and professional service expenses increased $33.4 million due to the Business Combination and company readiness for going public, as well as legal fees and expenses related to the Wisk litigation. Personnel-related expenses increased $14.3 million due to significantly increasing our workforce during 2021. In addition, there was an increase of $5.9 million pertaining primarily to marketing costs related to the Maker unveiling event.
Other Warrant Expense
Other warrant expense increased by $117.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to $78.2 million and $39.1 million of non-cash expense recognized in the first and third quarter of 2021, respectively, related to the vesting of warrants associated with the execution of the Purchase Agreement and United Warrant Agreements, in satisfaction of specific milestones.
Gain on Forgiveness of PPP Loan
In June 2021, we received notification that our Paycheck Protection Program Loan (“PPP Loan”) and accrued interest were forgiven in full, resulting in a $0.9 million gain on extinguishment of the loan and interest for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income
Other income increased by $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a gain of $10.4 million recorded from a change in fair value of our warrant liabilities (see Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies).
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to interest expense recognized for the Silicon Valley Bank term loans, which we entered into in July 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $746.9 million. We have incurred net losses since our inception and to date have not generated any revenues. We expect to incur additional losses and higher operating expenses for the foreseeable future. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient for at least the next 12 months to meet our requirements and plans for cash, including meeting our working capital requirements and capital expenditure requirements.
In the long term, our ability to support our working capital and capital expenditure requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the level of research and development expenses we incur as we continue to develop our eVTOL aircraft;
•capital expenditures needed to bring up our aircraft manufacturing capabilities, including for both the build out of our manufacturing facilities and component purchases necessary to build our aircraft;
•general and administrative expenses as we scale our operations and;
•sales, marketing and distribution expenses as we build, brand and market our eVTOL aircraft and UAM network.
The following includes our short-term and long-term material cash requirements from known contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Note Payable
We have short-term and long-term debt obligations of $10.0 million each. See Note 8 - Notes Payable to the consolidated financial statements for further detail on our debt.
Leases
The Company leases office, lab, hangar, and storage facilities in the normal course of business. Under our operating leases as noted in Note 9 - Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements, we have current obligations of $4.3 million and long-term obligations of $12.0 million, which include our obligations under the new sublease we entered into on January 14, 2022.
Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from our business operations, we expect to finance our cash needs primarily through existing cash on hand.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
We continue to experience negative cash flows from operations as we are still working to design, develop, certify, and bring up manufacturing of our eVTOL aircraft and thus have not generated any revenues from either of our planned lines of business. Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by our cash investments to support the growth of our research and development activities related to our eVTOL aircraft, as well as the general and administrative functions necessary to support those activities and operations as a publicly traded company. Our operating cash flows are also impacted by the working capital requirements to support growth and fluctuations in personnel-related expenditures, accounts payable, accrued interest and other current liabilities, and other current assets.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $108.4 million, resulting from a net loss of $347.8 million, adjusted for non-cash items consisting primarily of $117.3 million in other warrant expense related to the vesting of United warrants and $123.6 million in stock-based compensation primarily related to expense recognized for the Founder Grants. The net cash provided by changes in our net operating assets and liabilities of $0.4 million was primarily related to an increase in accrued professional fees and other miscellaneous expenses offset by an increase in prepaid expenses related to the ramp up in our research and development activities and expenses related to becoming a publicly traded company.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.8 million, resulting from a net loss of $24.8 million, adjusted for non-cash items consisting of primarily $0.3 million in non-cash interest primarily related to our convertible notes. The net cash provided by changes in our net operating assets and liabilities of $1.3 million was primarily related to a $1.6 million increase in accounts payable. The increase is related to parts and materials and outside contractors from the ramp up in our research and development activities.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.5 million, driven by purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.9 million, driven by purchases of property and equipment and domain names.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $822.2 million, consisting primarily of $20.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt, $600.0 million in proceeds from the PIPE Financing, and $201.8 million net proceeds from the Business Combination.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.2 million, consisting primarily of proceeds received from the issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these
estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and our actual results, our future financial statements will be affected.
The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgements, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment or complexity than our other accounting policies. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to a full understanding and evaluation of our consolidated financial statements. For additional information, refer to Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Common Stock Valuation
Prior to the Business Combination, there was no public market for our common stock, and our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock by taking into account input from management and independent third-party valuation analyses. The determinations of the fair value of our common stock were made using methodologies, approaches, and assumptions consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide: Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. In valuing our common stock, we determined the equity value of our business using a combination of the market and income approach valuation methods. The total enterprise value was then allocated to our various share classes using a hybrid approach consisting of the option pricing model (“OPM”) and probability-weighted expected return method (“PWERM”). The OPM considers preferred stockholders’ liquidation preferences, participation rights, dividend policy, and conversion rights to determine how proceeds from a liquidity event shall be distributed among the various ownership classes at a future date, whereas the PWERM estimates the fair market value of the common stock based on an analysis of future values for various potential liquidity outcomes. Since there was no active market for our common stock, we also applied a discount for lack of marketability for both OPM and PWERM scenarios. Application of these approaches and methods involves the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions, such as future revenue, expenses and cash flows, selections of comparable companies, probabilities and timing of exit events, and other factors. The fair value of our common stock, utilizing the above methodology prior to the closing of the Business Combination, was used to determine the fair value of the United warrants, and was a key input in in the estimation of the fair value of our stock options (as discussed below).
Since the closing of the Business Combination in September 2021, the fair value of our common stock is based on the closing price of our Class A common stock, as quoted on the NYSE, on the date of grant.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation awards granted to employees and non-employees by recording compensation expense based on each award’s grant date estimated fair value over the vesting period, in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. We estimate the fair value of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Determining the fair value of stock options under this model requires highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the risk-free interest rate, the expected term of the award, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different. We have not issued any stock options since the closing of the Business Combination.
The fair value of RSUs that vest based on service conditions is determined based on the value of the underlying common stock at the date of grant. The Founder Grants vest when either a market condition or performance condition is satisfied. We determined the fair value of the performance award by utilizing the trading price on the Closing Date. When the applicable performance milestone is deemed probable of being achieved, we will recognize compensation expense for the portion earned to date over the requisite period. For the market condition award, we estimated the fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The Company recognizes compensation expense for the market award on a straight-line basis over the derived service period. Determining the fair value for the market condition award under this model requires subjective assumptions, including the expected volatility of the price of our common stock. If the applicable performance condition is not probable of being achieved, compensation cost for the value of the award incorporating the market condition is recognized, so long as the
requisite service is provided. If the performance milestone becomes probable of being achieved, the full fair value of the award will be recognized, and any remaining expense for the market award will be cancelled.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States. Our income tax provision consists of an estimate of federal and state income taxes based on enacted federal and state tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in tax laws.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more-likely-than-not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different. We make adjustments to these reserves when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of issues under audit or expiration of statute of limitation, changes in or interpretations of tax law. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences may affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
Significant judgment is applied when assessing the need for valuation allowances and includes the evaluation of historical income (loss) adjusted for the effects of non-recurring items. Areas of estimation include consideration of future taxable income. We have placed a full valuation allowance against its federal and state deferred tax assets since the recovery of the assets is uncertain. Should a change in circumstances lead to a change in judgment about the utilization of deferred tax assets in future years, the adjustment related to valuation allowances would be reported as an increase to income.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a discussion about accounting pronouncements recently adopted and recently issued and not yet adopted.
Credit Risk
Financial instruments, which subjects us to concentrations of credit risk, consist primarily of cash, cash equivalents, and deposits. Our cash and cash equivalents are held at major financial institutions located in the United States of America. At times, cash account balances with any one financial institution may exceed Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance limits ($250 thousand per depositor per institution). Management believes the financial institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents are financially sound and, accordingly, minimal credit risk exists with respect to cash and cash equivalents.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. Atlas initially elected, and now we have elected, to take advantage of the extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards and to adopt certain of the reduced disclosure requirements available to emerging growth companies. As a result of the accounting standards election, we are not subject to the same implementation timeline for new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies which may make comparison of our financials to those of other public companies more difficult.
We have also elected to take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act so long as we qualify as an emerging growth company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments.
Additionally, we are a “smaller reporting company” as defined in Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K. Smaller reporting companies may take advantage of certain reduced disclosure obligations, including, among other things, providing only two years of audited financial statements. We will remain a smaller reporting company until the last day of the fiscal year in which (1) the market value of our shares of common stock held by non-affiliates equals or exceeds $250 million as of the end of that year’s second fiscal quarter, and (2) our annual revenues equaled or exceeded $100 million during such completed fiscal year or the market value of our shares of common stock held by non-affiliates equals or exceeds $700 million as of the end of that year’s second fiscal quarter.