Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Background
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on developing therapies that restore function and improve the lives of people with neurological disorders. We market Inbrija (levodopa inhalation powder), which is approved in the U.S. for intermittent treatment of OFF episodes, also known as OFF periods, in people with Parkinson’s disease treated with carbidopa/levodopa. Inbrija is for as needed use and utilizes our ARCUS pulmonary delivery system, a technology platform designed to deliver medication through inhalation that we believe has potential to be used in the development of a variety of inhaled medicines. We also market branded Ampyra (dalfampridine) Extended Release Tablets, 10 mg.
Our Products
Inbrija/Parkinson’s Disease
Inbrija is the first and only inhaled levodopa, or L-dopa, for intermittent treatment of OFF episodes, also known as OFF periods, in people with Parkinson’s disease treated with carbidopa/levodopa regimen. Approximately one million people in the U.S. and 1.2 million Europeans are diagnosed with Parkinson’s; it is estimated that approximately 40% of people with Parkinson’s in the U.S. experience OFF periods. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of Inbrija is for a single dose of 84 mg (administered as two capsules), which may be taken up to five times per day. Currently, Inbrija is available in the U.S. without the need for a medical exception for approximately 96% of commercially insured lives and approximately 27% of Medicare plan lives. U.S. net revenue for Inbrija was $29.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Inbrija is also approved for use in the European Union (EU). The European Commission (EC)-approved Inbrija dose is 66 mg (administered as two capsules) up to five times per day (per EU convention, this reflects emitted dose and is equivalent to the 84 mg labelled dose in the U.S.). Under the EU approval, Inbrija is indicated for the intermittent treatment of episodic motor fluctuations (OFF episodes) in adult patients with Parkinson’s disease treated with a levodopa/dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor. In July and November 2021, we announced that we entered into distribution and supply agreements with Esteve Pharmaceuticals to commercialize Inbrija in Spain and Germany, respectively. Under the terms of the Germany distribution agreement, we received a €5 million (approximately $5.9) upfront payment, and we are entitled to receive additional sales-based milestones. Under the terms of both the Spain and Germany supply agreements, we are entitled to receive a significant double-digit percent of the selling price of Inbrija in exchange for supply of the product. Esteve expects to launch Inbrija in Germany in mid-2022 and in Spain in early 2023. We are in discussions with potential partners for commercialization of Inbrija in other jurisdictions outside of the U.S.
Inbrija utilizes our ARCUS platform for inhaled therapeutics. Because of our limited financial resources, we previously suspended work on ARCUS and other proprietary research and development programs. However, we are discussing potential collaborations with other companies that have expressed interest in formulating their novel molecules for pulmonary delivery using ARCUS, and have already been performing feasibility studies for a number of these opportunities.
Ampyra/MS
Ampyra is an extended-release tablet formulation of dalfampridine approved by the FDA as a treatment to improve walking in patients with multiple sclerosis, or MS. Ampyra became subject to competition from generic versions of Ampyra starting in late 2018 as a result of an adverse U.S. federal district court ruling that invalidated certain Ampyra Orange Book-listed patents. We have experienced a significant decline in Ampyra sales due to competition from several generic versions of Ampyra. Additional manufacturers may market generic versions of Ampyra, and we expect our Ampyra sales will continue to decline over time. U.S. net revenue for Ampyra was $84.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Ampyra is marketed as Fampyra outside the U.S. by Biogen International GmbH, or Biogen, under a license and collaboration agreement that we entered into in June 2009. Fampyra has been approved in a number of countries across Europe, Asia and the Americas. Our Fampyra patents have been challenged in Germany and could be similarly challenged in other countries where Fampyra is marketed by Biogen, and these challenges could lead to generic competition with Fampyra. Refer to Legal Proceedings in Part I, Item 3 of this report for more information.
Sale of Chelsea Manufacturing Operations and Catalent MSA
In February 2021, we completed the sale of our Chelsea, Massachusetts manufacturing operations to Catalent Pharma Solutions. Pursuant to the transaction, Catalent paid us $80 million in cash, resulting in net proceeds to us of approximately $74 million after transaction fees and expenses and settlement of customary post-closing adjustments. In connection with the
sale of the manufacturing operations, we entered into a long-term, global manufacturing services agreement with a Catalent affiliate for the supply of Inbrija. The Catalent manufacturing services agreement provides that Catalent will manufacture Inbrija, to our specifications, and we will purchase Inbrija exclusively from Catalent during the term of the manufacturing services agreement; provided that such exclusivity requirement will not apply to Inbrija intended for sale in China.
Under the manufacturing services agreement, we agreed to purchase from Catalent at least $16 million of Inbrija in 2021 (pro-rated for a partial year) and $18 million of Inbrija each year from 2022 through 2030, subject to reduction in certain cases. In December 2021, we and Catalent amended the manufacturing services agreement to adjust the structure of the minimum payment terms for the period from July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022 (the “Adjustment Period”). Under the amendment, the minimum payment obligation for the Adjustment Period is replaced with payments to Catalent for actual product delivered during the Adjustment Period subject to a cap for the Adjustment Period that corresponds to our original minimum purchase obligation for that period (i.e., $17 million), and with certain payments being made in the first half of 2022 instead of during the second half of 2021. As a result of the amendment, our cash balance at the end of 2021 reflected approximately $5.3 million associated with this modified payment schedule. We have submitted a binding forecast for Inbrija batches for the Adjustment Period, the total cost of which may equal, but not exceed, the original payment obligation under the manufacturing services agreement.
Additionally, pursuant to the amendment, we agreed that we would reimburse a portion of Catalent’s costs in completing the installation and qualification of a larger size 7 spray dryer at the Chelsea manufacturing facility, which we believe will be beneficial to our future production needs, in the amount of $1.5 million. This amount will be paid quarterly over a one-year period commencing no sooner than January 1, 2024.
Convertible Notes
In December 2019, we completed a private exchange of $276 million of our convertible senior notes due in 2021 in exchange for a combination of approximately $207 million aggregate principal amount of newly-issued convertible senior secured notes due 2024 and $55.2 million in cash. As a result of the exchange, approximately $69 million of convertible senior notes due in 2021 remained outstanding, but we repaid these notes at maturity on June 15, 2021 using cash on hand. More information about the terms and conditions of the 2024 convertible notes is set forth in Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report as well as in Financing Arrangements in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of this report.
Financial Management
In January 2021 and September 2021, we announced corporate restructurings to reduce costs, more closely align operating expenses with expected revenue, and focus our resources on Inbrija. The headcount reductions and other budget cuts we implemented, including those resulting from the sale of the Chelsea manufacturing operations described above, are expected to result in a $60 million annualized reduction in operating expenses in 2022 as compared to 2020.
In January 2021, we entered into an At The Market (ATM) Offering Agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC as sales agent. Pursuant to the ATM agreement, we may offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate value of up to $15.25 million in an at-the-market offering, subject to a 3% sales commission payable to H.C. Wainwright.
In September 2021, we sent to BMR-Ardsley Park LLC (“BMR”) notice of exercise of our early termination option (the “Early Termination Option”) under our lease dated as of June 23, 2011, between us and BMR (as amended, the “lease”). The lease is for the Company’s Ardsley, N.Y. corporate headquarters, which we believe is substantially larger than our needs for the foreseeable future. Pursuant to the Early Termination Option, the lease will terminate on June 22, 2022 and we will pay an early termination fee of approximately $4.7 million.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of approximately $65.2 million. Restricted cash includes $18.6 million in escrow related to the 6% semi-annual interest portion of the convertible senior secured notes due 2024, which interest is payable in cash or stock. As further described in Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report as well as in Financing Arrangements in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of this report, if we elect to pay interest due in stock, a corresponding amount of restricted cash equivalent will be released from escrow. In June and December 2021, we issued 1,635,833 and 2,049,048 shares of our common stock, respectively, to the holders of the 2024 notes in satisfaction of approximately $6.2 million in interest due under the notes on each of June 1 and December 1, 2021, and a corresponding
amount of cash (approximately $12.4 million in the aggregate) was thereafter released from the escrow in June and December, 2021.
Reverse Stock Split
On December 31, 2020, we filed an amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation which effected a 1-for-6 reverse stock split of the shares of our outstanding common stock and proportionate reduction in the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 370,000,000 to 61,666,666. Our common stock began trading on a split-adjusted basis on The Nasdaq Global Select Market commencing upon market open on January 4, 2021. The common stock continued to trade under the symbol “ACOR” after the reverse stock split became effective. The reverse stock split applied equally to all outstanding shares of the common stock and did not modify the rights or preferences of the common stock. The reverse stock split also resulted in a corresponding adjustment to outstanding equity awards as well as shares reserved for future issuance under our incentive compensation plans. All figures in this report relating to shares of our common stock (such as share amounts, per share amounts, and conversion rates and prices), including in the financial statements and accompanying notes to the financial statements, have been retroactively restated to reflect the 1-for-6 reverse stock split of our common stock.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Our business and financial condition have been impacted by, and are subject to risks resulting from, the COVID-19 global pandemic. The COVID-19 global pandemic has caused significant disruptions in the healthcare industry. The duration of the pandemic is difficult to predict, and it is likely to have ongoing impacts as it continues. The travel restrictions, “shelter in place” orders, quarantine policies, vaccine mandates, and general concerns about the spread and effects of COVID-19 have disrupted the delivery of healthcare to patients; for example, the pandemic has made it more difficult for some patients to visit with their physician and obtain pharmaceutical prescriptions. Also, healthcare office staffing shortages may delay the administrative work, and particularly insurance-related documentation, needed to obtain reimbursement for prescriptions. We also believe that the governmental and other restrictions and requirements related to the pandemic may have caused certain patients to lessen their mobility and therefore their need for certain therapeutics. We believe these factors contributed to volatility in new Inbrija prescriptions since the start of the pandemic in 2020 and are continuing to impact prescriptions in 2022.
COVID-related policies, restrictions, and concerns may disrupt our operations and those of our customers and suppliers. Also, our operations could be interrupted if we or our customers or suppliers lose the services of key employees or consultants who become ill from COVID-19. These types of disruptions could potentially affect any of our critical business functions, and thus harm our business, including for example our sales and marketing operations, as well as compliance and certain general and administrative functions. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic, or any other health epidemic, is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, healthcare systems, or the global economy as a whole. As the pandemic continues, it may cause continuing economic volatility or result in a sustained economic downturn that could affect demand for our products and our ability to access capital on reasonable terms, or at all. These factors could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition.
Inbrija and ARCUS
Inbrija is the first and only inhaled levodopa, or L-dopa, for intermittent treatment of OFF episodes, also known as OFF periods, in people with Parkinson’s disease treated with carbidopa/levodopa regimen. Our New Drug Application, or NDA, for Inbrija was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, on December 21, 2018. The approval is for a single dose of 84 mg (administered as two capsules), which may be taken up to five times per day. Inbrija became commercially available in the U.S. on February 28, 2019. Currently, Inbrija is available in the U.S. without the need for a medical exception for approximately 96% of commercially insured lives and approximately 25% of Medicare plan lives. U.S. net revenue for Inbrija was $29.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Due to uncertainties caused by past and potential future impacts of the COVID-19 global pandemic and other factors, we are unable to provide projected peak U.S. annual net revenue of Inbrija. Actual peak U.S. Inbrija net revenue will likely be lower and could be materially lower than our prior projected peak sales range if, for example, disruptions to the healthcare system caused by the COVID-19 global pandemic or other prescribing challenges continue in 2022 and beyond.
In September 2019, we announced that the European Commission, or EC, approved our Marketing Authorization Application, or MAA, for Inbrija. The approved dose is 66 mg (administered as two capsules) up to five times per day (per
European Union, or EU, convention, this reflects emitted dose and is equivalent to the 84 mg labelled dose in the U.S.). Under the MAA, Inbrija is indicated in the EU for the intermittent treatment of episodic motor fluctuations (OFF episodes) in adult patients with Parkinson’s disease treated with a levodopa/dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor. The MAA approved Inbrija for use in what were then the 27 countries of the EU, as well as Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein. Following the exit of the UK from the EU, we were granted a grandfathered Marketing Authorization (MA) by the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the UK that was approved in November 2021.
In July and November 2021, we announced that we entered into distribution and supply agreements with Esteve Pharmaceuticals to commercialize Inbrija in Spain and Germany, respectively. Under the terms of the Germany distribution agreement, we received a €5 million (approximately $5.9) upfront payment, and we are entitled to receive additional sales-based milestones. Under the terms of both the Spain and Germany supply agreements, we are entitled to receive a significant double-digit percent of the selling price of Inbrija in exchange for supply of the product. Esteve has the exclusive distribution rights to Inbrija in Spain and Germany and we will supply the product to Esteve for sale. Esteve expects to launch Inbrija in Germany in mid-2022 and Spain in early 2023. We are in discussions with potential partners for commercialization of Inbrija in other jurisdictions outside of the U.S.
We market Inbrija in the U.S. using field-based teams supported by our corporate marketing personnel. Our own neuro-specialty sales representatives work in combination with sales representatives provided by a contract commercial organization, and collectively they are currently focused on a priority list of physicians who are high volume prescribers of carbidopa/levodopa and other products indicated to treat OFF episodes. Our field-based teams also include reimbursement and market access specialists, who provide information to physicians and payers on our marketed products, as well as market development specialists who work collaboratively with field-sales teams and corporate personnel to assist in the execution of our strategic initiatives. Our Inbrija field-based and marketing activities are focused on physician awareness and market access as well as patient awareness, education and training. Inbrija is distributed in the U.S. primarily through: Alliancerx Walgreens Prime, or Walgreens, a specialty pharmacy that delivers the medication to patients by mail; and ASD Specialty healthcare, Inc. (an AmeriSource Bergen affiliate). We recently initiated a pilot program to evaluate distribution of Inbrija through a specialty pharmacy that supports electronic prescriptions, and we intend to expand this into a national program in 2022. We believe the convenience of electronic prescribing may be preferred by some physicians and patients.
We have established Prescription Support Services for Inbrija, sometimes referred to as the Inbrija hub, which helps patients navigate their insurance coverage and identify potential financial support alternatives, when appropriate. The Inbrija hub also includes a virtual nurse educator program to assist patients with proper usage of the Inbrija inhaler. Insurance coverage services fall into one of these categories: insurance verification, to research patient insurance benefits and confirm insurance coverage; prior authorization support, to identify prior authorization requirements; and appeals support. For patients that may need assistance paying for their medication, Prescription Support Services offers several support options, including: a program that provides no cost medication to patients who meet specific program eligibility requirements; co-pay support, which may help commercially insured (non-government funded) patients lower their out-of-pocket costs; and a bridge program for federally insured patients who experience a delay in coverage determination. We have a no-cost sample program, available at physician offices, to enable patients and their physicians to assess the value of Inbrija before the patient incurs out-of-pocket co-pay or co-insurance costs. In addition, we have a first dispense zero-dollar copay program for commercially insured patients (which replaced our previous free trial program) to enable those patients to assess the value of Inbrija before incurring out-of-pocket co-pay or co-insurance costs.
Parkinson’s disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder resulting from the gradual loss of certain neurons in the brain. These neurons are responsible for producing dopamine and that loss causes a range of symptoms including impaired movement, muscle stiffness and tremors. The standard baseline treatment of Parkinson’s disease is oral carbidopa/levodopa, but oral medication can be associated with wide variability in the timing and amount of absorption and there are significant challenges in creating a regimen that consistently maintains therapeutic effects. As Parkinson’s progresses, people are likely to experience OFF periods, which are characterized by the return of Parkinson’s symptoms that result from low levels of dopamine between doses of oral carbidopa/levodopa. OFF periods are often highly disruptive to people with Parkinson’s. Approximately one million people in the U.S. and 1.2 million Europeans are diagnosed with Parkinson’s; it is estimated that approximately 40% of people with Parkinson’s in the U.S. experience OFF periods.
Inbrija utilizes our ARCUS platform for inhaled therapeutics. ARCUS is a dry-powder pulmonary drug delivery technology that we believe has potential to be used in the development of a variety of inhaled medicines. The ARCUS platform allows systemic delivery of medication through inhalation, by transforming molecules into a light, porous dry powder. This allows delivery of substantially higher doses of medication than can be delivered via conventional dry powder technologies. We acquired the ARCUS technology platform as part of our 2014 acquisition of Civitas Therapeutics. We have
worldwide rights to our ARCUS drug delivery technology, which is protected by extensive know-how and trade secrets and various U.S. and foreign patents, including patents that protect the Inbrija dry powder capsules beyond 2030. We have several patents listed in the Orange Book for Inbrija, including patents expiring between 2022 and 2032, and Inbrija is entitled to three years of new product exclusivity, through December 2021, as posted in the Orange book. We have patents in Europe for Inbrija expiring between 2022 and 2033. One of our European patents, EP 3090773B, had been opposed by an unnamed party but in 2021 was maintained as granted by the European Opposition Board. Inbrija also has ten years of market exclusivity in Europe that is set to expire in September 2029.
We believe there are potential opportunities for using ARCUS with central nervous system, or CNS, as well as non-CNS, disorders. Due to several corporate restructurings since 2017 and associated cost-cutting measures, including the corporate restructurings we announced in January and September 2021, we suspended work on ARCUS and other proprietary research and development programs. However, we are discussing potential collaborations with other companies that have expressed interest in formulating their novel molecules for pulmonary delivery using ARCUS, and have already been performing feasibility studies for a number of these opportunities.
Should we decide to proceed with any ARCUS development programs, we would be reliant on Catalent or another third-party supplier for the manufacture of product for that program. Our global supply agreement with Catalent does not provide for the terms and conditions under which Catalent would supply any product or product candidate other than Inbrija. We would be unable to advance the development of any ARCUS inhaled therapeutic candidate unless Catalent is willing to manufacture the candidate for us on commercially reasonable terms, or we could identify another third-party manufacturer that would be capable and willing to manufacture the candidate for us on commercially reasonable terms. Also, due to reductions in force, employee attrition and the 2021 sale of our Chelsea manufacturing operations, we may need to hire replacement personnel or engage consultants to continue with ARCUS research and development work beyond feasibility and similar early-stage studies.
Ampyra
Ampyra was approved by the FDA in January 2010 to improve walking in adults with multiple sclerosis. To our knowledge, Ampyra is the first drug approved for this indication. Efficacy was shown in people with all four major types of MS (relapsing remitting, secondary progressive, progressive relapsing and primary progressive). Ampyra became subject to competition from generic versions of Ampyra starting in late 2018 as a result of an adverse U.S. federal district court ruling that invalidated certain Ampyra Orange Book-listed patents. We have experienced a significant decline in Ampyra sales due to competition from several generic versions of Ampyra. Additional manufacturers may market generic versions of Ampyra, and we expect our Ampyra sales will continue to decline over time. U.S. net revenue for Ampyra was $84.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
License and Collaboration Agreement with Biogen
Ampyra is marketed as Fampyra outside the U.S. by Biogen International GmbH, or Biogen, under a license and collaboration agreement that we entered into in June 2009. Fampyra has been approved in a number of countries across Europe, Asia and the Americas. In May 2021, Biogen announced that Fampyra was approved by the National Medical Products Administration in China, and Biogen is evaluating commercial launch options in that country. Our Fampyra patents have been challenged in Germany and could be similarly challenged in other countries where Fampyra is marketed by Biogen, and these challenges could lead to generic competition with Fampyra.
Under our agreement with Biogen, we are entitled to receive double-digit tiered royalties on net sales of Fampyra and we are also entitled to receive additional payments based on achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones, although we do not anticipate achievement of any of those milestones in the foreseeable future. In November 2017, we announced a $40 million Fampyra royalty monetization transaction with HealthCare Royalty Partners, or HCRP. In return for the payment to us, HCRP obtained the right to receive these Fampyra royalties up to an agreed-upon threshold. Until this threshold is met, which we believe may occur in mid-2022, we will not receive Fampyra royalties although we retained the right to receive any potential future milestone payments. The HCRP transaction is accounted for as a liability, as described in Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report.
Ampyra Patent Update
There are no patents listed in the Orange Book for Ampyra. Ampyra became subject to competition from generic versions of Ampyra starting in late 2018 as a result of an adverse U.S. federal district court ruling that invalidated certain Ampyra Orange Book-listed patents.
There are two European patents, EP 1732548 and EP 2377536, with claims directed to use of a sustained release dalfampridine composition (known under the trade name Fampyra in the European Union) to increase walking speed in a patient with multiple sclerosis. Both European patents are set to expire in 2025, absent any additional exclusivity granted based on regulatory review timelines. Fampyra had ten years of market exclusivity in the European Union that expired in 2021. Accordingly, even though the European patents were upheld by the Technical Board of Appeal of the European Patent Office, Fampyra could potentially face competition from generic drug manufacturers that may seek to challenge Fampyra’s European patents within individual European countries.
Nullity actions with respect to Fampyra have been filed in Germany against both of the German national patents derived from EP 1732548 (the ‘548 patent) and EP 2377536 (the ‘536 patent) by ratiopharm GmbH, a generic manufacturer affiliated with Teva. In November 2021, a German court issued preliminary opinions in the ratiopharm case indicating that the claimed subject matter of the ‘548 patent lacked inventive step and the claimed subject matter of the ‘536 patent lacked novelty and inventive step. At an oral hearing in February 2022, the German patent court dismissed ratiopharm’s action against the ‘536 patent as inadmissible because of ongoing formality proceedings relating to the ‘536 patent in the European Patent Office. Ratiopharm could appeal this decision or refile the nullity action when the formalities are completed at the European Patent Office. An oral hearing is currently scheduled for April 26, 2022, for the ‘548 patent. On January 11, 2022, STADA Arzneimittel also filed a nullity action against the ‘536 patent in the same court. We are working with Biogen to vigorously defend these actions and enforce our patent rights. Refer to Legal Proceedings in Part I, Item 3 of this report for more information.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenues
Net Product Revenues
Inbrija
We recognize product sales of Inbrija following receipt of product by companies in our distribution network, which for Inbrija primarily includes specialty pharmacies, which deliver the medication to patients by mail, and ASD Specialty Healthcare, Inc. (an AmeriSource Bergen affiliate). We recognized net revenues from the sale of Inbrija of $29.6 million and $24.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in Inbrija net revenues was due to an increase in net volume of $3.3 million and price increase and discount and allowance adjustments of $2.1 million.
Discounts and allowances which are included as an offset in net revenues consist of allowances for customer credits, including estimated chargebacks, rebates, returns and discounts. Discounts and allowances are recorded following shipment of our products to our customers. Adjustments are recorded for estimated chargebacks, rebates, and discounts. Discounts and allowances also consist of discounts provided to Medicare beneficiaries whose prescription drug costs cause them to be subject to the Medicare Part D coverage gap (i.e., the “donut hole”). Payment of coverage gap discounts is required under the Affordable Care Act, the health care reform legislation enacted in 2010. Discounts and allowances may increase as a percentage of sales as we enter into new managed care contracts in the future.
We believe that first and fourth quarter revenues for our products is subject to certain recurring seasonal factors relating to the commencement of a new calendar year. For example, some patients refill their prescriptions earlier ahead of the new year, in the fourth quarter, in anticipation of the year-end reset of health plan deductibles and the Medicare donut hole, or a year-end switch of their insurance plans or pharmacy benefit providers. Also, we believe that AllianceRx Walgreens Prime (Walgreens), our primary specialty pharmacy used for Inbrija distribution, may increase their Inbrija
inventory, within contractual limits, in anticipation of the holidays and new year. We believe these factors have had a positive impact on fourth quarter revenues and a negative impact on first quarter revenues in the past two years. Also, discounts and allowances typically are highest in the first quarter, and lowest in the fourth quarter, and when this occurs fourth quarter revenues increase, and first quarter revenues decrease, on a relative basis. Also, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we believe our transition from a network of several specialty pharmacies to Walgreens as the sole specialty pharmacy (at that time) for U.S. sales of Inbrija was another factor that positively impacted Inbrija revenues on a one-time basis, as Walgreens initiated stocking for newly-transferred patients during the quarter.
Ampyra
We recognize product sales of Ampyra following receipt of product by companies in our distribution network, which for Ampyra primarily includes specialty pharmacies, which deliver the medication to patients by mail. We recognized net revenues from the sale of Ampyra to these customers of $84.6 million and $98.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These amounts are inclusive of Mylan AG revenue of $0.4 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in Ampyra net revenues was composed of a decrease in net volume of $21.8 million partially offset by price increase and discount and allowance adjustments of $7.8 million. Net revenues from sales of Ampyra decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the entry of generic versions of Ampyra as a result of the invalidation of our Ampyra patents in 2017, and we expect our Ampyra sales to continue to decline over time.
Discounts and allowances which are included as an offset in net revenues consist of allowances for customer credits, including estimated chargebacks, rebates, returns and discounts. Discounts and allowances are recorded following shipment of our products to our customers. Adjustments are recorded for estimated chargebacks, rebates, and discounts. Discounts and allowances also consist of discounts provided to Medicare beneficiaries whose prescription drug costs cause them to be subject to the Medicare Part D coverage gap (i.e., the “donut hole”). Payment of coverage gap discounts is required under the Affordable Care Act. Discounts and allowances may increase as a percentage of sales as we enter into new managed care contracts in the future.
We believe that first and fourth quarter revenues for our products is subject to certain recurring seasonal factors relating to the commencement of a new calendar year. For example, some patients refill their prescriptions earlier ahead of the new year, in the fourth quarter, in anticipation of the year-end reset of health plan deductibles and the Medicare donut hole, or a year-end switch of their insurance plans or pharmacy benefit providers. Also, we believe specialty pharmacies may increase their inventory in anticipation of the holidays and new year. These factors have had a positive impact on fourth quarter revenues and a negative impact on first quarter revenues. Also, discounts and allowances typically are highest in the first quarter, and lowest in the fourth quarter, and when this occurs fourth quarter revenues increase, and first quarter revenues decrease, on a relative basis.
Other Product Revenues
We recognized $0 in revenues from the sale of other products for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Milestone Revenues
We recognized $0 and $15 million in milestone revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease is due to the $15 million milestone payment from Biogen earned in 2020 based on ex-U.S. Fampyra net sales exceeding $100 million over a period of four consecutive quarters ending with the third quarter of 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2021, Biogen has not exceeded net sales of $250 million over a period of four consecutive quarters to achieve the next milestone payment of $15 million.
Royalty Revenues
We recognized $14.9 million in royalty revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, related to ex-U.S. sales of Fampyra by Biogen.
Cost of Sales
We recorded cost of sales of $40.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $33.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $7.3 million was primarily due to $6.2 million in minimum purchase commitments with Catalent in the current period, and a reversal in the year ended December 31, 2020 of inventory obsolescence provision, partially offset by lower cost of sales due to overall lower volume in the current period.
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of $32.5 million in inventory costs related to recognized revenues, $6.2 million in minimum purchase commitments with Catalent, $1.1 million in royalty fees based on net product shipments, idle capacity costs of $0.1 million, and $0.9 million in period costs related to freight, stability testing, packaging and other. Production costs related to idle capacity are not included in the cost of inventory but are charged directly to cost of sales in the period incurred.
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $14.7 million in inventory costs related to recognized revenues net of a reversal of inventory obsolescence provision, $4.1 million in royalty fees based on net product shipments, idle capacity costs of $6.3 million, $8.2 million in period costs related to expired inventory, freight, stability testing, and packaging and $0.2 million for costs related to sales of the authorized generic version of Ampyra. Production costs related to idle capacity are not included in the cost of inventory but are charged directly to cost of sales in the period incurred.
Amortization of Intangibles
We commenced amortization of the intangible asset upon launch in February 2019 and recorded amortization of $30.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $10.4 million as compared to $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $12.6 million, or 55%. The decrease was primarily due to reductions in spending of $6.0 million due to the commercialization of Inbrija, reductions of $6.6 million due to restructuring and a decrease in several programs to shift focus on the Inbrija launch.
Selling, General and Administrative
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $57.2 million compared to $81.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $24.0 million, or 30%. The decrease was attributable primarily to a decrease in marketing related spending of $13.3 million due to launch activities for Inbrija, a decrease in overall salaries and benefits of $11.5 million and a decrease in spending related to marketing for Ampyra of $1.6 million, partially offset by a reclassification of departmental costs from general and administrative expenses of $2.4 million due to a change in the overhead expense allocation method.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $67.2 million compared to $71.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $4.1 million, or 6%. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in overall salaries and benefit costs of $9.0 million and a decrease in Civitas spending of $8.1 million due to the sale of the Chelsea facility manufacturing operations, partially offset by an increase in professional fees of $5.8 million, an increase in restructuring costs of $5.4 million, and an increase of $1.9 million in other departmental spending.
Intangible Asset Impairments
We recognized an intangible asset impairment charge of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company determined that there were relevant changes to the key assumptions that would negatively affect the value of the IPR&D asset for BTT-1023. Management determined that the results of the clinical trial did not meet the primary or secondary end-points, and the clinical trial was not large enough or expansive enough to be persuasive to generate interest by third parties for a possible licensing arrangement. Management determined that this assessment was the triggering event that indicated that the asset was fully impaired as there was no potential value with an out-licensing arrangement. Based on the qualitative assessment, management determined that the carrying value of the asset
exceeded its estimated fair value and therefore, the asset was fully impaired. Management determined that additional quantitative procedures were not relevant in this circumstance given the overwhelming qualitative evidence that indicated the asset was fully impaired.
Loss on Assets Held for Sale
As a result of the sale of the Chelsea manufacturing operations to Catalent, the Company determined that the criteria to classify the Chelsea manufacturing operations as assets held for sale within the Company’s consolidated balance sheet effective December 31, 2020 were met. Accordingly, the assets were classified as current assets held for sale at December 31, 2020 as the Company, at that time, expected to divest the Chelsea manufacturing operations within the next twelve months. The Company entered into a definitive agreement to sell the Chelsea manufacturing operations on January 12, 2021 and closed the transaction on February 10, 2021. The classification to assets held for sale impacted the net book value of the assets expected to be transferred upon sale. The estimated fair value of the Chelsea manufacturing operations was determined using the purchase price in the purchase agreement along with estimated broker, accounting, legal, and other selling expenses, which resulted in a fair value less costs to sell of approximately $71.8 million. The carrying value of the assets being classified as held for sale was approximately $129.7 million, which includes property and equipment of $129.6 million and prepaid expenses of $0.1 million. As a result, the Company recorded a loss on assets held for sale of $57.9 million against the Chelsea manufacturing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
A derivative liability was recorded in December 2019 as a result of the issuance of the 6.00% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2024. The derivative liability is measured at fair value on a quarterly basis and changes in the fair value are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations. We recorded income of $1.2 million due to the change in the fair value of the derivative liability for the year ended December 31, 2021. The changes in the fair value of the derivative liability were primarily due to changes in the Company’s stock price over the period.
Changes in Fair Value of Acquired Contingent Consideration
As a result of the original spin out of Civitas from Alkermes, part of the consideration to Alkermes was a future royalty to be paid to Alkermes on Inbrija. Acorda acquired this contingent consideration as part of the Civitas acquisition. The fair value of that future royalty is assessed quarterly. We recorded expense relating to changes in the fair value of our acquired contingent consideration of $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to income of $30.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a change of $33.8 million. The changes in the fair-value of the acquired contingent consideration were primarily due to the change in projected revenue and the recalculation of cash flows for the passage of time, as well as a decrease in the discount rate.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net was $30.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to other expense, net of $29.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in expense of $0.4 million, or 2%. The increase was due primarily to a decrease in interest income of approximately $0.8 million, and a decrease in other income $0.2 million, partially offset by a decrease in interest and amortization of debt discount expense of approximately $0.6 million.
Benefit from Income Taxes
We recorded a $5.1 million benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a $8.1 million benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective income tax rates for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 4.7% and 7.5%, respectively.
The variances in the effective tax rates for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were due primarily to the valuation allowance recorded on deferred tax assets for which no tax benefit can be recognized, and the benefit recorded on the net operating loss carryback under the CARES act recorded at 21% to recover taxes paid at the previous statutory rate of 35%.
The Company’s overall effective tax rate in 2021 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the forfeitures of equity of which no tax deduction is recorded and the valuation allowance recorded on deferred tax assets for which no tax benefit can be recognized.
The Company continues to evaluate the realizability of its deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis and will adjust such amounts in light of changing facts and circumstances including, but not limited to, future projections of taxable income, tax legislation, rulings by relevant tax authorities, the progress of ongoing tax audits and the regulatory approval of products currently under development. Any changes to the valuation allowance or deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future would impact the Company's income taxes.
The Company was notified during the first quarter of 2021 that it is being audited by the state of Minnesota and Massachusetts for the tax years 2018 and 2019. There have been no proposed adjustments at this stage of the examination.
The Company also has an ongoing state examination in New Jersey which for the tax periods, 2015 through 2018. There have been no proposed adjustments at this stage of the examination. The Minnesota examinations for 2016 and 2017 were closed during 2021 with no changes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily from: private placements and public offerings of our capital stock; borrowing money through loans and the issuance of debt instruments; payments received under our collaboration and licensing agreements; revenue from sales of Ampyra, Fampyra, and Inbrija, as well as our former products, Zanaflex and Qutenza; royalty monetizations and our revenue interest financing arrangement; and, to a lesser extent, funding from government grants. Also, in February 2021, we obtained additional capital from the sale of our Chelsea manufacturing operations.
At December 31, 2021, we had $45.6 million of cash and cash equivalents, compared to $71.4 million at December 31, 2020. Our December 31, 2021 cash and cash equivalents balance includes approximately $5.3 million associated with a December 2021 amendment to our Catalent manufacturing services agreement that modified our payment schedule. Our December 31, 2021 cash and cash equivalents balance does not include $18.6 million of restricted cash that is currently held in escrow under the terms of our convertible senior secured notes due 2024, further described below under Financing Arrangements, which may potentially be released from escrow if we pay interest on those notes using shares of our common stock. We incurred net losses of $104.0 million and $99.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our future capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including:
•
the amount of revenue generated from sales of Inbrija and Ampyra;
•
our ability to manage operating expenses;
•
the amount and timing of purchase price, milestone or other payments that we may owe or have a right to receive under collaboration, license, asset sale, acquisition, or other agreements or transactions; and the extent to which the terms and conditions of our convertible senior secured notes due 2024 restrict or direct our use of proceeds from such transactions;
•
to the extent which we make required interest payments relating to our 2024 Notes, as defined below under Financing Arrangements, using shares of our common stock rather than cash;
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
•
capital required or used for future acquisitions, to in-license new products, programs or compounds, or for research and development relating to existing or future acquired or in-licensed programs or compounds.
Our ability to meet our future operating requirements, repay our liabilities, and meet our other obligations are dependent upon a number of factors, including our ability to generate cash from product sales, reduce planned expenditures, and obtain additional financing. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow from the sale of our products, we may be required to adopt one or more alternatives, subject to the restrictions contained in the indenture governing our 2024 Notes, such as further reducing expenses, selling assets, restructuring debt, or obtaining additional equity capital on terms that may
be onerous and which are likely to be highly dilutive. Also, our ability to raise additional capital and repay or restructure our indebtedness will depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time, among other factors. In addition, financing may not be available when needed, on terms acceptable to us or in compliance with the restrictions described above.
Financing Arrangements
Convertible Senior Secured Notes Due 2024
On December 24, 2019, we completed the private exchange of $276.0 million aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 1.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) for a combination of newly-issued 6.00% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”) and cash. For each $1,000 principal amount of exchanged 2021 Notes, we issued $750 principal amount of the 2024 Notes and made a cash payment of $200 (the “Exchange”). In the aggregate, the Company issued approximately $207.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes and paid approximate $55.2 million in cash to participating holders. The Exchange was conducted with a limited number of institutional holders of the 2021 Notes pursuant to Exchange Agreements dated as of December 20, 2019. The 2021 Notes received by us in the Exchange were cancelled in accordance with their terms. Accordingly, upon completion of the Exchange, $69.0 million of the 2021 Notes remained outstanding. On June 15, 2021, the Company repaid the outstanding balance of the 2021 Notes at their maturity date using cash on hand.
The 2024 Notes were issued pursuant to an Indenture, dated as of December 23, 2019, among us, our wholly owned subsidiary, Civitas Therapeutics, Inc. (along with any domestic subsidiaries acquired or formed after the date of issuance, the “Guarantors”), and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee and collateral agent (the “2024 Indenture”). The 2024 Notes are senior obligations of us and the Guarantors, secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the assets of us and the Guarantors, subject to certain exceptions described in the Security Agreement, dated as of December 23, 2019, between the grantors party thereto and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as collateral agent.
The 2024 Notes will mature on December 1, 2024 unless earlier converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Interest on the 2024 Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears at a rate of 6.00% per annum on each June 1 and December 1, beginning on June 1, 2020. We may elect to pay interest in cash or shares of our common stock, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions. If we elect to pay interest in shares of common stock, such common stock will have a per share value equal to 95% of the daily volume-weighted average price for the 10 trading days ending on and including the trading day immediately preceding the relevant interest payment date. In June 2021, we issued 1,635,833 shares of our common stock, and in December 2021, we issued 2,049,048 shares of common stock, in satisfaction of the interest payable to holders of the 2024 Notes on June 1, 2021 and December 1, 2021, respectively. In connection with these stock-based interest payments, in each of June and December 2021, approximately $6.2 million (approximately $12.4 million in the aggregate) was released from restricted cash and became available to us for other purposes.
The 2024 Notes are convertible at the option of the holder into shares of our common stock at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date. The adjusted conversion rate for the 2024 Notes is 47.6190 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2024 Notes, representing an adjusted conversion price of approximately $21.00 per share of common stock. The conversion rate was adjusted to reflect the 1-for-6 reverse stock split effected on December 31, 2020 and is subject to additional adjustments in certain circumstances as described in the 2024 Indenture.
We may elect to settle conversions of the 2024 Notes in cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock. Holders who convert their 2024 Notes prior to June 1, 2023 (other than in connection with a make-whole fundamental change) will also be entitled to an interest make-whole payment equal to the sum of all regularly scheduled stated interest payments, if any, due on such 2024 Notes on each interest payment date occurring after the conversion date for such conversion and on or before June 1, 2023. In addition, we will have the right to cause all 2024 Notes then outstanding to be converted automatically if the volume-weighted average price per share of our common stock equals or exceeds 130% of the adjusted conversion price for a specified period of time and certain other conditions are satisfied.
Holders of the 2024 Notes will have the right, at their option, to require us to purchase their 2024 Notes if a fundamental change (as defined in the 2024 Indenture) occurs, in each case, at a repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2024 Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the applicable repurchase date. If a make-whole fundamental change occurs, as described in the 2024 Indenture, and a holder
elects to convert its 2024 Notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change, such holder may be entitled to an increase in the adjusted conversion rate as described in the 2024 Indenture.
Subject to a number of exceptions and qualifications, the 2024 Indenture restricts the ability of the Company and certain of its subsidiaries to, among other things, (i) pay dividends or make other payments or distributions on their capital stock, or purchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value any capital stock, (ii) make certain investments, (iii) incur indebtedness or issue preferred stock, other than certain forms of permitted debt, which includes, among other items, indebtedness incurred to refinance the 2021 Notes, (iv) create liens on their assets, (v) sell their assets, (vi) enter into certain transactions with affiliates or (vii) merge, consolidate or sell of all or substantially all of their assets. The 2024 Indenture also requires us to make an offer to repurchase the 2024 Notes upon the occurrence of certain asset sales.
The 2024 Indenture provides that a number of events will constitute an event of default, including, among other things, (i) a failure to pay interest for 30 days, (ii) failure to pay the 2024 Notes when due at maturity, upon any required repurchase, upon declaration of acceleration or otherwise, (iii) failure to convert the 2024 Notes in accordance with the 2024 Indenture and the failure continues for five business days, (iv) not issuing certain notices required by the 2024 Indenture within a timely manner, (v) failure to comply with the other covenants or agreements in the 2024 Indenture for 60 days following the receipt of a notice of non-compliance, (vi) a default or other failure by us to make required payments under other indebtedness of us or certain subsidiaries having an outstanding principal amount of $30.0 million or more, (vii) failure by us or certain subsidiaries to pay final judgments aggregating in excess of $30.0 million, (viii) certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency and (ix) the commercial launch in the United States of a product determined by the U.S. FDA to be bioequivalent to Inbrija. In the case of an event of default arising from certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency with respect to the Company, all outstanding 2024 Notes will become due and payable immediately without further action or notice. If any other event of default occurs and is continuing, the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding 2024 Notes may declare all the notes to be due and payable immediately.
We assessed all terms and features of the 2024 Notes in order to identify any potential embedded features that would require bifurcation. As part of this analysis, we assessed the economic characteristics and risks of the 2024 Notes, including the conversion, put and call features. We concluded the conversion features required bifurcation as a derivative. The fair value of the conversion features derivative was determined based on the difference between the fair value of the 2024 Notes with the conversion options and the fair value of the 2024 Notes without the conversion options using a binomial model. We determined that the fair value of the derivative upon issuance of the 2024 Notes was $59.4 million and recorded this amount as a derivative liability with an offsetting amount as a debt discount as a reduction to the carrying value of the 2024 Notes on the closing date, or December 24, 2019. There are several embedded features within the 2024 Notes which, upon issuance, did not meet the conditions for equity classification. As a result, these features were aggregated together and recorded as the derivative liability conversion option. The conversion feature is measured at fair value on a quarterly basis and the changes in the fair value of the conversion feature for the period will be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
We received stockholder approval on August 28, 2020 to increase the number of authorized shares of the Company’s common stock from 13,333,333 shares to 61,666,666 shares. As a result of the share approval, we determined that multiple embedded conversion options met the conditions for equity classification. We performed a valuation of these conversion options as of September 17, 2020, which was the date we completed certain securities registration obligations for the shares underlying the 2024 Notes. The resulting fair value of these conversion options was $18.3 million, which was reclassified to equity and presented in the statement of stockholder’s equity as of September 30, 2020, net of the $4.4 million tax impact. The equity component is not re-measured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. We performed a valuation of the derivative liability related to certain embedded conversion features that are precluded from equity classification. The fair value of these conversion features was calculated to be negligible as of December 31, 2021.
The outstanding 2024 Note balances as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 consisted of the following:
Convertible Senior Notes Due 2021
In June 2014, we issued $345 million aggregate principal amount of 1.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”). On December 24, 2019, we completed the private exchange of $276.0 million aggregate principal amount of then-outstanding 2021 Notes for a combination of newly-issued 6.00% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2024 and cash. Accordingly, upon completion of the exchange, $69.0 million of the 2021 Notes remained outstanding. On June 15, 2021, we repaid the outstanding balance of the 2021 Notes at their maturity date using cash on hand.
Non-Convertible Capital Loans
Our Biotie subsidiary received fourteen non-convertible capital loans granted by Business Finland (formerly Tekes) for research and development of specific drug candidates, with an aggregate adjusted acquisition-date fair value of $20.5 million (€18.2 million) and an aggregate carrying value of $27.6 million as of December 31, 2021. The loans bear interest based on the greater of 3% or the base rate set by Finland’s Ministry of Finance minus one percentage point. The maturity dates for these loans range from eight to ten years from the date of issuance. However, the loans are to be repaid only when the consolidated retained earnings of Biotie from the development of the specific product candidates that are the subject of the loans is sufficient to fully repay the loans. As of December 31, 2021, Biotie had approximately $14.8 million in cash, which is not available for use in domestic operations without repatriation.
Research and Development Loans
In addition to the non-convertible capital loans described above, Research and Development Loans (“R&D Loans”) were granted to Biotie by Business Finland with an acquisition-date fair value of $2.9 million (€2.6 million) and a carrying value of $0 as of December 31, 2021. These loans were repaid in equal annual installments from January 2017 through January 2021.
Fampyra Royalty Monetization
As of October 1, 2017, we completed a royalty purchase agreement with HealthCare Royalty Partners, or HCRP (“Royalty Agreement”). In exchange for the payment of $40 million to us, HCRP obtained the right to receive Fampyra royalties payable by Biogen under the Collaboration and Licensing Agreement between us and Biogen, up to an agreed upon threshold of royalties. When this threshold is met, which we believe may occur in mid-2022, the Fampyra royalty revenue will revert back to us and we will continue to receive the Fampyra royalty revenue from Biogen until the revenue stream ends.
We maintained the rights under the license and collaboration agreement with Biogen, therefore, the Royalty Agreement has been accounted for as a liability that will be amortized using the effective interest method over the life of the arrangement, in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance. We recorded the receipt of the $40 million payment from HCRP and established a corresponding liability in the amount of $40 million, net of transaction costs of approximately $2.2 million.
The following table shows the activity within the liability account for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investment Activities
At December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents were approximately $45.6 million, as compared to $71.4 million at December 31, 2020. Our December 31, 2021 cash and cash equivalents balance includes approximately $5.3 million associated with a December 2021 amendment to our Catalent manufacturing services agreement that modified our payment schedule. Our cash and cash equivalents consist of highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less
at date of purchase and consist of investments in a Treasury money market fund. Our short-term investments consist of high-grade corporate debt securities, commercial paper and U.S. government securities with original maturities of twelve months or less at date of purchase. Also, we maintain cash balances with financial institutions in excess of insured limits. We do not anticipate any losses with respect to such cash balances. Our December 31, 2021 cash and cash equivalents balance does not include $18.6 million of restricted cash that is currently held in escrow under the terms of our convertible senior secured notes due 2024, further described above under Financing Arrangements, which may potentially be released from escrow if we pay interest on those notes using shares of our common stock.
Net Cash Used in Operations
Net cash used in operations was $41.3 million compared to $61.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the net loss of $104.0 million, a change in the derivative liability of $1.2 million, non-cash royalty revenues of $12.1 million, and a deferred tax benefit of $5.2 million.
Cash used in operations was partially offset by share-based compensation expense of $3.0 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $34.0 million, amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs of $16.3 million, a decrease in accounts receivable of $3.2 million, an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1.1 million, a change in the contingent consideration obligation of $2.9 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $8.4 million, a decrease in inventory of $7.9 million, and an increase in other non-current liabilities of $4.4 million.
Net Cash Provided by Investing
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $73.8 million, which was due primarily to net proceeds from the sale of the Chelsea facility of $74.0 million, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment of $0.2 million and negligible purchases of intangible assets.
Net Cash Used in Financing
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $69.7 million, which was due primarily to the repayment of Convertible Senior Notes due in June 2021 of $69.0 million and the repayment of loans payable of $0.7 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our long-term contractual obligations include commitments and estimated purchase obligations entered into in the normal course of business. Refer to Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a description of our long-term contractual obligations.
Under certain agreements, we are required to pay royalties for the use of technologies and products in our research and development activities and in the commercialization of products. The amount and timing of any of the foregoing payments are not known due to the uncertainty surrounding the successful research, development and commercialization of the products.
Under certain agreements, we are also required to pay license fees and milestones for the use of technologies and products in our research and development activities and in the commercialization of products. We have committed to make potential future milestone payments to third parties of up to approximately $18.5 million as part of our various agreements, including licensing and development programs. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon achievement of certain developmental, regulatory or commercial milestones. Because the achievement of these milestones had not occurred as of December 31, 2021, such contingencies have not been recorded in our financial statements. Amounts related to contingent milestone payments are not considered contractual obligations as they are contingent on the successful achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercial milestones. There is uncertainty regarding the various activities and outcomes needed to reach these milestones, and they may not be achieved.
Effects of Inflation
Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents. Because of their liquidity, these assets are not directly affected by inflation. Because we intend to retain and continue to use our equipment, furniture and fixtures and leasehold improvements, we believe that the incremental inflation related to replacement costs of such items will not materially affect our operations. However, the rate of inflation affects our expenses, primarily employee compensation and contract services, which could increase our level of expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion of critical accounting policies identifies the accounting policies that require application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. It is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our significant accounting policies, which are more fully described in Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this document. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by generally accepted accounting principles, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which the selection of an available alternative policy would not produce a materially different result.
Revenue Recognition
ASC 606 outlines a five-step process for recognizing revenue from contracts with customers: (i) identify the contract with the customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the separate performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue associated with the performance obligations as they are satisfied.
We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we determine the performance obligations that are distinct. We recognize as revenues the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to each respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied or as it is satisfied. Generally, our performance obligations are transferred to customers at a point in time, typically upon receipt of the product by the customer.
ASC 606 requires entities to record a contract asset when a performance obligation has been satisfied or partially satisfied, but the amount of consideration has not yet been received because the receipt of the consideration is conditioned on something other than the passage of time. ASC 606 also requires an entity to present a revenue contract as a contract liability in instances when a customer pays consideration, or an entity has a right to an amount of consideration that is unconditional (e.g. receivable), before the entity transfers a good or service to the customer. As of December 31, 2021, we had contract liabilities of $5.9 million, which is the upfront payment received as part of the Esteve Germany distribution agreement entered into in 2021. We did not have any contract liabilities as of December 31, 2020. We did not have any contract assets as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Product Revenues, Net
Net revenues from product sales is recognized at the transaction price when the customer obtains control of our products, which occurs at a point in time, upon receipt of the product by the customer. Our payment terms are between 30 to 35 days.
Our net revenues represent total revenues adjusted for discounts and allowances, including estimated cash discounts, chargebacks, rebates, returns, copay assistance, data fees and wholesaler fees for services. These adjustments represent variable consideration under ASC 606 and are recorded for our estimate of cash consideration expected to be given by us to a customer that is presumed to be a reduction of the transaction price of our products and, therefore, are characterized as a reduction of revenues. These adjustments are established by management as its best estimate based on available information and will be adjusted to reflect known changes in the factors that impact such allowances. Adjustments for variable consideration are determined based on the contractual terms with customers, historical trends, communications with
customers and the levels of inventory remaining in the distribution channel, as well as expectations about the market for the product and anticipated introduction of competitive products.
Discounts and Allowances
Revenues from product sales are recorded at the transaction price, which includes estimates for discounts and allowances for which reserves are established and includes cash discounts, chargebacks, rebates, returns, copay assistance, data fees and wholesaler fees for services. Actual discounts and allowances are recorded following shipment of product and the appropriate reserves are credited. These reserves are classified as reductions of accounts receivable (if the amount is payable to the customer and right of offset exists) or a current liability (if the amount is payable to a party other than a customer). These allowances are established by management as its best estimate based on historical experience and data points available and are adjusted to reflect known changes in the factors that impact such reserves. Allowances for customer credits, chargebacks, rebates, data fees and wholesaler fees for services, returns, and discounts are established based on contractual terms with customers and analyses of historical usage of these items. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenues and earnings in the period such variances become known. The nature of our allowances and accruals requiring critical estimates, and the specific considerations it uses in estimating their amounts are as follows:
Government Chargebacks and Rebates: We contract for Medicaid and other U.S. federal government programs to allow for our products to remain eligible for reimbursement under these programs. For Medicare, we also estimates the number of patients in the prescription drug coverage gap for whom we will owe an additional liability under the Medicare Part D program. Based upon our contracts and the most recent experience with respect to sales through each of these channels, we provide an allowance for chargebacks and rebates. We monitor the sales trends and adjust the chargeback and rebate percentages on a regular basis to reflect the most recent chargebacks and rebate experience. Our liability for these rebates consists of invoices received for claims from prior quarters that have not been paid or for which an invoice has not yet been received, estimates of claims for the current quarter, and estimated future claims that will be made for product that has been recognized as revenue, but remains in the distribution channel inventories at the end of each reporting period. Our government chargeback and rebate accruals were $4.5 million and $5.9 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. A 10% change in our government chargebacks and rebate allowances would have had an approximate $1.4 million and $1.7 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Managed Care Contract Rebates: We contract with various managed care organizations including health insurance companies and pharmacy benefit managers. These contracts stipulate that rebates and, in some cases, administrative fees, are paid to these organizations provided our product is placed on a specific tier on the organization’s drug formulary. Based upon our contracts and the most recent experience with respect to sales through managed care channels, we provide an allowance for managed care contract rebates. We monitor the sales trends and adjust the allowance on a regular basis to reflect the most recent rebate experience. Our liability for these rebates consists of invoices received for claims from prior quarters that have not been paid or for which an invoice has not yet been received, estimates of claims for the current quarter, and estimated future claims that will be made for product that has been recognized as revenue, but remains in the distribution channel inventories at the end of each reporting period. Our managed care contract rebate accruals were $4.6 million and $7.4 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. A 10% change in our managed care contract rebate allowances would have had an approximate $2.1 million and $3.1 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Copay Mitigation Rebates: We offer copay mitigation to commercially insured patients who have coverage for our products (in accordance with applicable law) and are responsible for a cost share. Based upon our contracts and the most recent experience with respect to actual copay assistance provided, we provide an allowance for copay mitigation rebates. We monitor the sales trends and adjust the rebate percentages on a regular basis to reflect the most recent rebate experience. Our copay mitigation rebate accruals were $0.5 million and $0.6 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. A 10% change in our copay mitigation rebate allowances would have had an approximate $0.5 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Cash Discounts: We sell directly to companies in our distribution network, which primarily includes specialty pharmacies and ASD Specialty Healthcare, Inc. (an AmeriSource Bergen affiliate). We generally provide invoice
discounts for prompt payment for our products. We estimate our cash discounts based on the terms offered to our customers. Discounts are estimated based on rates that are explicitly stated in the Company’s contracts as it is expected they will take the discount and are recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time of product shipment when product revenue is recognized. We adjust estimates based on actual activity as necessary. Our cash discount allowances were $0.8 million and $0.6 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. A 10% change in our cash discount allowances would have had an approximate $0.2 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Product Returns: We either offer customers no return except for products damaged in shipping or consistent with industry practice, a limited right of return based on the product’s expiration date. Our estimates the amount of its product sales that may be returned by its customers and records this estimate as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. We currently estimate product return liabilities using historical sales information and inventory remaining in the distribution channel.
Based on the data that we receive from our customers, we have been able to make a reasonable estimate for product returns. We do not accept returns of Ampyra except for product damaged in shipping. Historically, it has been rare for us to have product damaged in shipping. We will exchange product from inventory for product damaged in shipping.
Data Fees and Fees for Services Payable to Specialty Pharmacies: We have contracted with certain specialty pharmacies to obtain transactional data related to our products in order to develop a better understanding of our selling channel as well as patient activity and utilization by the Medicaid program and other government agencies and managed care organizations. We pay a variable fee to the specialty pharmacies to provide us the data. We also pay the specialty pharmacies a fee in exchange for providing distribution and inventory management services, including the provision of inventory management data to us. We estimate our fee for service accruals and allowances based on sales to each specialty pharmacy and the applicable contracted rate. Our fee for service expenses are accrued at the time of product shipment and are typically settled with the specialty pharmacies within 60 days after the end of each respective quarter. Our data fee and fee for service accruals were $0.6 million and $1.4 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. A 10% change in our data fee and fee for service allowances would have had an approximate $0.3 million and $0.6 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We have adjusted our allowances in the past based on actual experience, and we will likely be required to make adjustments to these allowances and accruals in the future. The historical adjustments have not been significant to operations. We continually monitor our allowances and accruals and make adjustments when we believe actual experience may differ from its estimates. The allowances included in the table below reflect these adjustments.
The following table provides a summary of activity with respect to our sales discounts and allowances during 2021 and 2020:
Royalty Revenues
Royalty revenues recorded by us relates exclusively to our License and Collaboration agreement with Biogen which provides for ongoing royalties based on sales of Fampyra outside of the U.S. We recognized revenues for royalties under ASC 606, which provides revenue recognition constraints by requiring the recognition of revenue at the later of the following: 1) sale or usage of the products or 2) satisfaction of the performance obligations. We satisfied our performance obligations and therefore recognizes royalty revenue when the sales to which the royalties relate are completed.
License Revenues
License revenues relates to the License and Collaboration agreement with Biogen which provides for milestone payments for the achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones during the term of the agreement. Regulatory milestones are contingent upon the approval of Fampyra for new indications outside of the U.S. Sales milestones are contingent upon the achievement of certain net sales targets for Fampyra sales outside of the U.S. We recognize license revenues under ASC 606, which provides constraints for entities to recognize license revenues which is deemed to be variable by requiring us to estimate the amount of consideration to which it is entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. We recognize an estimate of revenues to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenues recognized will not occur when the milestone is achieved. For regulatory milestones, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. For sales-based milestones, we recognize revenues upon the achievement of the specific sale milestones.
If the license to the Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenues from upfront license fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other rights and obligations, the Company determines whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time. If the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time, the Company uses its judgment in determining the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from the up-front license fees. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Inventory
We capitalize inventory costs associated with our products prior to regulatory approval when, based on management's judgment, future commercialization is considered probable and the future economic benefit is expected to be realized; otherwise, such costs are expensed as research and development.
The cost of Ampyra inventory manufactured by Alkermes is based on specified prices calculated as a percentage of net product sales of the product shipped by Alkermes to us. In the event Alkermes does not manufacture the products, Alkermes is entitled to a compensating payment for the quantities of product provided by the alternative manufacturer. This compensating payment is included in our inventory balances. We record a reserve for excess and obsolete inventory based on the historic and forecasted sales pattern and specifically identified obsolete inventory based on the expiration dates of its products. We periodically review inventory for slow moving or obsolete amounts based on expected sales. We review projected market share as well as current buying patterns from its customers. We analyze our ability to sell the inventory on hand and committed to customers prior to the expiration period of the respective inventory. As a result, significant judgment is employed in determining the appropriateness of our ability to sell inventory on hand and commitments based on the sales projections. If annual and expected volumes are less than expected, we may be required to make additional allowances for excess or obsolete inventory in the future.
Cost of Sales
Inbrija
Cost of sales includes the cost of inventory, expense due to inventory reserves when necessary, royalty expense, packaging costs, freight and required inventory stability testing costs. Cost of sales include those costs directly associated with the production of revenues, such as raw material consumed, factory overhead and other direct production costs. In periods of idle plant capacity, costs are charged directly to cost of sales in the period incurred.
Ampyra
Cost of sales includes the cost of inventory, expense due to inventory reserves when necessary, royalty expense, milestone amortization of intangible assets associated with our agreement with Alkermes as well as the capitalization of milestone achievements with the Canadian Spinal Research Organization (“CSRO”) during the three months ended March 31, 2010, packaging costs, freight and required inventory stability testing costs. Our inventory costs, royalty obligations and milestone obligations are set forth in the agreements entered into with Alkermes. These agreements require us to pay Alkermes a percentage of our net selling price for each inventory lot purchased from Alkermes. The cost for each lot is calculated based on an agreed upon estimated net selling price which is based on an actual historical net selling price. At the end of each quarter, we perform a calculation to adjust the inventory value for any lots received in the current quarter to that quarter’s actual net selling price. This payment is recorded as an adjustment to inventory as well as an accrual on our balance sheet and is required to be paid within 45 days of the quarter end. In the event we have sold any inventory purchased from Alkermes during that respective quarter, we would also record an adjustment to the cost of goods sold and an additional accrual on the balance sheet to be paid to Alkermes. The agreement with Alkermes allows us to purchase up to 25% of our annual inventory requirements from an alternative manufacturer but stipulates a compensating payment to be made to Alkermes for any inventory purchased from this alternative manufacturer. This payment is determined at the end of the quarter in which any new lots have been purchased exclusive from Alkermes using the actual net selling price for the respective quarter net of an agreed upon amount as stipulated by the Alkermes agreement. This payment is recorded as an adjustment to inventory as well as an accrual on our balance sheet.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists primarily of:
•
salaries and related benefits and share-based compensation for research and development personnel;
•
costs of facilities and equipment that have no alternative future use;
•
fees paid to professional service providers in conjunction with independently monitoring our clinical trials and acquiring and evaluating data in conjunction with our clinical trials;
•
fees paid to contract research organizations (“CRO”s) in conjunction with preclinical studies;
•
fees paid to organizations in conjunction with contract manufacturing;
•
costs of materials used in research and development;
•
upfront and milestone payments under contractual agreements;
•
consulting, license and sponsored research fees paid to third parties; and
•
depreciation of capital resources used to develop our products.
For those studies that we have administered ourselves, we account for our clinical study costs by estimating the patient cost per visit in each clinical trial and recognizing this cost as visits occur, beginning when the patient enrolls in the trial. This estimated cost includes payments to the trial site and patient-related costs, including laboratory costs related to the conduct of the trial. Cost per patient varies based on the type of clinical trial, the site of the clinical trial, and the length of the treatment period for each patient. For those studies for which we have used a CRO, we account for our clinical study costs according to the terms of the CRO contract. These costs include upfront, milestone and monthly expenses as well as reimbursement for pass through costs. All research and development costs are expensed as incurred except when we are accounting for nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be used in future research and development activities. In these cases, these payments are capitalized at the time of payment and expensed ratable over the period the research and development activity is performed. As actual costs become known to us, we adjust our accrual; such changes in estimate may be a material change in our clinical study accrual, which could also materially affect our results of operations.
We have used our employee and infrastructure resources across several projects, and many of our costs are not attributable to an individually named project, but are broadly applicable research projects. Accordingly, we do not account for internal research and development costs on a project-by-project basis. Unallocated costs are represented as operating expenses in the table below.
The following table shows, for each of the years ended, (i) the total third-party expenses for preclinical and clinical development, on a project-by-project basis, (ii) our unallocated research and development operating expenses, and (iii) acquisitions, licenses and milestone payments, on a project-by-project basis:
With respect to previously established clinical study accruals in prior periods and for the year ended December 31, 2021 we did not make any significant adjustments to our clinical study costs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses include personnel costs, related benefits and share-based compensation for our sales, managed markets and marketing personnel, the cost of Ampyra, Zanaflex, and Qutenza sales and marketing initiatives as well as the pre-market marketing costs for future products.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, related benefits and share-based compensation for personnel serving executive, finance, medical affairs, safety, business development, legal, quality assurance, information technology and human resource functions. Other costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development or sales and marketing expense and professional fees for legal and accounting services.
Asset Impairment
In Process Research and Development
The cost of in-process research and development (IPR&D) acquired directly in a transaction other than a business combination is capitalized if the project will be further developed or have an alternative future use; otherwise it is expensed. We recorded an impairment charge of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 in the statement of operations and therefore, the indefinite-lived intangible asset was fully impaired. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a discussion of intangible assets.
Finite-Lived Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized on a straight line basis over the period in which we expect to receive economic benefit and are reviewed for impairment when facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. The determination of the expected life will be dependent upon the use and underlying characteristics of the intangible asset. In our evaluation of the intangible assets, we consider the term of the underlying asset life and the expected life of the related product line. If impairment indicators are present or changes in circumstance suggest that impairment may exist, we perform a recoverability test by comparing the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows of each intangible asset to its carrying value on the consolidated balance sheet. If the undiscounted cash flows used in the recoverability test are less than the carrying value, we would determine the fair value of the intangible asset and recognize an impairment loss in the statement of operations if the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value. Fair value is generally estimated based on either appraised value or other valuation techniques. Events that could result in an impairment, or trigger an interim impairment assessment, may include actions by regulatory authorities with respect to us or our competitors, new or better products entering the market, changes in market share or market pricing, changes in the economic lives of the assets, changes in the legal framework covering patents, rights or licenses, and other market changes which could have a negative effect on cash flows and which could result in an impairment.
Derivative Liability
During 2019, a derivative liability was initially recorded as a result of the issuance of the 6.00% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2024 (see Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report). We initially determined the fair value of the liability upon issuance. The fair value measurement of the derivative liability is classified as Level 3 under the fair value hierarchy as it has been valued using certain unobservable inputs. These inputs include: (1) share price as of the valuation date, (2) assumed timing of conversion of the Notes, (3) historical volatility of share price and (4) the risk-adjusted discount rate used to present value the probability-weighted cash flows. Significant increases or decreases in any of those inputs in isolation could result in a significantly lower or higher fair value measurement. The fair value of the derivative liability was determined using a binomial model that calculates the fair value of the Notes with the conversion feature as compared to the fair value of the Notes without the conversion feature, with the difference representing the value of the conversion feature, or the derivative liability. The conversion feature will be measured at fair value on a quarterly basis and the change in the fair value of the conversion feature for the period will be recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
Changes in Fair Value of Acquired Contingent Consideration
Changes in the fair value of acquired contingent consideration represents changes in the estimated fair value of our acquired contingent liability. Contingent consideration is recognized at fair value as of the date of acquisition and recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet. The contingent consideration is re-valued on a quarterly basis using a probability weighted discounted cash-flow approach until fulfillment or expiration of the contingency. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration are recognized in the statement of operations.
To the extent that the discount rates were to increase or decrease by one percentage point, we estimate that our acquired contingent consideration liability would decrease or increase by approximately $2.6 million or $2.9 million, respectively. If the estimated net sales were to increase or decrease by one percentage point, we estimate that our acquired contingent consideration liability would change by approximately $0.5 million.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income consists of income earned on our cash and cash equivalents. Interest expense consists of cash and non-cash interest expense for the convertible senior secured notes due 2024 issued in December 2019, convertible senior notes due 2021 issued in June 2014, our capital and R&D loans and non-cash interest expense pertaining to the Fampyra royalty monetization.
Income Taxes
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements we are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. In accordance with ASC 740, we account for income taxes by the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized for tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each year-end, based on enacted laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are provided if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We will continue to evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets and liabilities on a quarterly basis, and will adjust such amounts in light of changing facts and circumstances, including but not limited to future projections of taxable income, tax legislation, rulings by relevant tax authorities and the progress of ongoing tax audits, if any. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance is required to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized in future periods.
Share-Based Compensation
We account for stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units granted to employees and non-employees by recognizing the costs resulting from all share-based payment transactions in the financial statements at their fair values. We estimate the fair value of each option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes closed-form option-pricing model based on assumptions for the expected term of the stock options, expected volatility of our common stock, prevailing interest rates, and an estimated forfeiture rate.
We have based our current assumptions on the following:
Of these assumptions, the expected term of the option and expected volatility of our common stock are the most difficult to estimate since they are based on the exercise behavior of the employees and expected performance of our common stock. Increases in the term and the volatility of our common stock will generally cause an increase in compensation expense.