Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “company,” “Independence Holdings,” “our,” “us,” or “we” refer to Independence Holdings Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K
includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10- K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on December 7, 2020. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet identified (herein referred to as the “initial business combination”).
Our sponsor is Independence Sponsor LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (the “sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on March 8, 2021. On March 11, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 49,590,908 units, including 6,090,908 additional units to partially cover over-allotments, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of approximately $495.9 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $28.0 million, of which approximately $17.4 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement of 9,078,788 warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant with the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $13.6 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement, approximately $495.9 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in a trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of its Initial Public Offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating an Initial Business Combination. Our Initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the trust account (excluding the deferred underwriting discounts and commissions and taxes payable on the income earned on the trust account) at the time we sign a definitive agreement in connection with the Initial Business Combination. However, we will only complete an Initial Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 11, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each such case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.3 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $2.0 million.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the sponsor to pay for certain offering costs and expenses in exchange for issuance of the founder shares, the loan under the note of $300,000, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our officers, directors and initial shareholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. To date, there are no working capital loans outstanding.
Until consummation of our business combination, we intend to use our cash held outside the trust account, and, if necessary, Working Capital Loans from the Company’s officers and directors, and initial shareholders, for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We have until March 11, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations, in accordance with ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” management determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic and has concluded that, while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations, close of the initial public offering and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statement. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from December 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021, was in preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $2.6 million, which consisted of approximately $4.2 million in change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, and approximately $40,000 in interest income from investments held in Trust Account, partly offset by approximately $926,000 in general and administrative expenses, approximately $97,000 in administrative expenses-related party, and approximately $634,000 in financing costs-derivative warrant liabilities.
For the period from December 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $16,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On December 11, 2020, the sponsor paid an aggregate of $25,000 to cover for certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for issuance of 11,500,000 Class B ordinary shares. In March 2021, we issued to the initial shareholders an additional 1,006,250 founder shares, resulting in the sponsor holding an aggregate of 12,506,250 founder shares. The holders of the founder shares agreed to forfeit up to an aggregate of 1,631,250 founder shares, on a pro rata basis, to the extent that the option to purchase additional units was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the founder shares will represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. Also in March 2021, our sponsor transferred 25,000 founder shares to each of our independent directors, as well as another transferee (which amounts have been adjusted for the share issuance of 1,006,250 ordinary shares, as well as transfers back to our sponsor by our independent directors and such other transferee of 2,187 ordinary shares each, which they received as a result of the share issuance). On March 9, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 6,090,908 Units; leaving only 108,523 Class B ordinary shares remain subject to forfeiture. On April 22, 2021, the underwriters’ over-allotment option expired, and the sponsor forfeited 108,523 shares of Class B ordinary shares accordingly.
The initial shareholders agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of their founder shares until the earlier to occur of (A) one year after the completion of the initial business combination and (B) subsequent to the initial business combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share subdivisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading
day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial business combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the public shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Related Party Loans
On December 7, 2020, the sponsor agreed to loan us up to $300,000 pursuant to a promissory note. The note was non-interest
bearing, unsecured and due upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The company borrowed approximately $171,000 under the note and fully repaid the balance upon closing of the Initial Public Offering.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, the sponsor, members of our founding team or any of their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the working capital loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lenders’ discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post initial business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings under the working capital loans.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on Nasdaq until the earlier of our consummation of an initial business combination or our liquidation, we pay affiliates of the sponsor a total of $10,000 per month, in the aggregate, for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us.
In addition, the sponsor, executive officers and directors, or their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket
expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable initial business combinations. The audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by us to the sponsor, executive officers or directors, or their affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial business combination will be made using funds held outside the trust account.
During year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $97,000 in expenses for these services, which is included in administrative expenses-related party on the accompanying statements of operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had $30,000 included in accounts payable on the balance sheet related to these expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the working capital loans and upon conversion of the founder Shares) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of the final prospectus to purchase up to 6,525,000 additional units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On March 9, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 6,090,908 units.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $9.9 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The underwriters were entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $17.4 million. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC Topic 480”) and ASC Topic 815-15
“Derivatives and Hedging-Embedded Derivatives.” The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC Topic 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the public warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and private placement warrants were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The fair value of public warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. Subsequently, the fair value of the private placement warrants has been estimated by reference to the trading price of the public warrants. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current
liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480. Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 49,590,908 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet. There were no Class A ordinary shares issued or outstanding at December 31, 2020.
Under ASC 480-10-S99,
we elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the units sold in the Initial Public Offering and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 18,996,970 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. The number of weighted average Class B ordinary shares for calculating basic net income (loss) per ordinary share was reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 1,631,250 Class B ordinary shares that were subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised in full or part by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied and there was a partial exercise, as of December 31, 2021, we included 1,522,727 of these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06,
“Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)”
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective for the company on January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06
would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K
and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.