Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We operate a life sciences company focused on improving outcomes for patients with cancer. Our plan is to develop and commercialize a variety of products in the diagnostics, pharmaceutical and medical device spaces that enable more informed treatment planning and more effective treatment options for patients. Our initial approach will be the commercialization of a proprietary genomic platform, StemPrint, for recurrence risk stratification of different types of cancer. To augment this unique offering we also plan to provide ancillary commodity testing (e.g., hereditary genetic testing, somatic mutation testing) to provide additional information and value to our clients.
StemPrintER Sciences Limited “StemPrintER” was transferred to the Accustem Sciences Limited on October 30, 2020 pursuant to the demerger of the StemPrintER and SPARE projects from Tiziana. The objective of the demerger was to maximize value to the shareholders of Tiziana through the further commercialization of the StemPrintER project and its assets and intellectual property. The Demerger will allow us to continue its collaboration strategy to further develop, validate and commercialize the StemPrintER/SPARE platform as a separate listed company with related party receivable reserves of $1,353,373 (£1,000,000).
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to conducting research and development of our product candidate. Our revenue is expected to be derived from different sources including standard private third-party and government medical insurance coverage and reimbursement models. On completion of the demerger, Tiziana transferred $1,353,373 in cash to StemPrintER Sciences Limited and the entire issued share capital of StemPrintER to the Company and has agreed to invest a further $2,706,746 (£2,000,000) in our equity securities if and when we list on an Exchange.
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing development activities related to our preclinical and clinical programs. We intend to conduct further validation and utility studies with the intention of filing for regulatory review under the CLIA system and, ultimately, for reimbursement review. We also may pursue a strategy to achieve appropriate regulatory review with European and Asian regulatory agencies to
expand the addressable market for its products.
In addition, upon the effectiveness of this registration statement, we expect to incur additional costs associated with the expansion of our management team and operating as a public company in the United States. We expect that our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in the near to mid-term as we:
● build out corporate headquarters and a CLIA-certified laboratory in Phoenix, AZ;
● continue our research and development efforts;
● seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials; and
● add clinical, scientific, operational financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and potential future commercialization claims.
As a result, we may need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of our product candidates.
Financial Operations Overview
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated revenue to date. We have never been profitable and have incurred net losses in each year since inception. We incurred net losses of $54,248 and $670,614 for the period from June 5, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2021, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $724,862. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
Segment Information
As of December 31, 2021, we viewed our operations and managed our business as one operating segment consistent with how our chief operating decision maker, our Chief Executive Officer, makes decisions regarding resource allocation and assessing performance. As of December 31, 2021, substantially all of our assets were located in the United States. Our headquarters and operations are located in New York, NY and London, UK.
Research and development expense
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. These costs consist of internal and external expenses, as well as depreciation expense on assets used within our research and development activities. Internal expenses include the cost of salaries, benefits, and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel serving in our research and development functions. External expenses include development, clinical trials, patent costs, and regulatory compliance costs incurred with research organizations, contract manufacturers, and other third-party vendors. License fees paid to acquire access to proprietary technology are expensed to research and development, unless it is determined that the technology is expected to have an alternative future use. All patent-related costs incurred in connection with filing and prosecuting patent applications are expensed as incurred to research and development expense due to the uncertainty about the recovery of the expenditure. We record costs for certain development activities, such as preclinical studies and clinical trials, based on our evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expense, as applicable. Our recording of costs for certain development activities requires us to use estimates. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the current conditions; however, actual results may differ from these estimates.
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We plan to incur research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we expect to continue the development of our product candidates. We anticipate that our research and development expenses will be higher in fiscal year 2022 and subsequent periods as compared to the prior periods presented herein as we prepare to establish a CLIA lab.
Our research and development expenses are not currently tracked on a program-by-program basis for indirect and overhead costs. We use our personnel and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs directed toward identifying, developing, and commercializing product candidates.
At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical developments as well as regulatory approval (or authorization) and commercialization, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur and the timelines we will require in our continued development and commercialization efforts. As a result of these uncertainties, successful development and completion of clinical trials as well as regulatory authorization or approval and commercialization are uncertain and may not result in authorized or approved and commercialized products. Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. We will continue to make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to our ability to enter into collaborations with respect to each product candidate, the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate as well as ongoing assessments as to the commercial potential of each product candidate.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits, insurance, and stock-based compensation expense, for employees in executive, accounting, commercialization, human resources, and other administrative functions. General and administrative expense also includes expenses related to pre-commercial activities, corporate facility costs, insurance premiums, legal fees related to corporate matters, and fees for auditing, accounting, and other consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in fiscal year 2022 as compared to the prior periods presented herein as a result of higher corporate infrastructure costs including, but not limited to accounting, legal, human resources, consulting, investor relations, and public company insurance fees.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations includes a comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the period from June 5, 2020 (date of inception) to December 31, 2020:
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased $67,587 in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase primary related to a full year of patent related expenses.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $548,779 in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase primarily related to a full year of operations and costs related to legal fees and other compliance expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue and have incurred significant operating losses. Our potential products are at various phases of development. We do not expect to generate significant revenue from product sales for several years, if at all. Pursuant to the demerger, Tiziana committed to transfer $1,353,373 (£1,000,000) in cash to StemPrintER and the entire issued share capital of StemPrintER to the Company. The $1,353,373 in cash was paid in January 2022, and Tiziana agreed to invest $2,706,746 (£2,000,000) in cash for additional shares of the Company. Our cash flows may fluctuate and are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
The Company did not generate any cash flows through December 31, 2021 as cash was funded by a related party.
Operating Activities
There were no cash flows from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from June 5, 2020 through December 31, 2020 since all cash activities were funded by a related party.
Investing Activities
There was no net cash used in or provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 or the period June 5, 2020 (period of inception) through December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities
There was no net cash received in financing investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 or the period June 5, 2020 (period of inception) through December 31, 2020. There is a cash receivable balance due from related party of $1,558,252 for shares related to the demerger and supplemental dermerger agreements.
Market Capital Expenditure Commitments
We have no material commitment for capital expenditures.
Funding Requirements
We expect that our expenses will increase and operating losses will be generated, and we have $724,862 of accumulated deficit as at December 31, 2021. Based on our current plans, we believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will be not be sufficient to fund our operations and capital expenditure requirements into 2023. Through December 31, 2021, the Company has received financial support from a related party, which resulted in a net related party balance of $1,367,414, which $1,288,310 was settled for cash in January 2022. We expect to incur substantial additional expenditures in the near term to support our acceleration of activities. We expect to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. Our ability to fund our product development and clinical operations as well as commercialization of our product candidates, will depend on the amount and timing of cash received from planned financings. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the costs, timing and outcomes of clinical trials and regulatory reviews associated with our product candidates;
● the costs of commercialization activities, including product marketing, sales and distribution;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims;
● the emergence of competing technologies and products and other adverse marketing developments;
● the effect on our product development activities of actions taken by the FDA, EMA or other regulatory authorities;
● our degree of success in commercializing our product candidates, if and when approved; and
● the number and types of future products we develop and commercialize.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Further, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity financings, debt financings, collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. We do not currently have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research, product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Further, our operating plans may change, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements for clinical trials and other research and development activities. We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated product development programs.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based payment awards issued to employees and members of our Board by measuring the fair value of the award on the date of grant and recognizing this fair value as stock-based compensation using a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, generally the vesting period.
Related parties
Parties are related to the Company if the parties, directly or indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, control, are controlled by, or are under common control with the Company. Related parties also include principal owners of the Company, its management, members of the immediate families of principal owners of the Company and its management and other parties with which the Company may deal with if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no other off-balance sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our consolidated financial statements or changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recent accounting pronouncements, see our consolidated financial statements - Note 2 and the related notes found elsewhere in this annual report.