Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K and our final prospectus for our initial public offering filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, on June 28, 2021, or the Prospectus. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Investors and others should note that we routinely use the Investor Relations section of our website to announce material information to investors and the marketplace. While not all of the information that we post on the Investor Relations section of our website is of a material nature, some information could be deemed to be material. Accordingly, we encourage investors, the media, and others interested in us to review the information that it shares on the Investors section of our website, www.acurxpharma.com.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company developing a new class of antibiotics for infections caused by bacteria listed as priority pathogens by the World Health Organization (“WHO”), the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”). Priority pathogens are those which require new antibiotics to address the worldwide crisis of antimicrobial resistance (“AMR”) as identified by the WHO, CDC and FDA. The CDC estimates that, in the U.S., antibiotic-resistant pathogens infect one individual every 11 seconds and result in one death every 15 minutes. The WHO recently stated that growing antimicrobial resistance is equally as dangerous as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, threatens to unwind a century of medical progress and may leave us defenseless against infections that today can be treated easily. According to the WHO, the current clinical development pipeline remains insufficient to tackle the challenge of the increasing emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance.
Our approach is to develop antibiotic candidates that block the DNA polymerase IIIC (“Pol IIIC”). We believe we are developing the first Pol IIIC inhibitor to enter clinical trials. Pol IIIC is the primary catalyst for DNA replication of several Gram-positive bacterial cells. Our research and development pipeline includes clinical stage and early stage antibiotic candidates that target Gram-positive bacteria for oral and/or parenteral treatment of infections caused by Clostridium difficile (“C. difficile”), Enterococcus (including vancomycin-resistant strains (“VRE”)), Staphylococcus (including methicillin-resistant strains (“MRSA”)), and Streptococcus (including antibiotic resistant strains).
Pol IIIC is required for the replication of DNA in certain Gram-positive bacterial species. By blocking this enzyme, our antibiotic candidates are believed to be bactericidal and inhibit proliferation of several common bacterial pathogens, including both sensitive and resistant C. difficile, MRSA, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumonia (“PRSP”) and other resistant bacteria.
We intend to “de-risk” this new class of antibiotics through our drug development activities and potentially partner with a fully-integrated pharmaceutical company for late-stage clinical trials and commercialization.
Our lead antibiotic candidate, ibezapolstat (formerly named ACX-362E), has a novel mechanism of action that targets the Pol IIIC enzyme, a previously unexploited scientific target. On December 3, 2021, we commenced enrollment in a double-blind, active controlled clinical trial of ibezapolstat versus vancomycin, the standard of care to treat C. difficile infections (“CDI”), pursuant to the trial design provided below.
Prior to that, we completed our Phase 2a clinical trial of ibezapolstat to treat patients with CDI and reported the top-line data in November 2020. The Phase 2a clinical trial was terminated early based upon the recommendation of our Scientific Advisory Board (the “SAB”). The SAB reviewed the study data presented by management, including adverse
events and efficacy outcomes, and discussed its clinical impressions. The SAB unanimously supported the early termination of the Phase 2a trial after 10 patients were enrolled in the trial instead of 20 patients as originally planned. The early termination was further based on the evidence of meeting the treatment goals of eliminating the infection with an acceptable adverse event profile.
The SAB noted that 10 out of 10 patients enrolled in the Phase 2a trial reached the Clinical Cure endpoint, defined in the study protocol as the resolution of diarrhea in the 24-hour period immediately before the end of treatment that is maintained for 48 hours after end of treatment. Such cure was sustained, meaning that the patients showed no sign of infection recurrence, for 30 days thereafter. This constitutes a 100% response rate for the primary and secondary endpoints of the trial. All 10 patients enrolled in the Phase 2a trial met the study’s primary and secondary efficacy endpoints, namely, Clinical Cure at end of treatment and Sustained Clinical Cure of no recurrence of CDI at the 28-day follow-up visit. No treatment-related serious adverse events (“SAEs”) were reported by the investigators who enrolled patients in the trial. We believe these results represent the first-ever clinical data showing Pol IIIC has potential as a therapeutically relevant antibacterial target. Our Phase 2b clinical trial commenced enrollment on December 3, 2021.
The SAB is comprised of seven scientists and clinicians who have significant expertise in the scientific disciplines required for the research and development of antibiotics. The members of the SAB serve at the pleasure of management, are paid in cash on an hourly basis for their services and do not receive equity compensation. Generally, the SAB is consulted by management during the process of designing our preclinical and clinical trials as well as in the process of analyzing data generated from these trials, although the SAB’s services are not limited to such activities.
Currently available antibiotics used to treat CDI infections utilize other mechanisms of action. We believe ibezapolstat is the first antibiotic candidate to work by blocking the DNA Pol IIIC enzyme in C. difficile. This enzyme is necessary for replication of the DNA of certain Gram-positive bacteria, like C. difficile.
We also have an early stage pipeline of antibiotic product candidates with the same previously unexploited mechanism of action which has established proof of concept in animal studies. This pipeline includes ACX-375C, a potential oral and parenteral treatment targeting Gram-positive bacteria, including MRSA, VRE and PRSP.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $13.0 million.
Recent Developments
Initial Public Offering
On June 29, 2021, we completed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 2,875,000 shares of our common stock, including the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase 375,000 additional shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $6.00 per share, which resulted in net cash proceeds of $14.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. The proceeds from the IPO are being used (i) to complete the Phase 2b clinical trial of ibezapolstat in patients with CDI, (ii) to complete pre-clinical development of ACX-375C and (iii) for general corporate purposes, which may include, without limitation, expenditures relating to research, development and clinical trials other than those specified above, manufacturing, capital expenditures, hiring additional personnel, acquisitions of new technologies or products, the payment, repayment, refinancing, redemption or repurchase of existing or future indebtedness, obligations or capital stock, and working capital. Prior to the IPO, we converted from a Delaware limited liability company into a Delaware corporation, and our previously outstanding Class A membership interests and Class B membership interests were converted to shares of common stock pursuant to a conversion ratio of one-half of one share of common stock for each Class A membership interest or Class B membership interest outstanding, resulting in the conversion of 14,082,318 Class A membership interests and Class B membership interests into 7,041,208 shares of common stock. Our common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market on June 25, 2021.
Effects of Coronavirus (COVID-19) on Our Business
The World Health Organization (“WHO”) recognized COVID-19 as a public health emergency of international concern on January 30, 2020 and as a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. The global pandemic and actions taken to contain COVID-19 have adversely affected the global economy and financial markets. Vaccines for COVID-19 continue to be administered in the United States and other countries around the world, but the extent and rate of vaccine adoption, the long-term efficacy of these vaccines and other factors remain uncertain. Authorities throughout the world have implemented measures to contain or mitigate the spread of the virus, including physical distancing, travel bans and restrictions, closure of non-essential businesses, quarantines, work-from-home directives, mask requirements, shelter-in-place orders and vaccination programs. While the rollout of vaccines has begun, the timing of vaccinations, herd immunity, and the lifting of shelter-in-place and similar restrictions and movement restrictions are unknown. The impact of COVID-19 and its variants has been and remains unpredictable.
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, we continued to enroll patients in our Phase 2a and Phase 2b clinical trial of our lead antibiotic candidate, ibezapolstat, although enrollment rates decreased significantly compared to expectations at certain of our clinical trial sites. Other areas of our business experienced no change, including our research and development activities with key vendors. We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of antibiotic development in responding to global health issues particularly because many hospitalized COVID-19 patients were also prescribed antibiotics which only accelerates the current antimicrobial resistance crisis described by several regulatory bodies worldwide.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately impact our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows depends on future developments that are highly uncertain, rapidly evolving and difficult to predict at this time. While we are not experiencing material adverse impacts at this time, given the global economic slowdown, the overall disruption of global supply chains and distribution systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially and adversely affected. While we believe that we are well positioned for the future as we navigate the crisis and prepare for an eventual return to a more normal operating environment, we continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic as we evolve our business continuity plans and response strategy.
In May 2020, we received a Paycheck Protection Program loan (“PPP Loan”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES ACT”), as administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) in the amount of $66,503. The PPP Loan carried an annual interest rate of 0.98% and matures two (2) years from issuance. On April 13, 2021, the SBA authorized the full forgiveness of the PPP Loan. Upon forgiveness of the PPP Loan, we reduced the liability and recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP Loan in our statement of operations.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue since our inception and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future, if at all.
Research and Development Expenses
To date, our research and development expenses have related primarily to development of ibezapolstat, preclinical studies and other preclinical activities related to our portfolio. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received.
Research and development expenses include:
● external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, and consultants to conduct our preclinical, toxicology and other preclinical studies;
● laboratory supplies;
● costs related to manufacturing product candidates, including fees paid to third-party manufacturers and raw material suppliers;
● license fees and research funding; and
● facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, maintenance of facilities, insurance, equipment and other supplies.
Clinical trial costs are a significant component of research and development expenses and include costs associated with third-party contractors. We outsource a substantial portion of our clinical trial activities, utilizing external entities such as CROs, independent clinical investigators and other third-party service providers to assist us with the execution of our clinical trials.
We plan to substantially increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates and seek to discover and develop new product candidates. Due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development, we cannot determine with certainty the timing of the initiation, duration or costs of future clinical trials and preclinical studies of product candidates. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and the amount of development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates and development programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate or program on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Our future clinical development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
● per-patient trial costs;
● the number of trials required for regulatory approval;
● the number of sites included in the trials;
● the countries in which the trials are conducted;
● the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
● the number of patients that participate in the trials;
● the number of doses that patients receive;
● the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
● potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
● the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
● the phase of development of the product candidate; and
● the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance and other administrative functions. Other significant costs include facility-related costs, legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting and consulting services and insurance costs. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support our continued research and development activities, pre-commercialization and, if any product candidates receive marketing approval, commercialization activities. We also anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs associated with operating as a public company.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses were $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.2 million primarily due to a decrease in consulting related costs of $0.5 million offset by an increase in manufacturing related costs of $0.3 million relating to the Phase 2b clinical trial.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $8.4 million primarily due to increases in share-based compensation and executive compensation settled in membership interests of $5.3 million, increases in compensation related expenses of $0.9 million, and increases in professional fees of $2.2 million as a result of increased legal, accounting and consulting work.
Net Loss. Net loss was $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $8.1 million, primarily due to increases in general and administrative expenses for the reasons stated above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and anticipate we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $13.0 million.
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations principally through private placements of equity issuances and the IPO.
Class A Membership Financings
We have funded our operations primarily from equity issuances. We received net cash proceeds of approximately $12.9 million from equity financings closed between March 2018 and October 2020 starting with investments from the co-founders. All of our equity financings were consummated at a price ranging from $1.00 per Class A Membership Interest (March 2018) to $3.25 per Class A Membership Interest (July 2020 and October 2020). Warrant coverage was provided in all but our most-recent financing and the warrant coverage in our early-stage financings ranged from 25%
warrant coverage to 50% warrant coverage, in each case, with a conversion price equal to the issue price in each offering.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
In May 2020, we received a PPP Loan under the CARES ACT, as administered by the SBA in the amount of $66,503. We did not provide any collateral or guarantees in connection with the PPP Loan, nor did we pay any facility charge to obtain the PPP Loan. The PPP Loan carried an annual interest rate of 0.98% and was scheduled to mature two (2) years from issuance. On April 13, 2021, the SBA authorized the full forgiveness of the PPP Loan. Upon forgiveness of the PPP Loan, we reduced the liability and recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP Loan in the statement of operations.
Initial Public Offering
In June 2021, we completed the IPO and issued and sold an aggregate 2,875,000 shares of common stock, which included 375,000 shares of our common stock issued pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $6.00 per share, for net cash proceeds of $14.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily attributable to the net loss of $12.7 million, offset by share-based compensation of $5.2 million, share-based payments to vendors of $1.6 million and $0.9 million of share-based executive compensation.
The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.4 million, which was primarily attributable to the net loss of $4.6 million, offset by share-based executive compensation of $0.8 million, share-based compensation of $0.7 million, and share based-payments to vendors of $0.6 million, which was paid in restricted Class A membership interests, and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.8 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was none for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to the net proceeds from our IPO.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to the net proceeds from our private placement offerings.
Funding Requirements
We believe that our existing cash, together with the net proceeds from our IPO, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least 12 months from the issuance of our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially, including with regard to the impact of COVID-19 on our clinical trial enrollment. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could deplete our capital resources sooner than we expect.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the timing, progress, and results of our ongoing and planned clinical trials of our product candidates;
● our ability to manufacture sufficient clinical supply of our product candidates and the costs thereof;
● discussions with regulatory agencies regarding the design and conduct of our clinical trials and the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
● the cost and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the costs of any other product candidates or technologies we pursue;
● our ability to establish and maintain strategic partnerships, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of any product candidates for which we receive marketing approval; and
● the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our capital requirements, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations and licensing arrangements or other capital sources. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may need to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, future revenue streams or research programs or may have to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings as and when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued certain accounting pronouncements as of December 31, 2021 that will become effective in subsequent periods; however, we do not believe that any of those pronouncements would have significantly affected our financial accounting measurements or disclosures had they been in effect during 2021, or that they will have a significant impact on us at the time they become effective.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting standards generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Federal Income Taxes
We estimate an annual effective tax rate of 0% as we incurred losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulting in an estimated net loss for both financial statement and tax purposes. Therefore, no current federal or state income tax expense has been recorded in the financial statements.
Based on our history of generating operating losses and our anticipation of operating losses for the foreseeable future, we have determined that it is more likely than not that the tax benefits from those net operating losses would not be realized and a full valuation allowance against all deferred tax assets has been recorded. Should our assessment change, tax benefits associated with the historic net operating loss carryforwards would be limited due to the ownership change.
Prior to our corporate conversion in June 2021, we were organized as a limited liability company. As such, we were not a tax paying entity for federal income tax purposes and, therefore, no income tax expense has been recorded in the financial statements. Our income or losses were passed through to the members for inclusion in their respective income tax returns.
Concentration of Credit Risk
The Company maintains its cash balance in one financial institution. The balance is insured up to the maximum allowable by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”). The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts and does not believe it is exposed to any significant risk of loss on cash. At times, the cash balance may exceed the maximum insured limit of the FDIC. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of approximately $13.0 million in U.S. bank accounts which was not fully insured by the FDIC.
Guaranteed Payments to Members
Prior to the corporate conversion, guaranteed payments to members of the Company that were designated to represent reasonable compensation for services rendered, were accounted for as Company expenses rather than an allocation of the Company’s net income.
Research and Development
The Company expenses research and development costs when incurred. At times, the Company may make cash advances for future research and development services. These amounts are deferred and expensed in the period the service is provided. The Company incurred research and development expenses in the amount of $2.0 million and $2.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for the cost of services performed by officers and directors received in exchange for an award of Company membership interests, common stock or stock options, based on the grant-date fair value of the award. The Company recognizes compensation expense based on the requisite service period.
Compensation expense associated with stock option awards is recognized over the requisite service period based on the fair value of the option at the grant date determined based on the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Option valuation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions including the expected price volatility. The Company’s employee stock options have characteristics significantly different from those of traded options, and changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value computation using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Because there is no public market for the Company’s stock options and very little historical experience with the Company’s stock, similar public companies were used for the comparison of volatility and the dividend yield. The risk-free rate of return was derived from U.S. Treasury notes with comparable maturities
Share-Based Payments to Vendors
The Company accounts for the cost of services performed by vendors in exchange for an award of Company membership interests, common stock, or stock options, based on the grant-date fair value of the award or the fair value of the services rendered; whichever is more readily determinable. Such fair value is measured as of the date the services or the date performance by the other party is complete. The Company recognizes the expense in the same period and in the same manner as if the Company had paid cash for the services.
Major Vendor
The Company had a major vendor that accounted for approximately 42% and 40% of the research and development expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The same vendor also accounted for approximately 5% and 6% of the total accounts payable and accrued expenses as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company continues to maintain this vendor relationship and anticipates incurring significant expenses with this vendor over the next 12 months.
The Company had an additional major vendor in 2021 that accounted for approximately 15% of the research and development expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021. The same vendor did not account for any portion of accounts payable and accrued expenses. The Company continues to maintain this vendor relationship and anticipates incurring significant expenses with this vendor over the next 12 months