ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Anthemis Digital Acquisitions I Corp, except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on February 26, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of the foregoing.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 7,800,000 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant with the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $11.7 million.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering, and the private placement, approximately $234.6 million ($10.20 per unit) of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by us meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Recent Developments
None.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for the initial public offering, and since the closing of the initial public offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 26, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $483,619, which consisted of the gain on settlement of payable of $693,229 and interest income earned on the trust account of $3,195 less formation and operating costs of $212,805.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern Considerations
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.9 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $1.4 million. The Company’s liquidity needs up to November 1, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares, and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the sponsor of $152,500.
Subsequent to the consummation of our initial public offering and private placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied with the net proceeds from the initial public offering and associated private placements, $234,600,000 of cash was placed in the Trust Account and $2,273,585 of cash was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for the Company’s working capital purposes.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
The Company is 13 months from its mandatory liquidation as of the time of filing this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the mandatory liquidation raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate, May 1, 2023.
The financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
Other than the below, we do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Service Fee
Commencing on the date that our securities are first listed on the NASDAQ through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination and the liquidation, we agreed to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial support and administrative services. For the period from February 26, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we incurred and paid $21,612 of administrative service fees.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the IPO to purchase up to an additional 3,000,000 units to cover over-allotments. On November 1, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full.
On November 1, 2021, we paid cash underwriting commissions of 2.0% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $4,600,000.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $8,050,000, which will be paid from the funds held in the Trust Account upon completion of our initial Business Combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statement in conformity with US GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statement.
Making estimates requires us to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statement, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Offering Costs associated with the Initial Public Offering
We comply with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1. Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the IPO that were directly related to the IPO. We incurred offering costs amounting to $14,101,214 as a result of the IPO consisting of $4,600,000 of underwriting commissions, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting commissions, and $1,451,214 of other offering costs. The offering costs were charged to temporary equity and additional paid-in capital upon the completion of the IPO. Immediately thereafter, temporary equity was remeasured and an adjustment was recognized through additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit to adjust temporary equity to the redemption value.
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary share subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary share subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary share (including ordinary share that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary share feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, 23,000,000 Class A ordinary share subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary share and Class B ordinary share. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 19,300,000 of our Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income per share have been excluded as their effect would be anti-dilutive.
Our statement of operations applies the two-class method in calculating net income per share. Basic and diluted net income per ordinary share for Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing net income attributable to us by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares outstanding, allocated proportionally to each class of shares as set out in the Statement of Operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. The update simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments by removing certain separation models in Subtopic 470-20, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options for convertible instruments and introducing other changes. As a result of ASU No. 2020-06, more convertible debt instruments will be
accounted for as a single liability measured at its amortized cost and more convertible preferred stock will be accounted for as a single equity instrument measured at its historical cost, as long as no features require bifurcation and recognition as derivatives. The amendments are effective for smaller reporting companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. We adopted ASCU No. 2020-06 upon its incorporation. There was no impact on the balance sheet.
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statement.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the independent registered public accounting firm’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.