Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is intended to promote understanding of the results of operations and financial condition and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC by Xperi Holding Corporation on February 26, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at investor.xperi.com.
Business Overview
On December 18, 2019, Xperi Corporation (“Xperi”) entered into a definitive agreement with TiVo Corporation (“TiVo”), to combine in an all-stock merger of equals transaction (the “Mergers”). Following consummation of the Mergers on June 1, 2020, Xperi Holding Corporation became the parent company of both Xperi and TiVo. The common stock of both Xperi and TiVo were de-registered after completion of the Mergers. On June 2, 2020, Xperi Holding Corporation’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, commenced trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market (“Nasdaq”) under the ticker symbol “XPER.” Xperi was determined to be the accounting acquirer in the Mergers. As a result, the historical financial statements of Xperi for periods prior to the Mergers are considered to be the historical financial statements of Xperi Holding Corporation. As used herein, the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Xperi when referring to periods prior to June 1, 2020 and Xperi Holding Corporation when referring to periods subsequent to June 1, 2020. Our results of operations include the operations of TiVo after June 1, 2020. For further discussion on the Mergers, refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” and “Note 9 - Business Combinations” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We are a leading consumer and entertainment product/solutions licensing company and one of the industry’s largest intellectual property licensing platforms, with a diverse portfolio of media and semiconductor intellectual property and more than 11,000 patents and patent applications worldwide. We create extraordinary experiences at home and on the go for millions of consumers around the world, elevating content and how audiences connect with it in a way that is more intelligent, immersive and personal. Powering smart devices, connected cars, entertainment experiences and more, we’ve created a unified ecosystem that reaches highly engaged consumers, uncovering significant new business opportunities, now and in the future. Our technologies are integrated into billions of consumer devices, media platforms, and semiconductors worldwide, driving increased value for partners, customers and consumers. Headquartered in Silicon Valley with operations around the world, we have approximately 1,900 employees and more than 35 years of operating experience.
We are currently planning, subject to any required regulatory approvals, a separation of our Product business and IP Licensing business through a tax-efficient transaction, resulting in two independent, publicly traded companies. We continue to evaluate the optimal timing of the contemplated business separation and currently anticipate that such separation will be completed in the second half of 2022.
COVID-19 Impact
Our business and results of operations have been adversely affected by the global COVID-19 pandemic and related events and we expect its impact to continue. The impact to date has included periods of significant volatility in various markets and industries. The volatility has had, and we anticipate it will continue to have, an adverse effect on our customers and on our business, financial condition and results of operations, and may result in an impairment of our long-lived assets, including goodwill, increased credit losses and impairments of investments in other companies. In particular, the automotive market, as well as the broad consumer electronics industry, has been and may continue to be impacted by the pandemic and/or other events beyond our control, and further volatility could have an additional negative impact on these industries, customers, and our business. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and, to a lesser extent, U.S. restrictions on trade with certain Chinese customers, have impacted and may continue to impact the financial conditions of our customers.
Actions by United States federal, state and local governments, as well as by foreign governments, to address the COVID-19 pandemic, including travel bans, stay-at-home orders and school, business and entertainment venue closures, also had a significant adverse effect on the markets in which we conduct our businesses. COVID-19 poses the risk that our workforce, suppliers, and other partners may be prevented from conducting normal business activities for an extended period of time, including due to shutdowns or stay-at-home orders that may be requested or mandated by governmental authorities. We have implemented policies to allow our employees to work remotely as a result of the pandemic as we reviewed processes related to
workplace safety, including social distancing and sanitation practices recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The COVID-19 pandemic could also cause delays in acquiring new customers and executing renewals and could also impact our business as consumer behaviors continue to change in response to the pandemic.
Since the start of the summer of 2021, there has been rapid spread of the contagious Delta variant of COVID-19, particularly in the regions and among the age groups with low vaccination rates, leading to a resurgence in cases, hospitalizations and deaths. With the emergence of the highly transmissible Omicron variant in November 2021, COVID-19 daily cases in the U.S. reached the highest level in January 2022. Businesses and consumers have been adjusting their plans to comply with renewed mask and vaccine mandates, travel restrictions, event cancellations and delayed office reopenings. Our operations and those of our customers have also been negatively impacted by certain trends arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, including labor market constraints, shortage of semiconductor components and manufacturing capacities, and delays in shipments, product development and product launches. In addition, the widespread supply chain disruption is expected to impede global and regional economic activities, such as consumer spending and product availabilities, which may adversely affect our business operations and financial results. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic, its related impact, and United States federal, state and foreign government policies enacted to combat the pandemic have contributed to a recent rise of inflation that may increase the cost of our operations and reduce demand for our products and services and those of our customers, which may adversely affect our financial performance.
We have been closely monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business, including legislation to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 such as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act which was enacted in March 2020, and the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 which was enacted in March 2021. Although a significant portion of our anticipated revenue for 2022 is derived from fixed-fee and minimum-guarantee arrangements, primarily from large, well-capitalized customers which we believe somewhat mitigates the risks to our business, our per-unit and variable-fee based revenue will continue to be susceptible to the volatility, labor shortages, supply chain disruptions, microchip shortages, and potential market downturns precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The full extent of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance is uncertain and will depend on many factors outside our control, including, without limitation, the timing, extent, trajectory and duration of the pandemic; the availability, distribution and effectiveness of vaccines; the spread of new variants of COVID-19; the continued and renewed imposition of protective public safety measures; the continuing global disruption in supply chains in our industries; and the impact of the pandemic on the global economy and demand for consumer products. Although we are unable to predict the full impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we are actively managing our financial expenditures in response to continued uncertainty. Further discussion of the potential impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic is provided under Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Key Metrics
In evaluating our financial condition and operating performance, we focus on revenue and cash flow from operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
•
Revenue decreased by $14.3 million, or 2%, from $892.0 million to $877.7 million. The decrease was primarily due to past royalty revenue from the Comcast Corporation (“Comcast”) license executed in the fourth quarter of 2020 and declines in revenue from the Semiconductor IP licensing business and the Product business driven largely by supply chain disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the inclusion of a full year of post-merger revenue from TiVo in 2021.
•
Cash provided by operating activities decreased by $192.8 million, or 45%, from $427.6 million to $234.8 million. The decrease was primarily due to past royalties received from Comcast in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by reductions in merger-related transaction costs and litigation expense in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Results of Operations
Significant events occurred over the past two years that affect the comparability of our financial statements. Key events and their financial impacts include the following:
•
On November 9, 2020, we entered into a patent license agreement (the “Agreement”) with Comcast Corporation (“Comcast”) and certain of its affiliates. In connection with the Agreement, we resolved all of the outstanding litigation with Comcast. The Agreement is effective as of the expiration of Comcast’s prior agreement in 2016 and its
term continues into 2031. Due to revenue recognized for the unlicensed period from 2016, the Agreement had a significant positive impact on our financial results and cash flows in 2020.
•
On June 1, 2020, we completed the Mergers with TiVo. As a result, we incurred significant one-time expenses in 2020 such as transaction related costs (e.g. bankers fees, legal fees, consultant fees), lease impairment charges due to facilities consolidation, severance and retention costs (including stock-based compensation expense resulting from the contractually-required acceleration of equity instruments for departing executives). Additionally, our amortization expense increased significantly due to the valuation of TiVo’s intangible assets recorded as a result of the Mergers. TiVo’s results of operations and cash flows have been included in our consolidated financial statements for periods subsequent to June 1, 2020.
Revenue
We derive the majority of our revenue from the licensing of our technologies and intellectual property (“IP”) rights to customers. For our revenue recognition policy including descriptions of revenue-generating activities, refer to “Note 4 - Revenue” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table presents our historical operating results for the periods indicated as a percentage of revenue:
The following table sets forth our revenue by year (in thousands, except for percentages):
The $14.3 million or 2% decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year, was primarily due to past royalty revenue from Comcast recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020 and declines in revenue from the Semiconductor IP licensing business and the Product business driven largely by supply chain disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the inclusion of a full year of post-merger revenue from TiVo in 2021.
On November 9, 2020, we entered into a patent license agreement (the “Comcast Agreement”) with Comcast and, as a result, we resolved all outstanding litigation with Comcast. The Comcast Agreement is effective as of the expiration of Comcast’s prior agreement in 2016 and its term continues into 2031. The Comcast Agreement provided for an initial payment by Comcast upon execution and provides for ongoing payments through the remainder of the Comcast Agreement. In connection with the
Comcast Agreement, we recorded revenue for past royalties in the fourth quarter of 2020 and expect to recognize revenue from the prospective license into 2031.
Cost of revenue, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization of Intangible Assets
Cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization of intangible assets, consists primarily of employee-related costs, royalties paid to third parties, hardware product-related costs, maintenance costs and an allocation of facilities costs, as well as service center and other expenses related to providing our technology solution offerings and NRE services.
Cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization of intangible assets, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $126.8 million, as compared to $78.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $48.4 million. The increase was primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of post-merger TiVo costs, and secondarily from the growth in our hardware product sales in 2021.
Research, Development and Other Related Costs
Research, development and other related costs (“R&D expense”) are comprised primarily of employee-related costs, stock-based compensation expense, engineering consulting expenses associated with new product and technology development, product commercialization, quality assurance and testing costs, as well as costs related to patent applications and examinations, reverse engineering, materials, supplies, and an allocation of facilities costs. All research, development and other related costs are expensed as incurred.
R&D expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $232.2 million as compared to $195.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $37.0 million. The increase was primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of post-merger TiVo R&D expenses in 2021, as well as employees hired in connection with the acquisition of certain assets of MobiTV on May 31, 2021, partially offset by a decrease in personnel-related costs resulting from cost synergies implemented subsequent to the Mergers.
We believe that a significant level of R&D expense will be required for us to remain competitive in the future.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling expenses consist primarily of compensation and related costs for sales and marketing personnel engaged in sales and licensee support, reverse engineering personnel and services, marketing programs, public relations, promotional materials, travel, trade show expenses, and stock-based compensation expense. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and related costs for general management, information technology, finance personnel, legal fees and expenses, facilities costs, stock-based compensation expense, and professional services. Our general and administrative expenses, other than facilities-related expenses, are not allocated to other expense line items.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $266.1 million, as compared to $245.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $20.7 million. The increase was due principally to the inclusion of a full year of post-merger TiVo SG&A expenses, partially offset by decreases in merger-related transaction costs, severance and retention, and provision for credit losses as well as decreased personnel-related costs resulting from cost synergies implemented in 2021.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation expense was $23.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.9 million. The increase was primarily attributable to depreciation expense on TiVo fixed assets added through the Mergers in June 2020.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $203.4 million, as compared to $156.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $46.6 million. The increase was primarily attributable to amortization of intangible assets recorded in connection with the Mergers in June 2020, and secondarily due to a significant amount of intangible assets
acquired in the fourth quarter of 2020, which was partially offset by certain acquired intangible assets becoming fully amortized in the fourth quarter of 2021.
As a result of the Mergers, we anticipate that amortization expenses will continue to be a significant expense since we acquired approximately $878.0 million in intangible assets which will be amortized over the next several years. See “Note 10 - Goodwill and Identified Intangible Assets” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Litigation Expense
Litigation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11.6 million, as compared to $20.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $9.2 million. The decrease was primarily due to the resolution of prior litigation and reduced case activity.
We expect that litigation expense will continue to be a material portion of our operating expenses. Litigation expense may fluctuate between periods because of planned or ongoing litigation, as described in Part I, Item 3 - Legal Proceedings, and because of litigation planned for or initiated from time to time in the future in order to enforce and protect our intellectual property and contract rights.
Upon expiration of our customers’ licenses, if those licenses are not renewed, litigation may become necessary to secure payment of reasonable royalties for the use of our patented technology. If we plan for or initiate such litigation, our future litigation expenses may increase.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
The following table sets forth our stock-based compensation (“SBC”) expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Stock-based compensation awards include restricted stock awards and units, employee stock plan purchases and employee stock options. The increase in stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year, was primarily a result of including a full year of SBC expense from assumed TiVo stock awards from the Mergers and increases in stock award grants for an expanded workforce as a result of the Mergers.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $39.0 million, as compared to $37.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily a result of a higher average debt balance in 2021 as compared to 2020 as we entered into a new term loan of $1,050 million on June 1, 2020 to refinance the indebtedness of the combined companies in connection with the Mergers, partially offset by a reduction in interest rate as a result of the debt refinancing in June 2021 described below.
We anticipate interest expense will decrease in 2022 when compared to 2021 as a result of a full year of the lower debt balance and amortization of debt discount and issuance costs. However, those reductions could potentially be offset by increasing interest rates since our interest rate is variable.
Other Income and Expense, Net
Other income and expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.6 million, as compared to $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other income was lower in the current year principally due to a decrease in interest income
from significant financing components from revenue contracts, and secondarily from a decline in interest income from our short-term investments.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
In June 2021, we refinanced the 2020 Term B Loan Facility by, among other things, lowering the interest rate on the debt. Certain lenders of the original loan syndication did not participate in the refinancing. Accordingly, we accounted for the refinancing event for these lenders as a debt extinguishment and recorded, in 2021, a loss on debt extinguishment of $8.0 million related to the write-off of unamortized debt discount and issuance costs for the portions of the 2020 Term B Loan Facility considered to be extinguished.
In June 2020, in connection with the Mergers we refinanced the indebtedness of the combined companies by entering into the 2020 Term B Loan Facility, and consequently recognized a loss of $8.3 million on early debt extinguishment on the legacy debt of TiVo in 2020.
Provision for (benefit from) Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an income tax provision of $28.4 million on a pretax loss of $30.5 million, which resulted in an effective tax rate of (92.9)%. The income tax expense of $28.4 million was primarily related to foreign withholding taxes, unrealized foreign exchange loss from prior year South Korea refund claims, tax on profitable foreign subsidiary earnings, state income taxes and BEAT, partially offset by releases of unrecognized tax benefits. The negative tax rate is the result of a tax expense recorded against a pre-tax loss.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $7.9 million on a pretax income of $135.9 million, which resulted in an effective tax rate of (5.8)%. The income tax benefit of $7.9 million was primarily related to a net decrease in valuation allowance as a result of the Mergers, eligible deductions from foreign-derived intangible income (“FDII”), releases of unrecognized tax benefits due to the lapse of applicable statutes of limitation, deductibility of certain transaction expenses, and unrealized foreign exchange gains from the prior period South Korea refund claim, partially offset by tax expense from operating income, withholding taxes, shortfalls from stock-based compensation, and certain non-deductible expenses.
The year-over-year increase in income tax expense is largely attributable to the inclusion of twelve months of TiVo activity in the current year and to further declines in the dollar value of the South Korea refund claim.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we filed a refund claim for foreign taxes previously withheld from licensees in South Korea based on court rulings in South Korea and other business factors. These previously-withheld foreign taxes were claimed as a foreign tax credit in the U.S. As a result of the 2019 refund claim and planned refund claims for 2020 and 2021, we recorded a total of $118.1 million and $123.0 million as a noncurrent income tax receivable at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, $63.1 million and $62.3 million as a noncurrent income tax payable at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $40.6 million and $36.7 million as a reduction in deferred tax assets at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Although the refund claim is subject to judicial review, we anticipate we will receive refunds in the amount recorded in the receivable.
The need for a valuation allowance requires an assessment of both positive and negative evidence when determining whether it is more-likely-than-not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. Such assessment is required on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis. In making such assessment, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. After considering both positive and negative evidence to assess the recoverability of our net deferred tax assets, we determined that it was not more-likely-than-not that we would realize our federal, certain state and certain foreign deferred tax assets given the substantial amount of tax attributes that will remain unutilized to offset reversing deferred tax liabilities as of December 31, 2021. We intend to continue maintaining a full valuation allowance on our federal deferred tax assets until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances. However, given our current earnings and anticipated future earnings, we believe that there is a reasonable possibility that within the next 12 months, sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to reach a conclusion that a significant portion of the federal valuation allowance will no longer be needed. Release of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain federal deferred tax assets and a
decrease to income tax expense for the period the release is recorded. However, the exact timing and amount of the valuation allowance release are subject to change based on the factors present when reevaluating both positive and negative evidence.
Segment Operating Results
We operate in two reportable segments: (1) IP Licensing and (2) Product. There are certain corporate overhead costs that are not allocated to these reportable segments because these operating amounts are not considered in evaluating the operating performance of our business segments.
Our Chief Executive Officer has been determined to be the Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) in accordance with the authoritative guidance on segment reporting.
In our IP Licensing segment, we primarily license our innovations to leading companies in the broader entertainment industry, and those developing new technologies that will help drive this industry forward. Licensing arrangements include access to one or more of our foundational patent portfolios and may also include access to some of our industry-leading technologies and proven know-how. In our Product segment, we derive the majority of the revenue from licensing our technology to customers primarily through Technology License arrangements and Technology Solutions arrangements. For Technology License arrangements, the customer obtains rights to the technology delivered at the commencement of the agreement. For Technology Solutions arrangements, the customer receives access to a platform, media or data that includes frequent updates, where access to such updates is critical to the functionality of the technology.
We do not identify or allocate assets by reportable segment, nor does the CODM evaluate reportable segments using discrete asset information. Reportable segments do not record inter-segment revenue and accordingly there are none to report. Although the CODM uses operating income to evaluate reportable segments, operating costs included in one segment may benefit other segments.
The following table sets forth our segment revenue, operating expenses and operating income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
(1) Unallocated operating expenses consist primarily of selling, marketing, general and administrative expenses, such as administration, human resources, finance, information technology, corporate development and procurement. These expenses are not allocated because these amounts are not considered in evaluating the operating performance of our business segments.
(2) Includes seven months of financial results of TiVo following the Mergers.
For year ended December 31, 2021, the unallocated operating expenses were $271.7 million compared to $249.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $22.6 million was due primarily to the inclusion of a full year of post-merger TiVo expenses, partially offset by decreases in merger-related transaction costs, severance and retention, and provision for credit losses in 2021.
The revenue and operating income (loss) amounts in this section have been presented on a basis consistent with GAAP applied at the segment level. Of our $851.1 million in goodwill at December 31, 2021, approximately $527.8 million was allocated to our Product segment and approximately $323.3 million was allocated to our IP Licensing segment.
IP Licensing Segment
(1) Excludes operating expenses which are not allocated on a segment basis.
The decrease in revenue in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily attributable to past royalty revenue from Comcast recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020 as discussed in “Results of Operations,” and secondarily a decline in revenue from the Semiconductor IP licensing business, partially offset by the inclusion of a full year of post-merger IP Licensing revenue from TiVo in 2021.
The increase in operating expenses in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of post-merger TiVo IP Licensing expenses, partially offset by a decrease in litigation expenses in 2021.
We expect that litigation expense will continue to be a material portion of our operating expenses and may fluctuate between periods because of planned or ongoing litigation, as described in Part I, Item 3 - Legal Proceedings, and because of litigation planned for or initiated from time to time in the future in order to enforce and protect our intellectual property and contract rights.
Operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $248.4 million and $402.6 million, respectively, which represented a decrease of $154.2 million, for the reasons stated above.
Product Segment
(1) Excludes operating expenses which are not allocated on a segment basis.
The increase in revenue in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily attributable to the inclusion of a full year of post-merger Product revenue from TiVo. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in Consumer Electronics revenue driven largely by supply chain constraints that impacted our customers’ shipment volumes in 2021, and from entering into minimum guarantee customer contracts of shorter duration in 2021 as compared to 2020.
The increase in operating expenses in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily attributable to the inclusion of a full year of post-merger TiVo Product expenses, and costs of headcount added in connection with the acquisition of certain MobiTV assets in May 2021, partially offset by a decrease in personnel-related costs resulting from cost synergies implemented subsequent to the Mergers.
Operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $37.1 million and $24.2 million, respectively, which represented an increase of $12.9 million, for the reasons stated above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents selected financial information related to our liquidity and significant sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are our operating cash flows and our short-term investments. Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments were $261.7 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of $4.6 million from $257.1 million at December 31, 2020. This increase resulted primarily from $234.8 million in cash generated from operations and $13.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our employee stock grant programs and employee stock purchase plans, which was partially offset by $21.0 million in dividends paid, $100.8 million in repurchases of common stock, $84.0 million in repayment of long-term debt, $17.4 million in cash used to acquire certain assets and liabilities of MobiTV, Inc. (the “MobiTV Acquisition”), $14.0 million of capital expenditures and $4.3 million in net debt refinancing costs. Cash and cash equivalents totaled $201.1 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of $30.9 million from $170.2 million at December 31, 2020.
The primary objectives of our investment activities are to preserve principal and to maintain liquidity while at the same time capturing a market rate of return. To achieve these objectives, we maintain a diversified portfolio of securities including money market funds and debt securities including corporate bonds and notes, municipal bonds and notes, commercial paper, treasury and agency notes and bills and certificates of deposit. We invest excess cash predominantly in high-quality investment grade debt securities with less than three years to maturity. Our marketable debt securities are classified as available-for-sale (“AFS”) with credit losses recognized as a credit loss expense and non-credit related unrealized gains and losses, net of tax, recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income or loss.
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding long-term debt in an aggregate principal amount of $789.8 million, with $40.5 million payable within 12 months. Future interest payments associated with the debt, based on current interest rates, total $153.6 million, with $27.8 million payable within 12 months. The interest payments may vary with changes in interest rates. Refer to “Note 11 - Debt” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on debt obligations and maturities.
Leases
We have lease arrangements for office and research facilities, data centers and office equipment. As of December 31, 2021, fixed lease payment obligations amounted to $79.7 million, with $19.7 million payable within 12 months. Refer to “Note 8 - Leases” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on lease obligations and maturities.
Inventory Purchase Commitments
We use contract manufacturers to provide manufacturing services for our products. As of December 31, 2021, we had total purchase commitments for inventory of $15.4 million, all of which is payable within 12 months.
Other Purchase Obligations
Our other purchase obligations primarily consist of noncancelable obligations related to advertising, engineering services and internet and telecommunications services. As of December 31, 2021, we had purchase obligations of $122.7 million, with $33.4 million payable within 12 months. These purchase obligations represent commitments under enforceable and legally binding agreements, and do not represent the entire anticipated purchases in the future. Refer to “Note 16 - Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail.
Income Tax Payable
As of December 31, 2021, we had accrued $91.6 million of unrecognized tax benefits in long-term income taxes payable related to uncertain tax positions, which includes $2.8 million of accrued interest and penalties. At this time, we are unable to reasonably estimate the timing of the long-term payments or the amount by which the liability will increase or decrease over time. If we are successful in receiving our South Korean withholding tax refunds of $118.1 million, including interest and foreign exchange gain, then $63.1 million of unrecognized tax benefit would be payable to the U.S. tax authorities.
In addition to the cash requirements outlined above, we have returned cash to stockholders through both quarterly dividend payments and repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase plan.
Quarterly Dividends
In 2021, we paid quarterly dividends of $0.05 per share in each of March, June, September and December. In 2020, we paid quarterly dividends of $0.20 per share in each of March and May and quarterly dividends of $0.05 per share in each of September and December. Our capacity to pay dividends in the future depends on many factors, including our financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, capital structure, industry practice and other business conditions that the Board of Directors considers relevant.
Stock Repurchase Plan
Following the closing of the Mergers, on June 12, 2020, our Board of Directors terminated a prior stock repurchase program and approved a new stock repurchase plan (the “Plan”) providing for the repurchase of up to $150.0 million of our common stock dependent on market conditions, share price and other factors. No expiration has been specified for this Plan. On April 22, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized an additional $100.0 million of purchases under the Plan. The stock repurchases may be made from time to time, through solicited or unsolicited transactions in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions, or pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan. Since the inception of the Plan, and through December 31, 2021, we have repurchased an aggregate of approximately 9.0 million shares of common stock at a total cost of $155.0 million at an average price of $17.29. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our repurchases totaled $84.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, the total remaining amount available for repurchase under the Plan was $95.0 million. We may continue to execute authorized repurchases from time to time under the Plan. The amount and timing of any repurchases under the Plan depend on a number of factors, including but not limited to, the trading price, volume and availability of our common shares. In addition, as we plan for the separation of our Product business and IP Licensing business we may reduce or suspend share repurchases as we plan for the capital needs of two independent businesses. There is no guarantee that such repurchases under the Plan will enhance the value of our common stock.
From 2019 through 2021, we generated approximately $831.6 million of cash flows from operating activities. While we expect to continue to generate cash flows from operating activities in 2022, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to present uncertainties as to the level of such cash flows as compared to prior years. Additionally, transaction costs relating to the planned separation of our two business segments are expected to impact operating cash flow for at least the next 9 months. We
have taken actions to manage cash flows by reducing discretionary spending and other variable costs, and closely monitoring receivables and payables.
We believe that based on current levels of operations and anticipated growth, our cash from operations, together with cash, cash equivalents and investments currently available, will be sufficient to satisfy our currently anticipated cash requirements through at least the next twelve (12) months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. Poor financial results, unanticipated expenses, unanticipated acquisitions of technologies or businesses, or unanticipated strategic investments could give rise to additional financing requirements sooner than we expect. There can be no assurance that equity or debt financing will be available when needed or, if available, that such financing will be on terms satisfactory to us. The sale of additional equity securities could result in dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and may include covenants that would restrict our operations.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operations were $234.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to our net loss of $58.9 million being adjusted for non-cash items of depreciation of $23.8 million, amortization of intangible assets of $203.4 million, stock-based compensation expense of $58.2 million, and a loss on debt extinguishment of $8.0 million.
Cash flows provided by operations were $427.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to our net income of $143.8 million, non-cash items of depreciation of $17.9 million, amortization of intangible assets of $156.8 million, stock-based compensation expense of $39.1 million and loss on debt extinguishment of $8.3 million, plus $76.8 million in changes in operating assets and liabilities. These increases were partially offset by a reduction of $34.7 million in deferred income taxes.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to purchases of short-term investments of $67.3 million, cash used in the MobiTV Acquisition of $17.4 million and capital expenditures of $14.0 million, partially offset by maturities and sales of securities of $92.7 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to net cash acquired in the Mergers of $117.4 million and maturities and sales of securities of $35.9 million, partially offset by purchases of short-term investments of $77.2 million, purchases of intangible assets of $50.9 million and capital expenditures of $7.4 million.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures for property, plant, and equipment consist primarily of purchases of computer hardware and software, information systems, production and test equipment. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we spent $14.0 million and $7.4 million on capital expenditures, respectively, and we expect capital expenditures in 2022 to be between $20.0 million to $25.0 million. These expenditures are expected to be financed with cash from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments. There can be no assurance that current expectations will be realized and plans are subject to change upon further review of our capital expenditure needs.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $196.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 principally due to $84.0 million in repayment of indebtedness, $4.3 million in net debt refinancing costs, $21.0 million in dividends paid, and $100.8 million in repurchases of common stock, partially offset by $13.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our employee stock grant programs and employee stock purchase plans.
Net cash used in financing activities was $351.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 principally due to $1,254.9 million in repayment of indebtedness, $80.6 million in repurchases of common stock and $30.8 million in dividends paid, partially offset by $1,010.3 million in net long-term debt proceeds and $4.9 million in proceeds due to the issuance of common stock under our employee stock option programs and employee stock purchase plans.
Long-term Debt
On December 1, 2016, we entered into a Credit Agreement with Royal Bank of Canada (“RBC”) which provided for a $600.0 million seven-year term B loan facility. The Term B Loan Facility was scheduled to mature on November 30, 2023. During 2019 we made three voluntary principal payments totaling $150.0 million, and upon consummation of the Mergers on June 1, 2020, we repaid the full remaining balance of $344.0 million under the Credit Agreement. In addition, upon consummation of the Mergers on June 1, 2020, we repaid $734.6 million of assumed TiVo debt with the proceeds from a new borrowing of $1,050 million discussed below.
On June 1, 2020, in connection with the consummation of the Mergers, we entered into a Credit Agreement (the “2020 Credit Agreement”) by and among us, the lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent and collateral agent. The 2020 Credit Agreement provided for a five-year senior secured term B loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $1,050 million (the “2020 Term B Loan Facility”). The interest rate applicable to loans outstanding under the 2020 Term B Loan Facility was equal to, at our option, either (i) a base rate plus a margin of 3.00% per annum or (ii) LIBOR plus a margin of 4.00% per annum. Commencing on September 30, 2020, the 2020 Term B Loan Facility was amortized in quarterly installments equal to (i) with respect to repayments occurring on or prior to June 1, 2023, 1.25% of the original principal amount of the 2020 Term B Loan Facility and (ii) with respect to repayments occurring after June 1, 2023 and prior to June 1, 2025, 1.875% of the original principal amount of the 2020 Term B Loan Facility, with the balance payable on the maturity date of the 2020 Term B Loan Facility (in each case subject to adjustment for prepayments). The 2020 Term B Loan Facility was scheduled to mature on June 1, 2025. Upon the closing of the 2020 Credit Agreement, we borrowed $1,050 million under the 2020 Term B Loan Facility. Net proceeds were used on June 1, 2020, together with cash and cash equivalents, to repay existing indebtedness of the combined Company, including the aforementioned Term B Loan Facility with RBC. We commenced repaying quarterly installments under the 2020 Term B Loan Facility in the third quarter of 2020. The agreement permitted prepayment of principal without penalty and on December 31, 2020, we elected to make a voluntary principal payment of $150.0 million. On June 8, 2021, we paid down $50.6 million in principal balance and completed a refinancing of the 2020 Term B Loan Facility by entering into an amendment to the 2020 Term B Loan Facility (the “Refinanced Term B Loans”) to provide a new loan facility in the amount of $810.0 million, reducing the borrowing rate by 50 basis points and extending the loan maturity date to June 2028. We commenced repaying quarterly installments under the Refinanced Term B Loans in the third quarter of 2021.
At December 31, 2021, $789.8 million was outstanding under the Refinanced Term B Loans with an interest rate, including amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, of 4.2%. Interest is payable monthly. Under the existing loan agreements, we have future minimum principal payments for our debt of $40.5 million in each year from 2022 through 2027, with the remaining principal balance of $546.8 million due in 2028. We are obligated to pay a portion of excess cash flow on an annual basis beginning in March 2023 based on certain leverage ratios and our excess cash flow generated for the immediately preceding calendar year. The Refinanced Term B Loans contain customary covenants, and as of December 31, 2021, we were in full compliance with such covenants.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements. These financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the United States which requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. By their nature, these estimates and judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We evaluate our estimates based on our historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates relate to revenue recognition, the assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, business combinations, recognition and measurement of deferred income tax assets and liabilities, the assessment of unrecognized tax benefits, and others. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and material effects on our operating results and financial position may result.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to understanding our consolidated financial statements. See “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 4 - Revenue” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of our accounting policies.
Revenue recognition
We derive the majority of our revenue from the licensing of our technologies and intellectual property (“IP”) rights to customers. Generally, revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products, services or technologies and IP rights to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those products, services or licensing of the technologies and IP rights. The primary judgments include estimating licensees’ quarterly royalties prior to receiving the royalty reports, estimating variable consideration, identifying the performance obligations in the contract,
determining stand-alone selling price and the transaction price, and allocating consideration in an arrangement with multiple performance obligations.
We generally recognize royalty revenue from per-unit or per-subscriber licenses based on units shipped or manufactured. Revenue is recognized in the period in which the customer’s sales or production are estimated to have occurred. This may result in an adjustment to revenue when actual sales or production are subsequently reported by the customer, generally in the month or quarter following sales or production. Estimating customers’ quarterly royalties prior to receiving the royalty reports requires us to make significant assumptions and judgments related to forecasted trends and growth rates used to estimate quantities shipped or manufactured by customers, which could have a material impact on the amount of revenue we report on a quarterly basis.
At times, we enter into license agreements in which a licensee is released from past patent infringement claims or is granted a license to ship an unlimited number of units or for an unlimited number of subscribers over a future period for a fixed fee. In these arrangements, we allocate the transaction price between the release for past patent infringement claims and the future license. In determining the stand-alone selling price of the release for past patent infringement claims and the future license, we consider such factors as the number of units shipped in the past or the number of past subscribers and the relevant geographies of the shipped units or subscribers, the future number of subscribers or units, as well as the licensing rate we generally receive for per-subscriber or units shipped in the same geographies. As the release from past patent infringement claims is generally satisfied at execution of the agreement, the transaction price allocated to the release from past patent infringement claims is generally recognized in the period the agreement is executed and the amount of transaction price allocated to the future license is recognized ratably over the future license term.
Business combinations
The fair value valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination under ASC 805 requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Critical estimates in determining the fair value of certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from customer contracts, customer lists, and acquired developed technologies and patents; competitive trends and market comparables; brand awareness and market position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the brand will continue to be used in our product portfolio; and discount rates. For additional information, refer to “Note 9 - Business Combinations” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Valuation of goodwill and intangible assets
We perform an annual review of the valuation of goodwill as of the beginning of the fourth quarter, or more often if indicators of impairment exist. Triggering events for impairment reviews may be indicators such as adverse industry or economic trends, restructuring actions, lower projections of profitability, or a sustained decline in our market capitalization. Evaluations of possible impairment and, if applicable, adjustments to carrying values require us to estimate, among other factors, future cash flows, useful lives, and fair market values of our reporting units and assets. When we conduct our evaluation of goodwill, the fair value of goodwill is assessed using valuation techniques that require significant management estimates and judgment. Should conditions be different from management’s last assessment, significant impairments of goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results.
As part of the annual goodwill impairment test, we elected to proceed with a quantitative goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2021. Based on the quantitative assessment, we concluded that the fair value of the reporting units exceeded the carrying amount for both the Product and IP Licensing reporting units with the fair value calculated as approximately 25% and 200% in excess of the respective carrying value for each of the Product and IP Licensing reporting units. In performing the quantitative impairment test for goodwill, the fair value of the reporting unit is compared to its carrying amount. We determine the fair value of a reporting unit using weighted results derived from an income approach and market approaches. Under the income approach, the fair value of a reporting unit is estimated based on the present value of future cash flows and considers projected revenue growth rates, future operating margins, income tax rates and economic and market conditions, as well as risk-adjusted discount rates. Under the market approaches, the fair value of a reporting unit is estimated based on the market comparable method, which estimates the fair value based on revenue multiples from comparable companies in similar lines of business, and the market transaction method, which estimates the fair value of the reporting unit by utilizing comparable transactions and transaction multiples.
Identified finite-lived intangible assets consist of acquired patents, existing technology, customer relationships, trademarks and trade names, non-compete agreements resulting from business combinations, and acquired patents under asset purchase agreements. Our identified intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, ranging
from 1 to 10 years. We make judgments about the recoverability of finite-lived intangible assets whenever facts and circumstances indicate that the useful life is shorter than originally estimated or that the carrying amount of assets may not be recoverable. If such facts and circumstances exist, we assess recoverability by comparing the projected undiscounted net cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their remaining lives against their respective carrying amounts. Impairments, if any, are based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of those assets. If the useful life is shorter than originally estimated, we would accelerate the rate of amortization and amortize the remaining carrying value over the new shorter useful life.
Identified indefinite-lived intangible assets include TiVo trademarks and tradenames resulting from business combinations. We evaluate the carrying value of indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis, and an impairment charge would be recognized to the extent that the carrying amount of such assets exceeds their estimated fair value.
Accounting for income taxes
We must make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments are used in the calculation of tax credits, tax benefits and deductions, and in the calculation of tax assets and liabilities. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to our tax provision in a subsequent period.
We must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets. If recovery is not likely on a more-likely-than-not basis, we must increase our provision for income taxes by recording a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. Should there be a change in our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, our provision for income taxes would fluctuate in the period of the change.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with authoritative guidance related to income taxes. The calculation of our unrecognized tax benefits involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. As such, we are required to make many subjective assumptions and judgments regarding our income tax exposures. We record unrecognized tax benefits for anticipated tax audit issues in the U.S. and other tax jurisdictions based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional tax liabilities are more-likely-than-not assuming the tax authorities have full knowledge of all relevant information. If we ultimately determine that the tax liabilities are unnecessary, we reverse the liabilities and recognize a tax benefit during the period in which it occurs. This may occur for a variety of reasons, such as the expiration of the statute of limitations on a particular tax return or the completion of an examination by the relevant tax authority. We record an additional charge in our provision for taxes in the period in which we determine that the recorded unrecognized tax benefits are less than the expected ultimate settlement.
Our policy is to classify accrued interest and penalties related to the accrued liability for unrecognized tax benefits in the provision for income taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $0.3 million of interest and penalties, and for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, we did not recognize any significant penalties or interest related to unrecognized tax benefits. See “Note 15 - Income Taxes” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 3 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective expected dates of adoption.