Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to 26 Capital Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
Proposed Business Combination
On October 15, 2021, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger and Share Acquisition (the “Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement”) with Tiger Resort Asia Ltd., a Hong Kong private limited company (“TRA”), Tiger Resort, Leisure and Entertainment Inc., a Philippine corporation and a subsidiary of TRA (“TRLEI”), Okada Manila International Inc., a Philippine corporation which is currently a subsidiary of TRLEI (“OMI”), and Project Tiger Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of OMI (“Merger Sub” and with TRA, TRLEI, and OMI, the “UEC Parties”). On February 15, 2022, the company entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement.
The Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement provides that, among other things and upon the terms and subject to the conditions thereof, the following transactions will occur (together with the other agreements and transactions contemplated by the Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement, the “Transactions”), following the Reorganization and the Subscription (each as defined below):
(a) at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement (the “Closing”), Merger Sub will merge with and into the Company, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub will cease and the Company will be the surviving corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of OMI (the “Merger”); and
(b) as a result of the Merger, among other things, all outstanding shares of common stock of the Company immediately prior to Closing (except with respect to certain specified shares) will be converted into and shall for all purposes represent only the right to subscribe for and purchase, pursuant to the Subscription Agreement (as defined herein) and a letter of transmittal and subscription confirmation, one validly issued, fully paid and non-assessable common share of OMI upon the exercise of such subscription right.
Prior to the Closing, TRA will effect a reorganization of parts of its business (the “Reorganization”) in accordance with the Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement. Pursuant to the Reorganization, among other matters, OMI will become a direct subsidiary of TRA, TRLEI will become a wholly-owned direct subsidiary of OMI, and intercompany receivables (other than ordinary course trade receivables) due from TRLEI to TRA and certain of its affiliates will be contributed to OMI.
Prior to Closing, but after the redemption of certain shares of the Company, the Company will, as agent acting on behalf of its stockholders, subscribe for common shares of OMI, at a price equal to their par value of 0.05 Philippine pesos, with the cash payment for such shares being deemed made by and on behalf of the applicable stockholders of the Company (the “Subscription”). In order to fund the cash payment on behalf the applicable stockholders, the Company will, prior to Closing, declare and pay a cash dividend on the shares of common stock of the Company in the amount of 0.05 Philippine pesos per share of common stock of the Company, which amount will either be paid by the Company to OMI in accordance with the Subscription Agreement or paid to holders of the Company’s shares of common stock who elect not to participate in the Subscription (but have not elected to have their shares redeemed by the Company).
The Transactions are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain customary closing conditions, including, among others, (a) the absence of any order by a governmental authority of competent jurisdiction preventing the consummation of the Transactions, (b) the approval of the Merger, the Subscription and related matters by the stockholders of the Company, (c) the effectiveness of the registration statement filed by OMI with the SEC in connection with the Transactions, (d) the receipt of approval for listing of OMI’s common shares on NASDAQ, (e) the completion of the Reorganization, (f) the amendment of OMI’s organizational documents in accordance with the Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement, and (g) the dividend to fund the Subscription shall have been declared, or alternative financing for the Subscription arranged.
The Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the Closing (a) by mutual written consent of the parties, (b) by either the Company or the UEC Parties in certain other circumstances set forth in the Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement, including, a breach by the other party or parties of their representations and warranties or covenants that would prevent the satisfaction of certain closing conditions, and (c) by either the Company or the UEC Parties (i) if any governmental authority shall have issued an order preventing consummation of the Transactions, (ii) in the event the Closing does not occur by July 1, 2022, and (iii) stockholders of the Company do not approve the Transactions as outlined in the Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement.
The Merger and Share Acquisition Agreement and other support agreements have been filed as exhibits to and described in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on October 18, 2021.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with the Merger by OMI to TRLEI or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of existing investors, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of the Merger. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete the Merger will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, the IPO and, since the closing of the IPO, a search for a Business Combination candidate. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $7,152,775 which was comprised of unrealized gain on change in fair value of warrants of $13,719,533 and interest income from investments held in our Trust Account of $16,371, offset by loss on sale of private placement warrants of $2,422,739, offering expenses related to warrant issuance of $1,021,001, and formation and operating costs of $3,139,389.
For the period from August 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,018 which was comprised of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Going Concern Consideration
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.5 million in our operating bank account, and working capital deficit of approximately $1.6 million.
Prior to the completion of the IPO, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a payment from the Sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $275,000. The promissory note from the Sponsor was paid in full as of January 20, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the IPO and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. On December 8, 2021, we received $1,500,000 from the Sponsor under the Working Capital Loans.
We have until January 20, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 20, 2023.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgement. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480-10-S99 “Classification and Measurement of Redeemable Securities.” Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that is considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ (deficit) equity section of the Company’s balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, the Company has elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable Class A common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
The Company has two classes of stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of stock. The 21,250,000 potential common stock for outstanding warrants to purchase the Company’s stock were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net income per common stock is the same as basic net income per common stock for the periods presented.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company”, we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of this offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.