Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Through December 31, 2021, we operated two segments: RC and APT. Our RC segment is comprised of our equity ownership in Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services, both of which are unconsolidated entities from which we generated substantial earnings. Tinuum Group provides reduction of mercury and NOx emissions at select coal-fired power generators through the production and sale of RC that qualifies for Section 45 tax credits under IRC Section 45. We benefited from Tinuum Group's production and sale of RC, which generated Section 45 tax credits, as well as its revenue from selling or leasing RC facilities to tax equity investors. We also earned royalties for technologies that we licensed to Tinuum Group, which were used at certain RC facilities to enhance combustion and reduce emissions of NOx and mercury from coal burned to generate electrical power. Tinuum Services operated and maintained the RC facilities under operating and maintenance agreements with Tinuum Group and owners or lessees of the RC facilities. Effective December 31, 2021, the Section 45 tax credit period expired and as a result both Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services have substantially ceased their operations. As such, our earnings and distributions from our RC segment substantially ceased as of December 31, 2021. We expect to receive limited, additional cash distributions from Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services during the first half of 2022.
Our APT segment is primarily comprised of operations of our wholly-owned subsidiary, Carbon Solutions, which we acquired on December 7, 2018. We sell consumable products that utilize AC and chemical based technologies to a broad range of customers, including coal-fired utilities, industrials, water treatment plants and other diverse markets. Our primary products are comprised of AC, which is produced from lignite coal. Our AC products include PAC and GAC. Our proprietary technologies and associated product offerings provide purification solutions to enable our customers to reduce certain contaminants and pollutants to meet the challenges of existing and potential regulations. Additionally, we own an associated lignite mine which supplies the primary raw material for manufacturing our products.
See further discussion of our business included in Item 1 - "Business" ("Item 1") of this Report. Discussion regarding segment information is included in the discussion of our consolidated results under this Item 7. Additionally, discussion related to our reportable segments is included in Item 1 and Note 19 of the Consolidated Financial Statements, which is included in Item 8 of this Report.
We believe there are opportunities and are continuing to pursue diverse markets for our purification products outside of coal-fired power generation, including industrial applications and water. The Supply Agreement with Cabot, as discussed below, continues to expand sales of our AC products to those diverse end-markets and drive the Company’s post-Refined Coal future.
Review of Strategic Alternatives
In May 2021, we announced that we had retained Ducera Partners, LLC as our financial advisor to assist in a strategic review process to assess a range of strategic alternatives to enhance value for our stockholders. We cannot provide any assurance that the exploration of strategic alternatives will result in the identification or consummation of any transaction. Similarly, any strategic decision will involve risks and uncertainties, and we cannot provide any assurance that any strategic alternative, if identified, evaluated and consummated, will provide the anticipated benefits or otherwise enhance stockholder value. The process is ongoing and our board of directors has not set a timetable for completion of the evaluation.
Drivers of Demand and Key Factors Affecting Profitability
Drivers of demand and key factors affecting our profitability differ by segment. Historically, we derived substantial earnings and cash distributions from the RC segment through our equity ownership in Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services as well as the royalties earned from a licensing arrangement with Tinuum Group for use of our M-45 Technology. With the expiration of the Section 45 tax credit period, we will no longer generate earnings from either Tinuum Group or Tinuum Services. Additionally, we do not expect our overall selling, general and administrative portions of our operating expenses to materially decrease in 2022 as a result of the wind down of our RC segment.
Demand in the APT segment is driven primarily by consumables-based solutions for coal-fired power generation, municipal water treatment and other industrial customers; and since the fourth quarter of 2020, demand from Cabot's customers through the Supply Agreement discussed below. Operating results in the APT segment have been influenced by: (1) changes in our sales volumes; (2) changes in price and product mix; (3) changes related to non-integrated supply chain inputs and (4) changes in coal-fired dispatch and electricity power generation sources. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we observed significant
increases in demand for our AC product. As such, we continue to purchase inventory to meet our customer demands to supplement products manufactured at our Red River Plant.
Customer Supply Agreement
On September 30, 2020, we and Cabot entered into the Supply Agreement, pursuant to which we agreed to sell and deliver to Cabot, and Cabot agreed to purchase and accept from us, Furnace Products. The term of the Supply Agreement is for 15 years with 10-year renewal terms that are automatic unless either party provides three years prior notice of intention not to renew before the end of any term.
The Supply Agreement has provided material incremental volume and allowed us to capture operating cost efficiencies at our Red River manufacturing plant. The incremental volumes from the Supply Agreement have improved fixed cost absorption and resulted in increased gross margins. Further, the Supply Agreement has expanded our AC products to diverse end markets that are outside of markets we historically served.
Acquisition of Marshall Mine
Concurrently with the execution of the Supply Agreement, on September 30, 2020, we entered into the Mine Purchase Agreement from Cabot for 100% of the membership interests in Marshall Mine, LLC (the "Marshall Mine Acquisition") for a nominal purchase price. Marshall Mine, LLC owns a lignite mine located outside of Marshall, Texas (the "Marshall Mine"). We independently determined to immediately commence activities to shutter the Marshall Mine and to incur the associated reclamation costs.
In conjunction with the execution of the Supply Agreement and the Mine Purchase Agreement, on September 30, 2020, we entered into the Reclamation Contract with a third party that provides a capped cost, subject to certain contingencies, in the amount of approximately $19.7 million plus an obligation to pay certain direct costs of approximately $3.6 million (collectively, the "Reclamation Costs") over the estimated reclamation period of 10 years. Under the terms of the Supply Agreement, Cabot is obligated to reimburse us for approximately $10.2 million of Reclamation Costs (the "Reclamation Reimbursement"), which are payable semi-annually over 13 years and inclusive of interest.
On February 25, 2022, we received $10.6 million in cash from Cabot (the "Cabot Payment") as a result of a change in control provision in the Supply Agreement (the "Change in Control"), which occurred as a result of the sale of Cabot by its parent, Cabot Corporation. Under the Change in Control, we received from Cabot full payment of all amounts outstanding under the Reclamation Reimbursement, payment of all unbilled amounts related to certain capital expenditures incurred by us through February 28, 2022 for specific use in manufacturing Furnace Products and payment of additional Reclamation Costs (the "Cabot Reclamation Costs"). Under the Reclamation Contract, we are obligated to remit payment for the Cabot Reclamation Costs to the third party operator of Marshall Mine within a specified timeframe. We will account for the Cabot Payment in its March 31, 2022 quarter and we do not anticipate any impacts to the Supply Agreement except as described above.
As the owner of the Marshall Mine, we were required to post a surety bond to ensure performance of our reclamation activities. As of December 31, 2021, the amount outstanding under this surety bond was $16.6 million. For the obligations due under the Reclamation Contract, we were required to post collateral of $10.0 million.
As of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021, we revised our estimate of future obligations owed for reclamation of the Marshall Mine primarily based on scope reductions related to future reclamation requirements. As a result, we reduced the Marshall Mine ARO by $1.9 million and $0.8 million as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021, respectively, and recorded a corresponding gain on change in estimate in the aggregate of $2.7 million in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Settlement with Former Customer
On December 29, 2020, we and a former customer (the "Parties") reached a settlement (the "Settlement") on various litigation matters (the "Litigation Matters") that resulted in the former customer (the "Former Customer") agreeing to pay to us cash of $2.5 million (the "Settlement Amount"), which was received on January 27, 2021. This payment was in exchange for full dissolution of all claims and counterclaims that the two Parties have asserted or could have asserted against each other in the Litigation Matters, or which have arisen or may arise against each other but are presently unknown, arising out of or related to the Litigation Matters and related to any other of the Parties’ business dealings, conduct and/or transactions through the date of the Settlement, including all claims for damages, fees, costs, sanctions, or any other amounts due or to become due in connection with the foregoing. We applied the Settlement Amount cash proceeds to both an outstanding trade account
receivable and a note receivable due from the Former Customer and recognized the excess cash received as a gain from the Settlement of $1.1 million, which is included as a reduction of operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, See further discussion under "Results of Operations" under this Item 7.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Heath Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. We follow the COVID-19 guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control concerning the health and safety of our personnel, including remote working for those that have the ability to do so, sequestered employees at our plant and other heath safety measures. Additionally, we have taken proactive and precautionary steps to ensure the safety of our employees, customers and suppliers, including frequent cleaning and disinfection of workspaces, property, plant and equipment, instituting social distancing measures and mandating remote working environments, where possible, for all employees.
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, in March 2020, the federal government passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act"). The CARES Act provided, among other things, the deferral of payroll tax payments for all payroll taxes incurred through December 31, 2020 and created the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"), which was sponsored and administered by the Small Business Administration ("SBA"). In June 2020, the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 (the "PPPFA") was signed into law and established the payment dates in the event that amounts borrowed under the PPP are not forgiven. See further discussion below of the loan made to us under the PPP under the section "PPP Loan" under this Item.
We elected to defer payments of payroll taxes of $0.4 million for the periods allowed under the CARES Act, which allowed for a deferral of 50% of the total amount to December 31, 2021 and 50% of the total amount to December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we had repaid $0.2 million and will repay the outstanding balance by December 31, 2022.
For 2020, we incurred costs of $0.4 million related to sequestration of certain of our employees at our Red River plant. These costs included hazard pay, lodging and meal expenses for 30 days. For 2021, we did not incur similar costs.
Our customers may also be impacted by COVID-19 pandemic as we believe the utilization of energy has changed. We cannot predict the long-term impact on our customers and the subsequent impact on our business.
Components of Revenue, Expenses and Equity Method Investees
The following briefly describes the components of revenues and expenses as presented in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Descriptions of the revenue recognition policies are included in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Revenues and cost of revenues
Consumables
We sell AC and products and other chemical-based technology products to a broad range of customers, including coal-fired utilities, industrials, water treatment plants and other diverse markets. Currently, our products mostly serve coal-fired utilities and other industrial boilers that allow the respective utilities to comply with the regulatory air emissions standards and water treatment plants to remove contaminants from the water. Additionally, we sell AC to Cabot and its customers through the Supply Agreement.
License royalties, related party
We recognize license royalties under the M-45 License with Tinuum Group. License royalties from our M-45 Technology are based on a percentage of the per-ton, pre-tax margin, inclusive of depreciation expense and other allocable expenses, as defined in the M-45 License. Because Section 45 tax credits from the production and sale of RC are not available to be generated after 2021 and both Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services significantly wound down their operations by the end of 2021, we do not expect to earn license royalties after 2021.
Other Operating Expenses
Payroll and benefits
Payroll and benefits costs include personnel related fringe benefits, sales and administrative staff labor costs and stock compensation expenses. Payroll and benefits costs exclude direct labor included in Cost of revenues.
Legal and professional fees
Legal and professional costs include external legal, audit and consulting expenses.
General and administrative
General and administrative costs include director fees and expenses, bad debt expense, research and development expense and other general costs of conducting business. Research and development costs, net of reimbursements from cost-sharing arrangements, are charged to expense in the period incurred and are reported in the General and administrative line item in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Depreciation, amortization, depletion and accretion
Depreciation and amortization expense consists of depreciation expense related to property, plant and equipment and the amortization of long-lived intangible assets. Depletion and accretion expense consists of depletion expense related to the depletion of mine development costs and the accretion of mine reclamation liabilities.
Other Income (Expense), net
Earnings from equity method investments
Earnings from equity method investments represent our share of earnings (losses) related to our equity method investments.
We own a 42.5% equity interest and a 50% voting interest in Tinuum Group. Our equity method earnings in Tinuum Group are positively impacted when Tinuum Group obtains an investor in a RC facility and receives cash payments under either a lease arrangement or sales arrangement of the RC facility. If Tinuum Group operates a retained RC facility, the Company's equity method earnings are negatively impacted as operating retained RC facilities generate operating losses. However, we benefit on an after-tax basis if we are able to utilize tax credits associated with the production and sale of RC from operation of retained RC facilities by Tinuum Group. These benefits, if utilized, increase our consolidated net income as a result of a reduction in income tax expense.
We own both a 50% equity and voting interest in Tinuum Services, which operates and maintains RC facilities under operating and maintenance agreements. The lessee/owner of an RC facility pays Tinuum Services, subject to certain limitations, the costs of operating and maintaining the RC facilities plus certain fees. Tinuum Services also arranges for the purchase and delivery of certain chemical additives under chemical agency agreements necessary for the production of RC.
Other income (expense)
The remaining components of other income (expense) include interest income, interest expense and other miscellaneous items.
Results of Operations
Presentation of Financial Results
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we have restated our "Revenues - Consumables" and "Cost of revenues, excluding depreciation and amortization" line items in our Consolidated Statement of Operations for the impact of previously reporting shipping and handling costs billed to our customers as a reduction to cost of revenue rather than as a component of consumables revenue. This restatement was a result of a reassessment of our accounting and presentation of shipping and handling costs billed to our customers under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP") in our Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. Historically, we have accounted for and presented shipping and handling costs billed to customers as a reduction of consumables cost of revenue rather than as a component of consumables revenue as required under Accounting Standards Codification 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Accordingly, we have restated both consumables revenues and consumable cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 by increasing the previously reported amounts by $5.8 million, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, there was no impact of the restatement to previously reported amounts for gross margin, operating loss, loss before income taxes, net loss or loss per share. Further there was no impact of this error to the previously reported Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 or the Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity or Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended December 31, 2020. See further discussion of this restatement in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of this Report.
For comparison purposes, the following tables set forth our results of operations for the years presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report. The year-to-year comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results that may be achieved in future years. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Year ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year ended December 31, 2020
Total Revenues and Cost of Revenues
A summary of the components of revenues and cost of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
Consumables revenues and consumables cost of revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, consumables revenue increased year over year primarily due to higher product volumes, which comprised approximately $25.0 million of the total change in consumables revenues. Product volumes were higher in power generation primarily due to higher natural gas prices compared to the prior year, which contributed to increased utilization of coal-fired generation and increased demand for our products. In addition, product sales increased under the Supply Agreement from the prior year as we began product shipments under this agreement beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020. Total revenues also increased due to a favorable price impact of our products by approximately $1.0 million as well as favorable product mix impact on consumables revenue of approximately $4.1 million. Consumables revenue for 2021 also increased $0.9 million related to an increase in shipping and handling costs billed to our customers, driven by increases in volumes and costs to ship our products.
Our gross margin, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the higher product volumes, which resulted in lower fixed costs per pound of product sold. Additionally, gross margin was positively impacted by product price increases. Offsetting these improvements for the year ended December 31, 2021, gross margin was negatively impacted by having to supplement the Red River production of our AC product, due to higher customer demand related to requirements-based contracts, with AC product purchases from third party suppliers at higher costs per pound. We expect to continue to purchase inventory from third party suppliers in 2022 due to ongoing increased demand for our products and Red River Plant capacity impacted by customer and product mix.
Consumables revenue is affected by electricity demand, driven by seasonal weather and related power generation needs, as well as competitor prices related to alternative power generation sources such as natural gas. According to data provided by the U.S. Energy Information Administration, for the year ended December 31, 2021, power generation from coal-fired power dispatch was up approximately 18.0% compared to the corresponding period in 2020. Additionally, there was an increase in total power generation from all sources of approximately 3.1% in 2021 compared to the corresponding period in 2020.
For 2022, and based on current market estimates and the expected benefits from the Supply Agreement, we believe that both consumables revenue and volumes will increase compared to 2021. We expect that consumables revenues and gross margin will be positively impacted by price increases announced in 2021 and our efforts to improve product mix to higher margin products through changes in our customer base. We anticipate that the product price increases will also help offset the increase
in operating costs from purchasing inventory from third party suppliers, as well as expected increases in pricing related to certain additives necessary for our manufacturing operations.
License royalties, related party
License royalties increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in the royalty rate per ton. This increase was primarily a result of an increase year over year in rent revenues generated from RC facilities even though the tonnage produced remained relatively flat. The tons of RC produced from RC produced using the M-45 Technology under the M-45 License were 49.3 million and 49.4 million for the year ends December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As a result of the Section 45 tax credit period ending as of December 31, 2021, both Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services ceased operations and, as such, we do not expect to earn M-45 License royalties after December 31, 2021.
Other cost of revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a credit of $0.6 million to Other cost of revenues related to the Settlement with the Former Customer. See further discussion below of the reversal of an allowance on a note receivable due from the Former Customer in this section under the caption "General and administrative."
Additional information related to revenue concentrations and contributions by class and reportable segment is included in the "Business Segments" section of this Item and in Note 13 and Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Other Operating Expenses
A summary of the components of our operating expenses, exclusive of cost of revenues items (presented above), for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
* Calculation not meaningful
Payroll and benefits
Payroll and benefits expenses increased year over year primarily due to expenses of $1.1 million related to the agreements with our executive officers and certain other key employees executed in June 2021 ("Retention Agreements") as well as $1.3 million related to an increase in incentive expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. These increases were offset by a decrease in expenses taken during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $1.4 million associated with the resignation of a former executive officer. Additionally, payroll expense decreased by approximately $0.5 million due to a decrease in headcount.
Legal and professional fees
Legal and professional fees increased year over year primarily due to an increase in legal and consulting fees of $0.9 million and $1.2 million, respectively, related to our continuing evaluation of strategic alternatives. Offsetting these increases was $0.9 million related to a reduction in outsourced shared service costs, which included legal and general consulting contractors, and $0.5 million in outsourced IT costs specific to the completion of the integration of Carbon Solutions in 2020.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased year over year primarily due to decreases in product development expenses of approximately $0.6 million related to the Supply Agreement, costs incurred due to the sequestration of certain of our employees at the Red River Plant in 2020 of approximately $0.4 million, rent and occupancy related expenses of $0.3 million and other general and administrative expenses, including recruiting, travel and licenses and fees of approximately $0.7 million.
Offsetting the net decrease in general and administrative expenses year over year was the offset to general and administrative expenses in 2020 from the reversal of an allowance on a note receivable from the Former Customer of $0.4 million. See further discussion below in this section under the caption "Gain on settlement." Further increases year over year included an increase in insurance premiums of approximately $0.4 million.
Depreciation, amortization, depletion and accretion
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased year over year primarily due to lower absorption from the drawdown of inventory, partially offset by increase in sales volumes for 2021, resulting in a decrease of depreciation expense of $0.2 million. Further, depreciation and amortization expense decreased by approximately $1.1 million related to a lower depreciable base for 2021 compared to 2020 as a result of an impairment charge recorded in the second quarter of 2020 which reduced the carrying value of our property, plant and equipment. Offsetting these decreases was an increase in accretion expense of $0.6 million related to the Marshall Mine ARO and an increase in depletion expense of $0.2 million due to increased production volume at the Five Forks Mine.
Gain on change in estimate, asset retirement obligation
As previously discussed under this Item, for the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain on change in estimate of $2.7 million related to a reduction in scope of our estimated future reclamation efforts of the Marshall Mine.
Impairment of long-lived assets
As of June 30, 2020, we recorded an impairment charge of $26.1 million, which is included in the Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was solely attributable to our APT segment. This impairment charge was necessitated by an analysis of the carrying values of our APT segment's long-lived assets and certain other long-lived assets (the "Asset Group"), which are comprised of our manufacturing plant and related assets and our lignite mine assets, to their respective fair values.
Gain on settlement
In connection with the Settlement discussed above, the Former Customer paid us the cash Settlement Amount of $2.5 million on January 27, 2021 in exchange for a full release of claims in the Litigation Matters. As a result of the Settlement, we recognized a gain of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense), net
A summary of the components of our other income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
* Calculation not meaningful
Earnings from equity method investments
The following table presents the equity method earnings by investee for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
* Calculation not meaningful
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $61.8 million in equity earnings from Tinuum Group compared to our proportionate share of Tinuum Group's net income of $40.1 million for the year. The difference between our pro-rata share of Tinuum Group's net income and our earnings from Tinuum Group equity method investment as reported on the Consolidated Statements of Operations is the result of cumulative distributions received from Tinuum Group being in excess of the carrying value of the investment, and therefore we recognize such excess distributions as equity method earnings in the period the distributions occur.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $24.4 million in equity earnings from Tinuum Group, which was equal to our proportionate share of Tinuum Group's net income for the year.
As of December 31, 2021, we concluded the carrying amount of our investment in Tinuum Services was not fully recoverable due to the remaining expected future cash distributions to be received as Tinuum Services shutters its operations in 2022 as a result of the expiration of the Section 45 tax credit period as of December 31, 2021. As a result, we wrote-down our investment in the amount of $0.7 million, which is included in the "Earnings from equity method investments" line item in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
See further discussion of year over year changes in Earnings from Equity Investments in "Business Segments" under this Item. Additional information related to equity method investments is included in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Tinuum Group's audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for the years then ended are included in Item 15 - "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" ("Item 15") of this Report.
Gain on extinguishment of debt
On July 27, 2021, we received formal notification in the form of a letter dated July 19, 2021 from Bank of Oklahoma ("BOK") that the SBA approved our PPP Loan forgiveness application for the PPP Loan in the amount of $3.3 million (including accrued interest). For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain on extinguishment of the PPP Loan in the amount of $3.3 million in the Consolidated Statement of Operations, which is included as a component of "Other income (expense)."
Tax Credits and Obligations
Historically, we have earned Section 45 tax credits that may be available for future benefit related to the production of RC from the operation of RC facilities in which we have held both direct ownership and indirect ownership through Tinuum's direct ownership. We refer to these RC facilities as "retained facilities." The Section 45 tax credit period ended December 31, 2021 and we will not earn Section 45 tax credits beyond this date. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $86.1 million in Section 45 tax carryforwards.
In the hypothetical event of an ownership change, as defined by IRC Section 382, utilization of general business credits ("GBC's") generated prior to the change would be subject to an annual limitation imposed by IRC Section 383 for GBC's. The results of a recent analysis indicated that we had not experienced an ownership change as of December 31, 2021, as defined by IRC Section 382. Such analysis for the period from January 1, 2022 through the date of this Report has not been completed. Therefore, it is possible that we experienced an ownership change between January 1, 2022 and the date of the filing of this Report, thus subjecting our GBC carryforwards to limitation.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased year over year by $2.4 million primarily due to principal payments made in 2021 on a senior term loan (the "Senior Term Loan") that resulted in lower coupon interest expense of $1.5 million. Interest expense for debt discount and debt issuance costs related to the Senior Term Loan also decreased by $0.5 million pursuant to the decrease in the Senior Term Loan principal. On June 1, 2021 and prior to the Senior Term Loan's maturity date, we paid the remaining principal balance of the Senior Term Loan and all remaining accrued interest through this date.
The remaining decrease in interest expense year over year related to lower interest expense ("Section 453A interest") related to IRS section 453A ("Section 453A"), which decreased by $0.3 million primarily due to a decrease in Tinuum Group's the tax liability year over year associated with RC facilities in which Tinuum Group recognized as installment sales for tax purposes.
The following table shows the balance of the tax liability that has been deferred and the applicable interest rate used to calculate the 453A interest liability:
(1) Represents the approximate tax effected liability utilizing the federal tax rate in effect for the applicable year ended related to the deferred gain on installment sales, which was approximately zero as of December 31, 2021.
Income tax expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our reported income tax expense was $15.7 million and was based on an effective rate of 21%. While the U.S. statutory federal income tax rate (the "Federal Rate") was also 21%, our effective tax rate was primarily increased for state income tax expense, net of federal benefit, and decreased from a reduction in the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our reported income tax expense of $6.5 million and was based on an inverse effective rate of 47%, which differed from the Federal Rate of 21% due to primarily an increase in the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets. This increase in the valuation allowance resulted in income tax expense rather than expected income tax benefit based on the pretax loss.
Accounting for income taxes requires that companies assess whether a valuation allowance should be recorded against their deferred tax asset based on an assessment of the amount of the deferred tax asset that is “more likely than not” to be realized.
Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
We assess a valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets at each reporting date. The determination of whether a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is appropriate requires the evaluation of positive and negative evidence that can be objectively verified. Consideration must be given to all sources of taxable income available to realize the deferred tax asset, including, as applicable, the future reversal of existing temporary differences, future taxable income forecasts exclusive of the reversal of temporary differences and carryforwards, taxable income in carryback years and tax planning strategies. In estimating taxes, we assess the relative merits and risks of the appropriate tax treatment of transactions taking into account statutory, judicial, and regulatory guidance.
As of December 31, 2021, we concluded it is more likely than not we will not generate sufficient taxable income within the allowable carryforward periods to realize any of our net deferred tax assets, and fully reserved for such assets as of December 31, 2021. In reaching this conclusion, we primarily considered forecasts of future taxable losses. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a valuation allowance of $87.5 million and $88.8 million, respectively, on our deferred tax assets.
The ability to recognize the remaining deferred tax assets that continue to be subject to a valuation allowance is evaluated on a quarterly basis to determine if there are any significant events that would affect the ability to utilize those deferred tax assets. Our estimate of future taxable income or losses is based on internal projections that consider historical performance, assumptions on future performance and external data. If events are identified that affect our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets, or if additional deferred tax assets are generated, we update our analysis to determine if an increase to a valuation allowance is required. Such an increase could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Conversely, better than expected results and continued positive results and trends could result in a decrease to a valuation allowance, and any such decreases could have a material positive effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
See additional discussion in Note 18 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, we are providing non-GAAP measures of certain financial performance. These non-GAAP measures include Consolidated EBITDA, Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, RC Segment EBITDA, RC Segment Adjusted EBITDA, APT Segment EBITDA and APT Segment Adjusted EBITDA. We have included non-GAAP measures because management believes that they help to facilitate period to period comparisons of our operating results. We believe the non-GAAP measures provide useful information to both management and users of the financial statements by excluding certain expenses, gains and losses that may not be indicative of core operating results and business outlook. Management uses these non-GAAP measures in evaluating the performance of our business.
These non-GAAP measures are not in accordance with, or an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP and may be different from non-GAAP measures used by other companies. In addition, these non-GAAP measures are not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles. These measures should only be used to evaluate our results of operations in conjunction with the corresponding GAAP measures.
We define Consolidated EBITDA as net income adjusted for the impact of the following items that are either non-cash or that we do not consider representative of our ongoing operating performance: depreciation, amortization, depletion, accretion, amortization of upfront customer consideration that was recorded as a component of the Marshall Mine Acquisition ("Upfront Customer Consideration"), interest expense, net and income tax expense. We define Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA as Consolidated EBITDA, reduced by the non-cash impacts of equity earnings from equity method investments, gain on change in estimate of asset retirement obligations, gain on extinguishment of debt and gain on customer settlement, and increased by cash distributions from equity method investments and impairment of long-lived assets. Because Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA omits certain non-cash items, we believe that the measure is less susceptible to variances that affect our operating performance.
We define APT Segment EBITDA (loss) as APT Segment operating loss adjusted for the impact of the following items that are either non-cash or that we do not consider representative of our ongoing operating performance: depreciation, amortization, depletion, accretion, amortization of Upfront Customer Consideration and interest expense, net. We define APT Segment Adjusted EBITDA (loss) as APT Segment EBITDA (loss), reduced by gain on customer settlement, gain on change in estimate of asset retirement obligation, gain on extinguishment of debt and gain on customer settlement, and increased by impairment of long-lived assets.
We define RC Segment EBITDA as RC Segment operating income adjusted for the impact of the following items that are either non-cash or that we do not consider representative of our ongoing operating performance: depreciation, amortization, depletion, accretion and interest expense. We define RC Segment Adjusted EBITDA as RC Segment EBITDA, reduced by the non-cash impact of equity earnings from equity method investments and gain on extinguishment of debt, and increased by cash distributions from equity method investments.
When used in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, we believe these non-GAAP measures are supplemental measures of operating performance that explain our operating performance for our period to period comparisons and against our competitors' performance. Generally, we believe these non-GAAP measures are less susceptible to variances that affect our operating performance results.
With the exception of extinguishment of debt, gain on change in estimate, asset retirement obligation, impairment on long-lived assets and gain on settlement, the adjustments to Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and APT Segment Adjusted EBITDA in future periods are generally expected to be similar. These non-GAAP measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under GAAP.
Reconciliation of Net income (loss) to Consolidated EBITDA (Loss) and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA
The following table reconciles net income (loss), our most directly comparable as-reported financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to Consolidated EBITDA (Loss) and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA. A reconciliation of RC Segment EBITDA, RC Segment Adjusted EBITDA, APT Segment EBITDA and APT Segment Adjusted EBITDA to our most directly comparable as-reported financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is included below following the discussion of the results of each respective segment.
Business Segments
As of December 31, 2021, we have two reportable segments, RC and APT.
The business segment measurements provided to and evaluated by our chief operating decision maker are computed in accordance with the principles listed below:
•The accounting policies of the operating segments are the same as those described in the summary of significant accounting policies except as described below.
•Segment revenues include equity method earnings and losses from our equity method investments.
•Segment operating income (loss) includes segment revenues, gains related to sales of equity method investments and allocation of certain "Corporate general and administrative expenses," which include Payroll and benefits, Legal and professional fees, General and administrative, and Depreciation, amortization, depletion and accretion.
•RC segment operating income includes interest expense directly attributable to the RC segment.
The principal products and services of our segments are described in Item 1 of this Report. The following table presents our operating segment results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1) Included in the APT segment operating income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $7.4 million and $7.9 million, respectively, of depreciation, amortization, depletion and accretion expenses on mine- and plant-related long-lived assets and liabilities. Further included in the APT segment operating income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.7 million related to the gain on change in estimate, asset retirement obligation. Included in the APT segment operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was an impairment charge of $26.1 million offset by gain on settlement with the Former Customer of $1.1 million.
A reconciliation of segment operating income to consolidated net income is included in Note 19 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Refined Coal
The following table provides the segment revenues of our respective equity method investments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
For 2021, equity earnings from Tinuum Group were positively impacted by an increase in overall coal-fired power generation demand and higher production volume from coal-fired sources, which was driven by higher prices related to alternative power generation sources such as natural gas. Also, this increase was driven by higher RC facility count for the majority of 2021 compared to 2020. Further, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized equity earnings from Tinuum Group equal to
our proportionate share of Tinuum Group's net income for the period, which was less than cash distributions received for the same period.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, Tinuum Group recorded an impairment charge of $3.0 million on certain of its assets located at RC facilities and a retention accrual related to the wind down of its operations upon the expected expiration of Section 45 on December 31, 2021.
RC earnings related to M-45 license royalties increased from 2021 to 2020 as a result of an increase in the royalty rate per ton year over year offset by a reduction in RC facilities subject to the M-45 License due to the expected expiration of Section 45 on December 31, 2021.
Equity earnings from Tinuum Services increased by $0.4 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily as a result of recording an impairment charge of $2.9 million for year ended December 31, 2020 as well as an increase in tonnage for the RC facilities that Tinuum Services operated in 2021 compared to 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Tinuum Services provided operating and maintenance services to zero and 22 RC facilities, respectively. Tinuum Services derived earnings from both fixed-fee arrangements as well as fees that are tied to actual RC production, as determined by the specific RC facility operating and maintenance agreement.
As discussed above, as of December 31, 2021, the Company reduced its investment in Tinuum Services in the amount of $0.7 million, which is included in the "Earnings from equity method investments" line item in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Outlook
As a result of the expiration of the ability to generate Section 45 tax credits after December 31, 2021, both Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services ceased operations and are in reclamation of their respective businesses. The loss of equity earnings, distributions and M-45 Royalties beginning in 2022 will have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and consolidated operating results compared to historical periods.
Reconciliation of RC Segment operating income to RC Segment EBITDA and RC Segment Adjusted EBITDA
The following table reconciles RC Segment operating income, our most directly comparable as-reported financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to RC Segment EBITDA and RC Adjusted EBITDA.
Advanced Purification Technologies
APT segment operating income increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the Impairment Charge of $26.1 million recorded for the year end December 31, 2020. Further, for the year ended December 31, 2021, consumable revenues and associated gross margin increased, driven by an increase in volume year over year, specifically related to the Supply Agreement, as well as an increase in demand for our products by our current customer base and from new customers.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred costs of $0.4 million related to sequestration of certain of our employees at our Red River plant. These costs included hazardous pay, lodging expense and other related costs for 60 days.
Outlook
Based on current market estimates, we believe that the APT segment will continue to be affected, both positively and negatively, by power generation and the pricing of other sources, including natural gas and renewable energy, as well as weather throughout the U.S. In 2022, we expect demand from our current customers to be consistent with 2021 based on current market trends. Further, we see opportunities and are continuing to pursue diverse markets for our purification products outside of coal-fire power generation, including industrial application, water treatment plants and other end markets.
Reconciliation of APT Segment operating income (loss) to APT Segment EBITDA (loss) and APT Segment Adjusted EBITDA (loss)
The following table reconciles APT Segment income (loss), our most directly comparable as-reported financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to APT Segment EBITDA (loss) and Adjusted EBITDA (loss).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Current Resources and Factors Affecting Our Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, our principal future sources of liquidity include:
•$88.8 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash; and
•operations of the APT segment
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our principal uses of liquidity included:
•our business operating expenses, including capital expenditures, reclamation costs, federal and state tax payments and cash severance payments; and
•payment of debt principal and interest.
During 2021, our liquidity position was positively affected primarily from cash distributions from Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services, royalty payments from Tinuum Group and borrowing availability under our line of credit with a bank ("Line of Credit"). Due to the expiration of the Section 45 tax period as of December 31, 2021 and the resultant wind down of Tinuum Group's and Tinuum Services' operations at the end of 2021, distributions from Tinuum Group will no longer be a material source of liquidity after 2021. Our line of credit expired on December 31, 2021.
Our ability to continue to generate sufficient cash flow required to meet ongoing operational needs and obligations, and make potential future dividend payments and share repurchases depends upon several factors. These include: (1) executing on our contracts and initiatives; (2) increasing our share of the market for APT consumables, including expanding our overall AC business into additional adjacent markets and improving our customer and product mix; and (3) receiving final, expected M-45 License royalty payments from Tinuum Group and distributions from Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services in 2022.
For 2022 and beyond, our primary sources of liquidity are expected to be from cash on hand and through the ongoing operations of our APT segment. We believe our existing operations and related contract volumes will continue to provide operating cost efficiencies of the Red River Plant, providing additional sources of operating cash flows in the future. Full and partial reimbursements on capital expenditures from Cabot will offset our uses of investing cash flows. As discussed above, on February 25, 2022, we received the Cabot Payment in the amount of $10.6 million, which provides a source of cash for us in 2022.
Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services Distributions
The following table summarizes the cash distributions from our equity method investments, which most significantly affected our consolidated cash flow results, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash distributions from Tinuum Group for 2021 increased by $11.9 million compared to 2020 primarily due to higher production volume driven by high competitor prices related to alternative power generation sources such as natural gas. Also, this increase was driven by higher average RC facility count for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020.
Both Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services ceased their operations as of December 31, 2021 due to the expiration of the Section 45 tax credit period as of December 31, 2021. As such, our distributions from our RC segment will substantially cease as of December 31, 2021.
During the first half of 2022, we expect to receive final cash distributions from Tinuum Group and Tinuum Services in the range of $4.0 to $5.0 million.
PPP Loan
On April 20, 2020, we entered into the PPP Loan under the PPP, evidenced by a promissory note, with BOK providing for $3.3 million in proceeds, which was funded on April 21, 2020. The PPP Loan had a maturity date of April 21, 2022. The PPP Loan
principal was eligible for forgiveness subject to the terms of the PPP and approval by the SBA. The interest rate on the PPP Loan was 1.00%. The PPP Loan was unsecured and contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults, making materially false and misleading representations to the SBA or BOK, or breaching the terms of the PPP Loan. The occurrence of an event of default could result in the repayment of all amounts outstanding, collection of all amounts owing from us, or filing suit and obtaining judgment against us.
On July 27, 2021, we received formal notification in the form of a letter dated July 19, 2021 from BOK that the SBA approved the forgiveness of our PPP Loan forgiveness application for the PPP Loan in the amount of $3.3 million (including accrued interest). For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a gain on extinguishment of the PPP Loan in the amount of $3.3 million in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, which is included as a component of "Other income (expense)."
Restricted Cash
As of December 31, 2021, we had long-term restricted cash of $10.0 million as required under the Surety Agreement related to the Reclamation Contract.
Senior Term Loan
On December 7, 2018, we and ADA-ES, Inc. ("ADA"), a wholly-owned subsidiary, and certain other subsidiaries of the Company as guarantors, The Bank of New York Mellon as administrative agent, and Apollo Credit Strategies Master Fund Ltd and Apollo A-N Credit Fund (Delaware) L.P., affiliates of a beneficial owner of greater than five percent of our common stock and a related party, entered into the Senior Term Loan in the amount of $70.0 million, less original issue discount of $2.1 million. Proceeds from the Senior Term Loan were used to fund the acquisition of Carbon Solutions. We also paid debt issuance costs of $2.0 million related to the Senior Term Loan. The Senior Term Loan bore interest at a rate equal to 3-month LIBOR (subject to a 1.5% floor) + 4.75% per annum, which was adjusted quarterly to the current 3-month LIBOR rate, and interest was payable quarterly in arrears. The Senior Term Loan was secured by substantially all the assets of the Company, including the cash flows from the Tinuum Entities, but excluding our equity interests in the Tinuum entities.
On June 1, 2021 and prior to the Senior Term Loan's maturity date, we paid the remaining principal outstanding on the Senior Term Loan and all remaining accrued interest through this date. We did not incur any prepayment fees associated with the early pay-off.
Stock Repurchases and Dividends
In November 2018, our Board authorized us to purchase up to $20.0 million of our outstanding common stock under a stock repurchase program (the "Stock Repurchase Program"), which was to remain in effect until December 31, 2019 unless otherwise modified by the Board. As of November 2019, $2.9 million remained outstanding related to Stock Repurchase Program. In November 2019, the Board authorized an incremental $7.1 million to the Stock Repurchase Program and provided that it will remain in effect until all amounts are utilized or it is otherwise modified by the Board. We did not make any stock repurchases during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not pay quarterly cash dividends to stockholders. We paid our most recent dividend in March 2020 of $0.25 per share.
Line of Credit
In September 2013, ADA, as borrower, ADES, as guarantor, entered into the Line of Credit with a bank for an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million that was secured by certain amounts due to us from certain Tinuum Group RC leases. The Line of Credit was amended 16 times from the period from December 2, 2013 through March 23, 2021, which included a reduction in the principal amount to $5.0 million in September 2018. The Line of Credit expired on December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash increased from $35.9 million as of December 31, 2020 to $88.8 million as of December 31, 2021, an increase of $52.8 million. The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $28.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 and the net decrease was primarily due to the following: (1) a decrease in Distributions from equity method investees, return on investment of $39.5 million year over year; (2) an increase in Earnings from equity method investments of $37.7 million year over year; (3)Impairment of long-lived assets of $26.1 million recorded in 2020; and (4) Gain on extinguishment of debt of $3.3 million recorded in 2021. Offsetting the net decrease in cash flows provided by operating activities year over year was a net change in net income of $80.7 million year over year as a result of net loss recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash flows provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $44.4 million compared to cash flows used in investing activities of $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This net increase in cash flows provided by investing activities was primarily due to increases in distributions from equity earnings in excess of cumulative earnings of $51.1 million year over year as well as proceeds from the sale of property and equipment in 2021.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash flows used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $10.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower principal payments on the Senior Term Loan of $8.0 million. Also contributing to the decrease was a decrease year over year in dividends paid and shares repurchased of $4.9 million and $0.2 million, respectively, and a reduction in repurchases of shares of our common stock to satisfy tax withholdings of $0.3 million. Offsetting the net decrease year over year was $3.3 million of cash proceeds received in 2021 from the forgiveness of the PPP Loan.
Material Cash Requirements
For 2022, we expect to spend $13.0 million in capital expenditures compared to $7.6 million incurred in 2021. This increase is primarily the result of forecasted improvements to the plant, which are estimated to be $7.0 million, product specific capital expenditures related to the Supply Agreement, which are estimated to be $1.0 million and routine, scheduled maintenance improvements.
As of June 30, 2021, we entered into the Retention Agreements for the purpose of retaining officers and key employees in order to maintain our current business operations, while we pursue and execute on our strategic initiatives. The total amount due at time of payment pursuant to the Retention Agreements is $2.0 million, which we expect to pay in 2022.
We intend to fund the remaining portion of the Reclamation Costs from cash on hand as well as cash generated from the Supply Agreement. We believe that as reclamation activities proceed and the related bonded amounts required under the Surety Agreement are able to be reduced, there may be an opportunity to further reduce the collateral requirement. On a normalized basis, our annual capital expenditures, exclusive of any capital specifically procured for Cabot under the Supply Agreement or capital for major improvements to the plant, are expected to average approximately $5.0 million.
We expect that our cash on hand as of December 31, 2021 will provide sufficient liquidity to fund operations for the next 12 months.
Contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
(1) Includes payments due under a capped fee contract with a third-party mining operator for reclamation of the Marshall Mine (the "Marshall Mine ARO"). Payments on this contract are due through approximately 2031. Reclamation costs related to the Marshall Mine ARO are based on a stated fee by month structure based on the initial estimate of the total costs of reclamation, which provides for certain contingencies that could increase or decrease the reclamation fee over time. The timing and amount of future payments may change from original estimates, and the Company assesses changes in estimated future amounts on a quarterly basis.
The table above also excludes our asset retirement obligation ("ARO") related to reclamation of the Five Forks Mine (the "Five Forks ARO"). As of December 31, 2021, our consolidated balance sheet reflects a liability of $3.6 million for the Five Forks ARO. The Five Forks Mine ARO was recorded at fair value. The timing and amount of payments to satisfy the Five Forks ARO are uncertain and are based on numerous factors including, but not limited to, the Five Forks Mine expected closure date.
We had no outstanding letters of credit as of December 31, 2021. We expect that our cash on hand as of December 31, 2021 will provide sufficient liquidity to fund operations for the next 12 months.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding surety bonds of $24.1 million related to performance requirements under reclamation contracts associated with both the Five Forks Mine and the Marshall Mine. As of December 31, 2021, we had restricted cash of $10.0 million securing the Surety Agreement. We expect that the obligations secured by these surety bonds will be performed in the ordinary course of business and in accordance with the applicable contractual terms. To the extent that the obligations are performed, the related surety bonds should be released, and we should not have any continuing obligations. However, in the event any surety bond is called, our indemnity obligations could require us to reimburse the issuer of the surety bond.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report. In presenting our financial statements in conformity with GAAP, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported therein. Several of the estimates and assumptions we are required to make relate to matters that are inherently uncertain as they pertain to future events. Our estimates are based on historical experience and other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the accounting estimates discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these estimates relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Business Combinations, including asset acquisitions
We apply the acquisition method to acquisitions of both businesses and assets and allocate the purchase price to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions with respect to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. We believe the assumptions and estimates we make are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience, market conditions and information obtained from management of the acquired company or group of assets and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of long-lived assets, including intangible assets, we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
•future expected cash flows from revenues;
•historical and expected customer attrition rates and anticipated growth in revenues from acquired customers;
•the acquired company’s developed technology as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired developed technology will continue to be used in the combined company's product portfolio;
•the expected use and useful lives of the acquired assets; and
•valuation methods and discount rates used in estimating the values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
In regard to the Marshall Mine Acquisition, which we accounted for as an asset acquisition, we recorded the fair value of assumed assets, which included property, plant and equipment and spare parts and assumed liabilities. In addition, we recorded other assets, including Upfront Customer Consideration and the Cabot Receivable, and a liability for the Marshall Mine ARO.
Carrying value of long-lived assets and intangibles
We review and evaluate our long-lived assets and intangibles for impairment at least annually, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is measured and recorded for long-lived assets and intangibles based on the excess of their carrying amounts over their estimated fair values. Fair value is typically determined through the use of an income approach utilizing estimates of discounted pretax future cash flows or a market approach utilizing recent transaction activity for comparable assets.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Accounting for AROs requires us to make estimates of future costs unique to a specific mining operation that we will incur to complete the reclamation and remediation work required to comply with existing laws and regulations. Any such changes in future costs, the timing of reclamation activities, scope or the exclusion of certain costs not considered reclamation and remediation costs could materially impact the amounts charged to earnings for reclamation and remediation. Additionally, future changes to environmental laws and regulations could increase the scope of reclamation and remediation work required.
Five Forks Mine ARO - Reclamation costs related to the Five Forks Mine ARO are allocated to expense over the life of the related mine assets and are periodically adjusted to reflect changes in the estimated present value resulting from the passage of time and revisions to the estimates of either the timing or amount of the reclamation costs. Remediation costs for the Five Forks Mine are accrued based on management’s best estimate of the costs expected to be incurred. Such cost estimates may include ongoing care, maintenance and monitoring costs. Reclamation obligations are based on the timing of estimated spending for an existing environmental disturbance. We review, on at least an annual basis, the future expected costs and the timing of such costs for the Five Forks Mine ARO.
Marshall Mine ARO - Reclamation costs related to the Marshall Mine are based on a capped fee structure for a significant portion of the ARO liability based on the initial estimate of the total costs of reclamation, which provides for certain contingencies that could increase or decrease the reclamation fee based on the reclamation agreement executed between us and the Marshall Mine operator. The timing of payments may vary, and in valuing the the Marshall Mine ARO, we account for these timing differences, as well as changes in actual reclamation costs, on a quarterly basis.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires judgment in determining income tax expense and the related balance sheet amounts. This includes estimating and analyzing historical and projected future operating results, the reversal of taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and the ultimate outcome of uncertain income tax positions. Actual income taxes paid may vary from estimates depending on changes in income tax laws, actual results of operations, state apportionment and, if applicable, final audits of tax returns by taxing authorities. Tax assessments may arise several years after tax returns have been filed. Changes in the estimates and assumptions used for calculating income tax expense and potential differences in actual results from estimates could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial condition.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that we believe these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies and results of recent operations.
We establish a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets when, based upon the weight of all available evidence, we believe it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making this determination, we consider the relative impact of all of the available positive and negative evidence regarding future sources of taxable income and tax planning strategies. However, there could be a material impact to our effective tax rate if there is a
significant change in our estimates of future taxable income. If and when our estimates change, or there is a change in the value of deferred tax assets or liabilities warranting the need to reassess the realizability of deferred tax assets, we adjust a valuation allowance through the provision for income taxes in the period in which this determination is made. Refer to Note 18 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report for additional information regarding our deferred tax assets and liabilities and related deferred income tax expense (benefit).
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report for information regarding recently issued accounting standards.