Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The various sections of this discussion contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be materially affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this Annual Report. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially.
OVERVIEW
Our Business
ADMA Biologics, Inc. (the “Company,” “ADMA,” “we,” “us” or “our”) is an end-to-end commercial biopharmaceutical company dedicated to manufacturing, marketing and developing specialty plasma-derived biologics for the treatment of immunodeficient patients at risk for infection and others at risk for certain infectious diseases. Our targeted patient populations include immune-compromised individuals who suffer from an underlying immune deficiency disorder or who may be immune-suppressed for medical reasons.
Through our ADMA BioManufacturing business segment, we currently have three products with U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) approval, all of which are currently marketed and commercially available: (i) BIVIGAM (Immune Globulin Intravenous, Human), an Intravenous Immune Globulin (“IVIG”) product indicated for the treatment of Primary Humoral Immunodeficiency (“PI”), also known as Primary Immunodeficiency Disease (“PIDD”), and for which we received FDA approval on May 9, 2019 and commenced commercial sales in August 2019; (ii) ASCENIV (Immune Globulin Intravenous, Human - slra 10% Liquid), an IVIG product indicated for the treatment of PI, for which we received FDA approval on April 1, 2019 and commenced first commercial sales in October 2019; and (iii) Nabi-HB (Hepatitis B Immune Globulin, Human), which is indicated for the treatment of acute exposure to blood containing HBsAg and other listed exposures to Hepatitis B. We seek to develop a pipeline of plasma-derived therapeutics, including a product based on our most recently approved patent application under U.S. Patent No. 10,259,865 related to methods of treatment and prevention of S. pneumonia infection for an immunoglobulin manufactured to contain standardized antibodies to numerous serotypes of S. pneumoniae. Our products and product candidates are intended to be used by physician specialists focused on caring for immune-compromised patients with or at risk for certain infectious diseases.
We manufacture these products at our FDA-licensed, plasma fractionation and purification facility located in Boca Raton, Florida with a peak annual processing capability of up to 600,000 liters (the “Boca Facility”). Based on current production yields, our ongoing supply chain enhancements and capacity expansion initiatives, we believe this facility has the potential to produce sufficient quantities of our immune globulin (“IG”) products representing more than $250 million in annual revenue beginning in 2024 and potentially in excess of $300 million of annual revenue thereafter, as well as achieving profitability during the first quarter of 2024, as we ramp-up production over the next two to four years.
Through our ADMA BioCenters subsidiary, we currently operate FDA-licensed source plasma collection facilities in the U.S. This business unit, which we refer to as our Plasma Collection Centers business segment, provides us with a portion of our blood plasma for the manufacture of our products and product candidates, and also allows us to sell certain quantities of source plasma to customers for further manufacturing. As a part of our planned supply chain robustness initiative, we have opened five new plasma collection centers during the past 18 months, and we now have ten plasma collection centers in various stages of approval and development, including six that are operational and collecting plasma. With respect to our operational plasma collection centers, five plasma collection centers currently hold FDA licenses. In addition, one of our FDA-approved plasma collection centers also has approvals from the Korean Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (“MFDS”), as well as FDA approval to operate a Hepatitis B immunization program. After giving effect to the progress we made in 2020 and 2021 with our plasma collection network expansion, we believe we remain on track to achieve our goal of having 10 plasma collection centers licensed by the FDA by the end of 2023. A typical plasma collection center, such as those operated by ADMA BioCenters, can collect approximately 30,000 to 50,000 liters of source plasma annually, which may be sold for different prices depending upon the type of plasma, quantity of purchase and market conditions at the time of sale. Plasma collected from ADMA BioCenters’ facilities that is not used to manufacture our products or product candidates is sold to third-party customers in the U.S. and in other locations outside the U.S. where we are approved under supply agreements or in the open “spot” market.
We sell plasma-derived intermediate fractions to certain customers, which are generated as part of our FDA-approved manufacturing process for IG and IVIG products. In January 2020, we announced our entry into a five-year manufacturing and supply agreement to produce and sell these intermediate by-products, which are used as the starting raw material to produce other plasma-derived biologics. In addition, from time to time we provide contract manufacturing and testing services for certain third-party clients. We also provide laboratory contracting services to certain customers.
On September 8, 2021, we announced that the FDA granted approval for our aseptic fill-finish machine and our related internal fill-finish processes. This approval provides us with in-house fill-finish operations capable of sufficiently addressing our forecasted production requirements for our FDA approved commercial products. With our fill-finish machine and related processes now operational, we anticipate improved gross margins, enhanced patient supply consistency, potentially accelerated inventory production cycle times, and increased control and visibility of commercial product lot releases. We also expect that the approval of our in-house fill-finish processes and capabilities will potentially enable us with the opportunity to onboard new fill-finish contract manufacturing opportunities with third parties as a potential new revenue stream.
On June 6, 2017, we completed the acquisition of certain assets (the “Biotest Assets”) of the Therapy Business Unit (“BTBU”) of Biotest Pharmaceuticals Corporation (“BPC” and, together with Biotest AG, “Biotest”), which included two FDA-licensed products, Nabi-HB and BIVIGAM, and the Boca Facility (the “Biotest Transaction”).
Our Products
BIVIGAM
BIVIGAM is a plasma-derived IVIG that contains a broad range of antibodies similar to those found in normal human plasma. These antibodies are directed against bacteria and viruses and help to protect PI patients against serious infections. BIVIGAM is a purified, sterile, ready-to-use preparation of concentrated human Immunoglobulin G antibodies indicated for the treatment of PI, a group of genetic disorders. This includes, but is not limited to, the humoral immune defect in common variable immunodeficiency, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, congenital agammaglobulinemia, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and severe combined immunodeficiency. These PIs are a group of genetic disorders. Based on recent estimates, these disorders are no longer considered to be very rare, with as many as one in every 1,200 people in the United States having some form of PI.
On May 9, 2019, the FDA approved the Prior Approval Supplement (the “PAS”) for the use of our IVIG manufacturing process, thereby enabling us to commence commercial sales of this product in the United States. We resumed production of BIVIGAM during the fourth quarter of 2017 and commercial production is ongoing, using our FDA-approved IVIG manufacturing process under U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”) License No. 2019. We commenced commercial sales for this product in August of 2019.
On April 28, 2021, we announced that the FDA granted approval for our expanded plasma pool production scale process, allowing for a 4,400-liter plasma pool for the manufacture of our BIVIGAM IVIG product. This increased IVIG plasma pool scale, which allows us to produce BIVIGAM at an expanded capacity utilizing the same equipment, release testing assays and labor force, has begun to have a favorable impact on our gross margins and operating results, beginning in the third quarter of 2021.
ASCENIV
ASCENIV is a plasma-derived IVIG that contains naturally occurring polyclonal antibodies, which are proteins that are used by the body’s immune system to neutralize microbes, such as bacteria and viruses, and prevent against infection and disease. We manufacture ASCENIV under HHS License No. 2019 using a process known as fractionation. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”) has issued a permanent, product-specific-J-code for ASCENIV. Under the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (“HCPCS”), the J-code (J1554) became effective April 1, 2021. As part of our proprietary manufacturing process for ASCENIV, we leverage our unique, patented plasma donor screening methodology and tailored plasma pooling design, which blends normal source plasma and plasma from donors tested to have high levels of neutralizing antibody titers to respiratory syncytial virus (“RSV”) using our proprietary microneutralization testing assay. We are able to identify the high titer or “hyperimmune” plasma that meets our internal and required specifications for ASCENIV with our patented testing methods and assay. This type of high titer plasma is typically found in less than 10% of the total donor collection samples we test.
ASCENIV is approved for the treatment of Primary Immune Deficiency Disorder (“PIDD”), a class of inherited genetic disorders that causes a deficient or absent immune system in adults and adolescents (12 to 17 years of age). Our pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial in 59 PIDD patients met the primary endpoint of no Serious Bacterial Infections reported during 12 months of treatment. Secondary efficacy endpoints further demonstrated the benefits of ASCENIV in the low incidence of infection, therapeutic antibiotic use, days missed from work/school/daycare and unscheduled medical visits and hospitalizations. We believe this clinical data together with the FDA approval for the treatment of PIDD better positions ADMA to further evaluate ASCENIV in immune-compromised patients infected with or at-risk for RSV infection or potentially other respiratory viral pathogens. We may elect to work with the FDA and the immunology and infectious disease community to potentially design an appropriate clinical trial to evaluate the use of ASCENIV in this patient population or other appropriate populations. Commercial sales of ASCENIV commenced in October of 2019 and the product is currently available to U.S.-based healthcare professionals for prescription and use in U.S.-based patients.
Nabi-HB
Nabi-HB is a hyperimmune globulin that is rich in antibodies to the Hepatitis B virus. Nabi-HB is a purified human polyclonal antibody product collected from plasma donors who have been previously vaccinated with a Hepatitis B vaccine. Nabi-HB is indicated for the treatment of acute exposure to blood containing HBsAg, prenatal exposure of infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers, sexual exposure to HBsAg-positive persons and household exposure to persons with acute Hepatitis B virus infection in specific, listed settings. Hepatitis B is a potentially life-threatening liver infection caused by the Hepatitis B virus. It is a major global health problem. It can cause chronic infection and puts people at high risk of death from cirrhosis and liver cancer. Nabi-HB has a well-documented record of long-term safety and effectiveness since its initial market introduction. The FDA approved Nabi-HB on March 24, 1999. Production of Nabi-HB at the Boca Facility has continued under our leadership since the third quarter of 2017. In early 2018, we received authorization from the FDA for the release of our first commercial batch of Nabi-HB for commercial distribution in the U.S. and we continue to manufacture Nabi-HB under HHS License No. 2019.
IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 CRISIS
We continue to monitor the ongoing developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the emergence of the Delta and Omicron variants and other resistant strains of the coronavirus, and its impacts to our commercial and manufacturing operations and plasma collection facilities, including collections of source plasma, procurement of raw materials and packaging materials, a portion of which are sourced internationally, and the testing of finished drug product that is required prior to its availability for commercial sale. A substantial portion of such testing has historically been performed by contract laboratories outside the United States.
Due to a combination of previous state and local “shelter-in-place” orders, as well as government stimulus packages, persisting social distancing measures and varying roll-outs of vaccinations by state, we have experienced lower than normal donor collections at our FDA approved plasma collection centers. We were also subject to delays in shipments of source plasma from our contracted third-party suppliers, as well as delays in deliveries for personal protective equipment, reagents and other non-plasma raw materials and supplies used in the manufacture and distribution of our products. In addition, we are subject to supply chain delays as a result of certain of our suppliers diverting significant resources towards the rapid development and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines and, as a result, we have elected to carry more raw materials inventory than we have in the past. The COVID-19 pandemic has also impacted, to a certain degree, our customer engagement initiatives, whereby ADMA’s sales and medical affairs field personnel have faced difficulties communicating directly with physicians and other healthcare professionals, as well as the cancellation or postponement of a number of key scientific and medical meetings, further limiting our ability to communicate with potential customers. We have implemented a comprehensive suite of virtual engagement initiatives; however, clinician engagement has been reduced due to rapidly evolving COVID-19 priorities at U.S. medical centers.
The pandemic could also impact our ability to interact with the FDA or other regulatory authorities and may result in delays in the conduct of inspections or review of pending applications or submissions. Although we received several FDA approvals and two FDA inspections of the Boca Facility were completed during the year ended December 31, 2021, no assurances can be provided as to the timing for completion of any other regulatory submissions or applications that may be impacted by restrictions related to COVID-19.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenue attributable to international customers was approximately 13% of our total revenues. As we seek to grow this aspect of our business, we may also be subject to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in locations outside the United States.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the COVID-19 pandemic to date has not had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations, and we do not believe that our production operations at the Boca Facility, our contract fill/finishers or our plasma collection facilities have been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we do not anticipate and have not experienced any material impairments with respect to any of our long-lived assets, including our property and equipment, goodwill or intangible assets.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic has not, to date, materially adversely impacted our capital and financial resources, because we are unable to determine the ultimate severity or duration of the pandemic or its long-term effects on, among other things, the global, national or local economies, the capital and credit markets or our workforce, customers or suppliers, at this time we are unable to predict whether COVID-19 will have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with Accounting Principles Generally Accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and assumptions, including those described below. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates. Significant estimates include rebates and certain other deductions from gross revenues, impairment of long-lived assets, assumptions used in projecting future liquidity and capital requirements, assumptions used in the fair value of awards granted under our equity incentive plans and warrants issued in connection with the issuance of notes payable and the valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets.
Some of the estimates and assumptions we have to make under U.S. GAAP require difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain and, as a result, actual results could differ from those estimates. Due to the estimation processes involved, the following summary of accounting estimates and their application are considered to be critical to understanding our business operations, financial condition and results of operations. For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Estimates and assumptions used in projecting future liquidity and capital requirements are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenues
Our gross product revenues are subject to a variety of deductions, which are estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenues are recognized. These deductions primarily consist of rebates, distribution fees, chargebacks and sales allowances. These deductions represent estimates of the related obligations, some of which are contractual in nature and do not require extensive judgment to be exercised by management, while other estimates require complex or subjective matters of knowledge and judgment when estimating the impact of these revenue deductions on net revenues for a reporting period.
Historically, adjustments to these estimates to reflect actual results or updated expectations, have not been material to our overall business. However, two of our primary immunoglobulin products, ASCENIV and BIVIGAM, were only approved for commercial sale by the FDA in 2019, and as such our historical experience with rebates with respect to these products is limited. If any of our ratios, factors, assessments, experiences or judgments are not indicative or accurate estimates of our future experience, our results could be materially affected. Estimates that are most at risk for material adjustment are those associated with U.S. Medicaid rebates because of the extensive time delay between the recording of the accrual and its ultimate settlement, an interval that can generally take up to several years or more. While our results of operations to date have not required any material adjustment due to this risk, the lag time between when this obligation is initially recorded and ultimately settled could potentially materially impact our revenues and our results of operations in the future.
Stock-Based Compensation and Valuation of Warrants
All equity-based payments, including grants of stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) are recognized at their estimated fair value at the date of grant, and compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the grantee’s requisite vesting period. For the purpose of valuing stock options granted to our employees, directors and officers, we use the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of publicly traded options, which have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. The Company’s employee stock options have characteristics significantly different from those of traded options, and changes in the underlying Black-Scholes assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate. To determine the risk-free interest rate, we utilize the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant with a term consistent with the expected term of our awards. The expected term of the options granted is in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletins 107 and 110 and is based on the average between vesting terms and contractual terms. The expected dividend yield reflects our current and expected future policy for dividends on our Common Stock. The expected stock price volatility for our stock options was calculated by examining the historical volatility of our Common Stock since our Common Stock became publicly traded in the fourth quarter of 2013. We will continue to analyze the expected stock price volatility and expected term assumptions and will adjust our Black-Scholes option pricing assumptions as appropriate. Any changes in the foregoing Black-Scholes assumptions, or if we were to elect to utilize an alternative method for valuing stock options granted to employees, directors and officers, could potentially impact our stock-based compensation expense and our results of operations.
We also use the Black-Scholes option valuation model for the purpose of estimating the fair value of warrants we issue from time to time in connection with the issuance of notes payable. Changes in our Black-Scholes assumptions, or if we were to utilize an alternative method for valuing warrants issued to our lenders, could impact our interest expense and results of operations.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We assess the recoverability of our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets, whenever significant events or changes in circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred. If indicators of impairment exist, projected future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are compared to its carrying amount to determine whether the asset’s carrying value is recoverable. Any resulting impairment is recorded as a reduction in the carrying value of the related asset in excess of fair value and a charge to operating results. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we determined that there was no impairment of our long-lived assets. Examples of events or circumstances that may be indicative of impairment that would require the use of significant judgment by management include:
•
A significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate that could affect the value of the asset.
•
Significant and continued cash flow losses.
•
A significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used, such as a restriction imposed by the FDA or other regulatory authorities that could affect our ability to manufacture our products using a particular asset.
•
An expectation of losses or reduced profits associated with an asset. This could result, for example, from the introduction of a competitor’s product that impacts projected revenue growth, or a change in the acceptance of a product by patients, physicians and payers that results in an inability to sustain projected product revenues.
Goodwill is not amortized but is assessed for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if impairment indicators exist. The testing of goodwill for impairment requires us to determine whether or not the fair value of the reporting unit associated with the goodwill is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill and other intangible assets. An impairment charge is recorded to the extent the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, with the impairment loss recognized not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In order to determine the fair value of the reporting unit, we utilize the fair value of the Company as a whole, as determined by its market capitalization. Determination of the fair value and carrying value of each reporting unit, relative to the fair value of the Company, requires management to employ certain estimates, assumptions and judgment, which we believe are reasonable. However, any changes to these estimates and assumptions could impact our determination of whether or not our goodwill is impaired. We did not recognize any impairment charges related to goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Deferred Tax Assets
We have historically maintained a full valuation allowance against all of our net deferred tax assets, and as a result have recorded no income tax benefit in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. This valuation allowance reflects our assessment of whether it is more likely than not that we will generate sufficient taxable income in the future to be able to utilize our deferred tax assets. In determining whether a valuation allowance is warranted, we evaluate factors such as prior earnings history, expected future earnings, carryback and carryforward periods and tax strategies. We consider all positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to realize our deferred tax assets. We consider cumulative losses in recent years to be a significant type of negative evidence, and based on our history of losses, at this time we have not included future projected taxable income as a source of income to recognize our deferred tax assets.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
The following table presents a summary of the changes in our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
Revenues
We recorded total revenues of $80.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $42.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $38.7 million, or approximately 92%. The increase is mainly due to increased sales of our immunoglobulin products and intermediate fractions generated by our Boca Facility manufacturing operations in 2021 totaling $38.1 million as we conclude our second full year of commercial sales of BIVIGAM and ASCENIV. We attribute this increase in revenue, which reflects sales volume increases across our entire portfolio of IVIG products, to an expansion of our customer base in 2021 and to increased physician, payer and patient acceptance of both BIVIGAM and ASCENIV. We also experienced a $0.5 million increase in plasma revenues generated by our plasma collection centers business segment.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue was $79.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $61.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $18.5 million. This increase reflects higher product revenue costs pertaining to the Company’s immunoglobulin product sales during the year of approximately $23.6 million due to higher sales volume, an increase in non-inventoriable manufacturing costs of approximately $1.9 million related to IVIG production at our Boca Facility operations, largely due to higher prices, and to increased product revenue costs pertaining to plasma sales of $0.3 million. These amounts were partially offset by non-recurring production charges of $7.5 million in 2020 for the manufacture of BIVIGAM conformance lots at an increased plasma pool production scale in connection with our planned capacity expansion and other production initiatives and investments at the Boca Facility.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses (“R&D”) totaled $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to several non-recurring projects in 2020 aggregating to $2.2 million for which there are no comparable amounts in 2021, consisting of (i) $1.4 million for the testing and development of a new filling line at one of our third-party fill/finishers for a process that had not been approved by the FDA, (ii) $0.4 million for a study we performed to potentially extend ASCENIV’s approved and labeled expiration dating, (iii) $0.2 million related to third-party assay development and (iv) $0.2 million for assistance with a third-party clinical research project. In addition, we experienced lower compensation expense (including stock-based compensation) related to R&D expenses of $1.1 million in 2021, mainly due to the resignation of our former Chief Medical and Chief Scientific Officer. These amounts were partially offset by $1.0 million of increased expenses associated with post-marketing commitment clinical studies for ASCENIV and BIVIGAM in 2021.
Plasma Center Operating Expenses
Plasma center operating expenses were $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Plasma center operating expenses consist of certain general and administrative plasma center costs, including lease expenses, maintenance, utilities, compensation and benefits for center and administrative staff, advertising and promotion expenses and computer software fees related to donor collections.
At December 31, 2020 we had three plasma collection centers in operation. At December 31, 2021, we had six plasma collection centers in operation. In addition, for those plasma collection centers that are in construction or development but not yet operational, we still need to incur staffing, training, travel and other costs during the build-out period so that these facilities can be operational on the day they open. The increase in plasma center operating expenses in 2021 is mainly attributable to increases in employee compensation costs of $4.8 million, donor fees of $2.5 million, softgoods and supplies of $0.8 million, depreciation expense of $0.7 million, rent expense of $0.7 million, plasma testing expenses of $0.3 million, travel expense of $0.3 million and advertising expenses of $0.2 million. These amounts were partially offset by an increase in plasma collections which resulted in a reduction in our plasma center operating expenses by approximately $3.0 million. We expect additional increases in our plasma center operating expenses in 2022 and beyond as we intend to have 10 plasma collection centers in operation and approved by the FDA by the end of 2023.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) were $42.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $7.8 million from the year ended December 31, 2020. As we continued to support the increase in the size and scope of our Boca Facility manufacturing and commercial operations in 2021, we experienced increases in employee compensation and related expenses, including travel, relocation and recruiting, of $6.7 million. We also experienced increased insurance expense of $1.3 million in 2021, recognized an expense and corresponding liability in the amount of $0.8 million related to the separation and transition agreement with our former Chief Medical and Chief Scientific Officer and incurred increased expenses associated with the commercialization of our immunoglobulin portfolio of $0.7 million. These amounts were partially offset by a reduction in market intelligence fees of approximately $2.1 million for a one-time project related to ASCENIV that concluded in early 2021.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization expense for intangible assets acquired in the Biotest Transaction was $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Loss from Operations
Our operating loss was $58.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $64.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in operating loss was mainly due to the improved gross profit/loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $20.2 million compared with the same period of a year ago and the $2.3 million of lower R&D expenses, largely offset by the increases in plasma center operating expenses and SG&A. The improvement in gross profit/loss is mainly due to the 92% increase in revenues in 2021, as well as to the absence of the $7.5 million of non-recurring production charges we incurred during 2020. We expect further improvements to our gross margins in 2022 as the efficiencies we anticipate from our expanded plasma pool production scale process that was approved by the FDA in April of 2021 and our in-house fill-finish capabilities that were approved in September of 2021 begin to take effect, subject to the current rate of inflation and price increases we may receive from time to time from our suppliers.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase reflects the additional interest expense associated with the Perceptive Tranche III Loan which we drew down on March 20, 2020, as well as the higher interest on the $15 million note formerly due to Biotest that we refinanced in December 2020, which increased the interest rate on this indebtedness from 6% per annum to 11% per annum (see “Liquidity and Capital Resources”). Interest expense also includes the amortization of debt discount in the amount of $1.9 million and $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In connection with the refinancing of our senior credit facility on March 23, 2022, we expect our annual interest expense, excluding amortization of debt discount, to increase from approximately $11.2 million per year to a range between approximately $16.0 million and $19.0 million per year, depending on whether and when we access the second tranche of this facility in the amount of $25.0 million (see “Liquidity and Capital Resources”) .
Gain/Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
On December 8, 2020, we refinanced our $15 million subordinated note payable to Biotest with an amendment to our senior credit facility and the corresponding Tranche IV draw on that facility. As a result of this transaction and the payoff of the Biotest note, we recorded a gain on the extinguishment of debt in the amount of $1.0 million (see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Net Loss
Our net loss was $71.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $75.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net loss of $4.1 million was mainly due to the decrease in operating loss, partially offset by the higher interest expense in 2021 and the gain on extinguishment of debt in 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $178.4 million, primarily consisting of $124.7 million of inventory, cash and cash equivalents of $51.1 million and accounts receivable of $28.6 million, partially offset by $29.6 million of accounts payable and accrued expenses, as compared to working capital of $133.8 million, mainly comprised of $81.5 million of inventory, cash and cash equivalents of $55.9 million and accounts receivable of $13.2 million, partially offset by accounts payable and accrued expenses of $19.4 million, as of December 31, 2020. We have incurred an accumulated deficit of $412.1 million since inception and had negative cash flows from operations of $112.4 million and $102.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have funded our operations over the past few years primarily from the sale of our equity and debt securities. Our material cash requirements are primarily comprised of:
•
The procurement of raw material plasma and other raw materials necessary to maintain and scale up our manufacturing operations
•
Employee compensation and benefits
•
Capital expenditures for the building of additional plasma collection facilities and for equipment upgrades and capacity expansion at the Boca Facility
•
Plasma donor fees and plasma center supplies
•
Interest on our debt
•
Marketing programs and continued commercialization efforts
•
Boca Facility maintenance, repairs and supplies; and
•
Conducting post-marketing clinical trials for our FDA-approved products.
In addition, our end-to-end production cycle from procurement of raw materials to commercial release of finished product can take between seven and 12 months or potentially longer, requiring substantial investments in raw material plasma and other manufacturing materials.
We expect that we will not be able to generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to achieve profitability until the beginning of 2024. We currently anticipate, based upon our projected revenue and expenditures, that our current cash, cash equivalents and accounts receivable, including the proceeds received and expected to be received from the refinancing of our senior credit facility as discussed below, along with the remaining amounts available under the distribution agreement for the sale of our common stock also discussed below, will be sufficient to fund our operations, as currently conducted, into the first quarter of 2024, at which time we believe we will begin to generate positive cash flow from operations. This time frame may change based several factors, including the success of our commercial sales of our products and the acceptability of our immune globulin products by physicians, patients or payers, and whether or not the assumptions underlying our projected revenues and expenses are correct. If we are unable to raise additional capital if needed, including due to widespread liquidity constraints or significant market instability that could result from the COVID-19 pandemic, inflationary pressures or other factors beyond our control, we may have to delay, curtail or eliminate some of our commercialization efforts or product development activities. We are also continuing to evaluate a variety of strategic and financing alternatives through our ongoing engagement with Morgan Stanley as a financial advisor.
On March 23, 2022, (the “Hayfin Closing Date”) we and all of our subsidiaries entered into a Credit and Guaranty Agreement (the “Hayfin Credit Agreement”) with Hayfin Services LLP (“Hayfin”). The Hayfin Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured term loan facility in a principal amount of up to $175.0 million (the “Hayfin Credit Facility”), composed of (i) a term loan made on the Hayfin Closing Date in the principal amount of $150.0 million (the “Hayfin Closing Date Loan”), and (ii) a delayed draw term loan in the principal amount of $25.0 million (the “Hayfin Delayed Draw Loan” and, together with the Hayfin Closing Date Loan, the “Hayfin Loans”). The obligation of the lenders to make the Hayfin Delayed Draw Loan expires on March 22, 2023, and is subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including, but not limited to, our meeting certain 12-month revenue targets as set forth in the Hayfin Credit Agreement. The Hayfin Credit Facility has a maturity date of March 23, 2027 (the “Hayfin Maturity Date”), subject to acceleration pursuant to the Hayfin Credit Agreement, including upon an Event of Default (as defined in the Hayfin Credit Agreement).
On the Hayfin Closing Date, we used $100.0 million of the Hayfin Closing Date Loan to terminate and pay in full all of the outstanding obligations under our previous senior credit facility with Perceptive (see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). We also used $2.0 million of the Hayfin Closing Date Loan proceeds to pay a redemption premium to Perceptive and used approximately $0.3 million of the Hayfin Closing Date Loan proceeds to pay certain fees and expenses incurred in connection with this transaction. In addition, a $1.8 million upfront fee payable to Hayfin was paid “in kind” and was added to the outstanding principal balance in accordance with the terms of the Hayfin Credit Agreement. The remainder of the proceeds received or to be received from the Hayfin Loans will be used for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
Borrowings under the Hayfin Credit Agreement will bear interest at our election, at either (a) a base rate (equal to the highest of (i) the rate of interest per annum last quoted by The Wall Street Journal as the “Prime Rate” in the United States, (ii) the federal funds rate in effect on such day plus 0.50% and (iii) the adjusted Term SOFR for a one-month tenor in effect on such day plus 1.00%) plus an applicable margin of 8.50% or (b) adjusted Term SOFR for either a one-month or three-month tenor, as elected by us, and subject to a floor of 1.25%, plus an applicable margin of 9.5% (the “Applicable Margin”); provided, however, that upon, and during the continuance of, an Event of Default, the Applicable Margin shall increase by an additional 3% per annum. We will also pay “in kind” a portion of the interest on the Hayfin Loans for each monthly or quarterly interest period in an amount equal to 2.5% per annum. Such interest paid “in kind” will reduce our quarterly cash interest obligation by approximately $1.0 million and will be added to the principal amount of the outstanding debt under the Hayfin Credit Facility. On the Hayfin Closing Date, our interest rate was 10.75%. On the last day of each calendar month or quarter during the term of the Hayfin Credit Facility, we are required to pay accrued interest to Hayfin of approximately $1.0 million per month or $3.1 million per quarter, after giving effect to the “in kind” interest of 2.5% per annum, but without giving effect to the Hayfin Delayed Draw Loan.
On the Hayfin Maturity Date, we will pay Hayfin the entire outstanding principal amount underlying the Hayfin Loans and any accrued and unpaid interest thereon, as well as an exit fee of 1.0% of the outstanding principal amount being paid. Prior to the Hayfin Maturity Date, there will be no scheduled principal payments on the Hayfin Loans. We may prepay outstanding principal on the Hayfin Loans at any time and from time to time upon five business days’ prior written notice, subject to the payment to Hayfin of, (A) any accrued but unpaid interest on the prepaid principal amount plus (B) an early prepayment fee in the amount equal to (i) 7.0% of the prepaid principal amount, if prepaid on or prior to the first anniversary of the Hayfin Closing Date, (ii) 3.0% of the prepaid principal amount, if prepaid after the first anniversary of the Hayfin Closing Date and on or prior to the second anniversary of the Hayfin Closing Date, or (iii) 1.0% of the prepaid principal amount, if prepaid after the second anniversary of the Hayfin Closing Date and on or prior to the third anniversary of the Hayfin Closing Date. In addition, for any prepayments of principal or payment of principal on the Hayfin Maturity Date, we are required to pay an exit fee of 1.0% of the amount of principal being paid.
All of our obligations under the Hayfin Credit Agreement are secured by a first-priority lien and security interest in substantially all of our tangible and intangible assets, including intellectual property and all of the equity interests in our subsidiaries. The Hayfin Credit Agreement contains certain representations and warranties, affirmative covenants, negative covenants and conditions that are customarily required for similar financings. The negative covenants restrict or limit our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to, among other things and subject to certain exceptions contained in the Hayfin Credit Agreement, incur new indebtedness; create liens on assets; engage in certain fundamental corporate changes, such as mergers or acquisitions, or changes to our or our subsidiaries’ business activities; make certain Investments or Restricted Payments (each as defined in the Hayfin Credit Agreement); change our fiscal year; pay dividends; repay other certain indebtedness; engage in certain affiliate transactions; or enter into, amend or terminate any other agreements that have the impact of restricting our ability to make loan repayments under the Hayfin Credit Agreement. In addition, we are required (i) at all times prior to the Maturity Date to maintain a minimum cash balance of $6.0 million; and (ii) as of the last day of each fiscal quarter commencing with the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2022, report IVIG product and related revenues for the trailing 12-month period that exceed the amounts set forth in the Hayfin Credit Agreement, which range from $75.0 million for the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2022 to $250.0 million for the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2026 and each fiscal quarter thereafter.
On October 25, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering whereby we issued 57.5 million shares of our common stock and received gross proceeds of $57.5 million. Net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and expenses associated with the offering, were approximately $53.8 million, and are being used (i) to advance the commercial sales of our FDA approved products through the procurement of raw materials for the manufacturing of BIVIGAM and ASCENIV; (ii) to expand our plasma collection facility network; (iii) to scale up the manufacturing capacity of the Boca Facility and make continuous improvements in order to adhere to cGMP compliance; (iv) to explore business development opportunities; and (v) for general corporate purposes and other capital expenditures.
On September 3, 2021, we entered into a distribution agreement with Raymond James & Associates, Inc., as agent (“Agent”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, at our option, through or to the Agent, up to an aggregate of $50 million of shares of our common stock (the “Distribution Agreement”). We currently intend to use any net proceeds from the sale of our common stock under the Distribution Agreement for general corporate purposes, including procurement of source plasma and other raw materials, supply chain initiatives and production expenditures, funding expansion of plasma collection centers, working capital, capital expenditures, expansion and resources for commercialization activities, and other potential research and development and business opportunities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 5,540,831 shares of our common stock under the Distribution Agreement and received net proceeds of $6.9 million. We currently have approximately $42.8 million of shares available to sell under the Distribution Agreement.
On August 5, 2020, we entered into an open market sale agreement (as amended from time to time, the “Sale Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”), pursuant to which we could offer and sell, from time to time, at our option, through or to Jefferies, up to an aggregate of $50 million of shares of our common stock. On November 5, 2020 and February 3, 2021, we and Jefferies amended the Sale Agreement to provide for increases in the aggregate offering amount under the Sale Agreement such that we could sell shares having an aggregate offering price of up to $105.4 million under the Sale Agreement, as amended. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued and sold 27,805,198 shares of common stock under the Sale Agreement and received net proceeds of $60.4 million. The Sale Agreement was terminated on August 31, 2021.
In February 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 27,025,000 shares of our common stock and received net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and other expenses associated with the offering, of approximately $88.7 million. The proceeds from this offering were used (i) for the procurement of raw materials for the manufacturing of BIVIGAM and ASCENIV; (ii) to support the ongoing commercial sales of BIVIGAM and ASCENIV; (iii) to expand the manufacturing capacity of our Boca Facility and enhance our supply chain capabilities; (iv) to expand our plasma collection facility network; (v) for research and development and business development opportunities; and (vi) for general corporate purposes and other capital expenditures.
On February 11, 2019 (the “Perceptive Closing Date”), we and all of our subsidiaries entered into the Perceptive Credit Agreement. The Perceptive Credit Agreement, as amended, provided for a senior secured term loan facility in a principal amount of $100.0 million comprised of (i) a term loan made on the Perceptive Closing Date in the principal amount of $45.0 million, as evidenced by the Company’s issuance of a promissory note (the “Perceptive Tranche I Note”) in favor of Perceptive on the Perceptive Closing Date (the “Perceptive Tranche I Loan”), (ii) a term loan in the principal amount of $27.5 million (the “Perceptive Tranche II Loan”) evidenced by the Company’s issuance of a promissory note (the “Perceptive Tranche II Note”) in favor of Perceptive on May 3, 2019, (iii) a term loan in the principal amount of $12.5 million evidenced by the Company’s issuance of a promissory note (the “Perceptive Tranche III Note”) in favor of Perceptive on March 20, 2020 (the “Perceptive Tranche III Loan”); and (iv) a term loan in the principal amount of $15 million evidenced by our issuance of a promissory note in favor of Perceptive on December 8, 2020 (the “Perceptive Tranche IV Loan”, and together with the Perceptive Tranche I Loan, the Perceptive Tranche II Loan and the Perceptive Tranche III Loan, the “Perceptive Loans”). The Perceptive Tranche III Loan is the result of an amendment to the Perceptive Credit Agreement that the Company and Perceptive entered into on May 3, 2019 (the “First Perceptive Amendment”), and the Perceptive Tranche III Loan became available to the Company upon the approval of BIVIGAM on May 9, 2019. The Perceptive Tranche IV Loan is the result of an amendment to the Perceptive Credit Facility entered into on December 8, 2020 (the “Second Perceptive Amendment”), which also extended the maturity date of the Perceptive Credit Facility to March 1, 2024 (the “Maturity Date”), subject to acceleration pursuant to the Perceptive Credit Agreement, including upon an Event of Default (as defined in the Perceptive Credit Agreement). The proceeds from the Perceptive Tranche IV Loan were used to retire the $15.0 million note we had payable to Biotest, which had a maturity date of June 17, 2022.
All of the Perceptive Loans were retired and our other obligations under the Perceptive Credit Facility were satisfied using the proceeds we received from the Hayfin Closing Date Loan.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $112.4 million, an increase of $10.4 million from the same period of a year ago, mainly due to the increase in inventories as we continue to increase production resulting from the FDA approval of the 4,400 liter scale-up expansion for BIVIGAM. The following table illustrates the primary components of our cash flows from operations:
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $13.5 million, which consisted of $8.6 million for the construction and buildout of new plasma collection facilities and $4.9 million of capital expenditures at the Boca Facility, which included equipment purchases and continued implementation of our in-house fill/finish capabilities. Cash used in investing activities of $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly comprised of $7.6 million of capital expenditures at the Boca Facility and $5.1 million for the construction and buildout of new plasma collection facilities. We expect our total capital expenditures will be between $12.0 million and $18.0 million for fiscal 2022 as we seek to have 10 FDA-approved plasma collection centers in operation by the end of 2023.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $121.0 million, which is mainly comprised of the net proceeds of $60.4 received from the Sale Agreement, $53.8 million from the October 2021 underwritten public offering and $6.9 million from the Distribution Agreement. Cash provided by financing activities of $143.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly consisted of $88.7 million of net proceeds received from our underwritten public offering in February 2020, $42.5 million of proceeds received from the Sale Agreement during the second half of 2020 and $12.5 million of proceeds from the Perceptive Tranche III Loan received in March 2020.
Effect of Inflation
Although inflation or changing prices did not have a significant impact on our revenues or net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, inflation however did impact a number of facets of our business during the year ended December 31, 2021 at both of our business segments. We experienced price increases for, among other items, raw materials, consumable supplies, services for repairs and maintenance of our facilities and labor costs. We expect this trend to continue at least into the first half of 2022, which could have a significant impact on our future results of operations. In addition, some of our plasma purchase agreements provide for annual price increases that are tied to various consumer price indices, which have resulted in higher than historical price increases and is expected to result in higher source plasma costs in 2022.