ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Forward Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Rule 175 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 3b-6 of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended, that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, our beliefs and our assumptions. Words such as “anticipate,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks” and “estimates” and variations of these words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond our control and difficult to predict and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or forecasted in the forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Form 10-K. Investors should carefully consider all of such risks before making an investment decision with respect to the Company’s stock. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and summary of selected financial data for ADM Endeavors, Inc. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment from our Management.
Current and Planned Operations
Just Right Products, Inc.
Since 2016 Just Right Products, Inc.’s annual revenues have been growing at approximately 19.6% per year. We anticipate this continued growth rate as all production departments currently have more equipment which currently exceeds the workload potential of the employees. This gives Just Right Products the ability for expansion in revenue with the hiring of additional employees, and/or having the luxury of having backup equipment eliminating down time and the ability to perform large jobs with the help of part-time employees. The additional equipment is also part of a long-term expansion plan for the Company. Just Right Products, Inc. purchased 10 acres of raw land which will be used for expansion of the Company. The goal is to move the entire operation upon completion of a new facility.
COMPARISON OF THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
Results of Operations
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had revenues of $6,556,864 compared to $5,037,518 for the same period in 2020 from continuing operations. The increase in revenue of $1,519,346, or 30.2%, is primarily due to new YouTube and government customers and a return of existing customers.
Cost of Revenues
The cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3,990,161 compared to $3,043,512 for the same period in 2020. Cost of revenues for 2021 was 60.9% of revenue compared to 60.4% of revenue for 2020. The primary cause of the increase as a percentage of revenue was a direct result of increased sales with a minimal increase in fixed expenses.
Operating Expenses
The general and administrative expenses were $1,641,648 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,914,947 for the same period in 2020. The decrease in 2021 in general and administrative expenses was approximately 14.3% primarily due to decreases in stock-based compensation and professional fess along with cost cutting and more efficient use of resources.
The marketing and selling expenses were $209,979 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $200,296 for the same period in 2020. The increase in 2021 in marketing and selling expenses was approximately 4.8% primarily due to new marketing technique and increase stockholder awareness.
Net Income (Loss) From Continuing Operations
The net income from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $737,348 compared to net loss from continuing operations of $119,922 for the same period in 2020.
Discontinued Operations
The net income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $96,635. The majority of the net income from discontinued operations in 2020 is the gain on disposal of ADM Enterprises, Inc.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $418,413. We have historically met our cash needs through a combination of cash flows from operating activities and proceeds from loans and financing by our officers and directors. Our cash requirements are generally for selling, general and administrative activities. We believe that our cashflow from operations and cash balance is sufficient to finance our cash requirements for expected operational activities, capital improvements, and repayment of debt through the next 12 months.
Our cash provided by operating activities of $498,545 for the year ended December 31, 2021, and we had $59,300 of cash used by operations during the same period in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities of $498,545 consisted of net income from operations of $737,348, plus $61,454 of non-cash items, consisting primarily of depreciation and amortization of $59,283, less a gain on forgiveness of debt of $169,495 and $126,067 used in changes in operating assets and other operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities of $59,300 consisted of net loss from operations of $23,287, plus $330,344 of non-cash items, consisting primarily of depreciation and amortization of $67,275 and stock-based compensation of $231,875, less a gain on disposal of ADM Enterprises, Inc of $96,635, gain on forgiveness of debt of $10,000 and $259,722 used in changes in operating assets and other operating activities.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $143,086 compared to $113,214 during the same period in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities consisted of $143,086 for the purchase of property and equipment. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities consisted of $100,455 for the purchase of property and equipment and $12,759 for the disposal of ADM Enterprises, Inc.
Cash used in financing activities was $214,410 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to cash provided by financing activities of $161,698 during the comparable period in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities consisted of $214,410 for the repayment of notes payable. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $179,495 of proceeds from notes payable and $17,797 for the repayment of notes payable.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had working capital of $309,680, of which $218,017 of current liabilities was related to derivative liabilities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a work capital deficit of $257,821, of which $222,712 of current liabilities was related to derivative liabilities.
Going Concern
The Company considered its going concern disclosure requirements in accordance with ASC 240-40-50. The Company concluded that its history of negative working capital and negative cash flows from operating are conditions that raised substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Without a successful plan in place from management these conditions could negatively impact the Company’s ability to meets its financial obligations over the next year. In response, the Company has implemented a plan to alleviate such substantial concern as follows. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had net income from continuing operations of $737,348, cash flow from operations of $498,545 and working capital of $527,697 (excluding the non-cash derivative liability). The Company plans to continue to generate additional revenue, improve cash flows from operations and seek additional funding through debt and equity offerings. As a result, following this plan substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is alleviated.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company currently has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates. Such estimates include management’s assessments of the carrying value of certain assets, useful lives of assets, and related depreciation and amortization methods applied, and the fair value of the common stock used in stock-based compensation and derivative valuations.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements
The Company measures their financial assets and liabilities in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. For certain of our financial instruments, including cash, accounts payable, accrued expenses escrow liability and short-term loans the carrying amounts approximate fair value due to their short maturities.
We have adopted accounting guidance for financial and non-financial assets and liabilities. The adoption did not have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or liquidity. This standard defines fair value, provides guidance for measuring fair value and requires certain disclosures. This standard does not require any new fair value measurements, but rather applies to all other accounting pronouncements that require or permit fair value measurements. This guidance does not apply to measurements related to share-based payments. This guidance discusses valuation techniques, such as the market approach (comparable market prices), the income approach (present value of future income or cash flow), and the cost approach (cost to replace the service capacity of an asset or replacement cost). The guidance utilizes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels. The following is a brief description of those three levels:
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable, either directly or indirectly. These include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore developed using estimates and assumptions developed by us, which reflect those that a market participant would use.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and issued subsequent amendments to the initial guidance in August 2015, March 2016, April 2016, May 2016, and December 2016 within ASU 2015-14, ASU 2016-08, ASU 2016-10, ASU 2016-12 and ASU 2016-20, respectively. The core principle of this new revenue recognition guidance is that a company will recognize revenue when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The new guidance defines a five-step process to achieve this core principle. The new guidance also requires more detailed disclosures to enable users of financial statements to understand the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. The new guidance provides for two transition methods, a full retrospective approach and a modified retrospective approach.
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC Topic 606 using the modified retrospective method with no impact to the opening retained earnings and determined there were no changes required to its reported revenues as a result of the adoption. An analysis of contracts with customers under the new revenue recognition standard was consistent with the Company’s current revenue recognition model, whereby revenue is recognized primarily on the date products are shipped to the customer. The Company has enhanced its disclosures of revenue to comply with the new guidance.
We recognize revenue for merchandise sales, net of expected returns and sales tax, at the time of in-store purchase or delivery of the product to our guest. When merchandise is shipped to our guests, we estimate receipt based on historical experience. Revenue is deferred and a liability is established for sales returns based on historical return rates and sales for the return period. We recognize an asset and corresponding adjustment to cost of sales for our right to recover returned merchandise. At each financial reporting date, we assess our estimates of expected returns, refund liabilities and return assets. For merchandise sold in our stores and online, tender is accepted at the point of sale. When we receive payment before the guest has taken possession of the merchandise, the amount received is recorded as deferred revenue until the transaction is complete. Our performance obligations for unfulfilled merchandise orders are typically satisfied within one week. Shipping and handling fees charged to guests relate to fulfillment activities and are included in net sales with the corresponding costs recorded in cost of sales.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based instruments issued to employees in accordance with ASC Topic 718. ASC Topic 718 requires companies to recognize in the statement of operations the grant-date fair value of stock options and other equity-based compensation issued to employees. The Company accounts for non-employee share-based awards in accordance with ASC Topic 505-50. The value of the portion of an award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense over the requisite service periods using the straight-line attribution method. The Company estimates the fair value of each stock option at the grant date by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Company estimates the fair value of each stock option at the grant date by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We have decided to take advantage of the exemptions provided to emerging growth companies under the JOBS Act and as a result our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We may take advantage of exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, delay compliance with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until they are made applicable to private companies.
Company management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, if adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
We are susceptible to general economic conditions, natural catastrophic events and public health crises, and a potential downturn in advertising and marketing spending by advertisers could adversely affect our operating results in the near future.
Our business is subject to the impact of natural catastrophic events, such as earthquakes, or floods, public health crisis, such as disease outbreaks, epidemics, or pandemics, and all these could result in a decrease or sharp downturn of economies, including our markets and business locations in the current and future periods. The outbreak of the coronavirus (COVID-19) resulted in increased travel restrictions, and shutdown of businesses, which may cause slower recovery of the economy. We may experience impact from quarantines, market downturns and changes in customer behavior related to pandemic fears and impact on our workforce if the virus continues to spread. In addition, one or more of our customers, partners, service providers or suppliers may experience financial distress, delayed or defaults on payment, file for bankruptcy protection, sharp diminishing of business, or suffer disruptions in their business due to the outbreak. The extent to which the coronavirus impacts our results will depend on future developments and reactions throughout the world, which are highly uncertain and will include emerging information concerning the severity of the coronavirus and the actions taken by governments and private businesses to attempt to contain the coronavirus. It is likely to result in a potential material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Wider-spread COVID-19 globally could prolong the deterioration in economic conditions and could cause decreases in or delays in advertising spending and reduce and/or negatively impact our short-term ability to grow our revenues. Any decreased collectability of accounts receivable, bankruptcy of small and medium businesses, or early termination of agreements due to deterioration in economic conditions could negatively impact our results of operations.