Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Edoc Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on August 20, 2020 as a Cayman Islands corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (a “Business Combination”). We consummated our Public Offering (as defined below) on November 12, 2020 and are currently in the process of locating suitable targets for our business combination. We intend to use the cash proceeds from our Public Offering and the Private Placement described below as well as additional issuances, if any, of our capital shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt to complete the Business Combination.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
We completed the sale of 9,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per Unit on November 12, 2020. Simultaneous with the closing of the Public Offering, we completed the sale of 479,000 private placement units (the “Private Units”) at a price of $10.00 per unit in a private placement. Of the 479,000 private placement units, 65,000 units, or the “representative units” were purchased by I-Banker (and/or its designees).
In addition, the Company’s sponsor agreed, pursuant to a letter agreement to purchase up to 3,750,000 of the Company’s rights in the open market at a market price not to exceed $0.20 per right. I-Bankers also agreed to purchase up to 1,250,000 of the Company’s rights in the open market at a market price not to exceed $0.20 per right.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust account for the benefit of the Company’s public shareholders of $92,459,548 (including $29,548 of interest earned since the IPO and $900,000 from the Trust extension payment). The trust fund account is invested in interest-bearing U.S. government securities and the income earned on those investments is also for the benefit of our public shareholders.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of IPO and the Private Placement, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally towards consummating a business combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering and identifying a target company for our initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective Business Combination candidates.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $899,880 consisting of formation and operating costs of $1,798,098 affected by interest expense of $5,027 and change in fair value of convertible promissory note of $70,297 and offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust of $20,868 and change in fair value in warrant liabilities of $952,674.
For the period from August 20, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $565,298 which consists of non-cash loss of $484,637 related to changes in the fair value of the warrant liabilities, formation and operating costs of $89,341, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in Trust of $8,680.
Recent Developments
On February 2, 2022, the Company, entered into the Calidi Merger Agreement with Merger Sub, the sponsor as Purchaser Representative, Calidi, and the Seller Representative pursuant to which, upon Closing, Merger Sub will merge with and into Calidi, with Calidi continuing as the surviving corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Further, (i) all issued and outstanding shares of Calidi common stock will be converted into the right to receive the Merger Consideration (as previously defined); and (ii) each outstanding option to acquire shares of Calidi common stock (whether vested or unvested) will be assumed by the Company and automatically converted into an option to acquire shares of the Company common stock, with its price and number of shares equitably adjusted based on the conversion ratio of the shares of Calidi common stock into the Merger Consideration. For more information on the Calidi Merger and the Calidi Merger Agreement, see “Item 1. Business”.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash outside the Trust Account of $223,398 available for working capital needs. All remaining cash held in the Trust Account are generally unavailable for the Company’s use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in a Business Combination or to redeem ordinary shares. As of December 31, 2021 and 2021, none of the amount in the Trust Account was available to be withdrawn as described above.
Through December 31, 2021, the Company’s liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares, and the remaining net proceeds from the IPO and the sale of Private Placement Units.
Until the consummation of a Business Combination, the Company will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination. The Company will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from its Sponsor, shareholders, officers, directors, or third parties. The Company’s Sponsor, officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, the Company may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
On November 10, 2021, the Company issued an interest bearing convertible promissory to the Sponsor in the amount of $900,000. As of December 31, 2021, the fair market value of the note outstanding, including accrued interest, was $975,324. On February 13, 2022, the Company issued a non-interest bearing promissory note in the principal amount of up to $750,000 to the Sponsor, as of March 1, 2022 $300,000 was drawn and remains outstanding on the note.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
We entered into an administrative support agreement (“Administrative Support Agreement”) pursuant to which agreed to pay our sponsor for office space and secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month. Effective March 31, 2021, we entered into a termination agreement with our sponsor (the “Termination Agreement”) to terminate the Administrative Support Agreement (and any accrued obligations pursuant thereto). Since our initial public offering, we have not made any payments under the Administrative Support Agreement, and have paid for services rendered and expenses advanced by our sponsor on an as-needed basis.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15.
We account for the Public Warrants, Private Warrants, Rights and Representative Warrants (as defined in Note 5, 6 and 8) collectively (“Warrants”), as either equity or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the Warrants and the applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the Warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to our own ordinary shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the Warrants and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the Warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of liability-classified warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
We account for the Private Warrants, Rights and Representative’s Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants and FPAs do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. The fair value of the Private Warrants, Rights and Representative’s Warrants has been estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model.
We evaluated the Public Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity,” and concluded that they met the criteria for equity classification and are required to be recorded as part a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance.
Convertible Promissory Note
The Company accounts for its convertible promissory note under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). Under 815-15-25, the election can be at the inception of a financial instrument to account for the instrument under the fair value option under ASC 825. The Company has made such election for its convertible promissory note. Using fair value option, the convertible promissory note is required to be recorded at its initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the note are recognized as non-cash change in the fair value of the convertible promissory note in the statements of operations. The fair value of the conversion feature of the note was valued utilizing the Monte Carlo model.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, 9,000,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
The Company applies the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. The contractual formula utilized to calculate the redemption amount approximates fair value. The Class feature to redeem at fair value means that there is effectively only one class of stock. Changes in fair value are not considered a dividend of the purposes of the numerator in the earnings per share calculation. Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing the pro rata net loss between the Class A ordinary shares and the Non-redeemable Class A and Class B ordinary shares by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted loss per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants and rights issued in connection with the IPO since the exercise of the warrants and rights are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. The warrants and rights are exercisable for 6,137,400 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the aggregate.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the independent registered public accounting firm’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of this offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.