ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements. All statements other than statements of historical fact are, or may be deemed to be, forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements include statements regarding, among others, (a) our expectations about possible business combinations, (b) our growth strategies, (c) our future financing plans, and (d) our anticipated needs for working capital. Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies, and expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “approximate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” “plan,” “budget,” “could,” “forecast,” “might,” “predict,” “shall” or “project,” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology. This information may involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from the future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by any forward-looking statements. These statements may be found in this Annual Report.
Forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and assumptions regarding our business, potential target businesses, the economy and other future conditions. Because forward-looking statements relate to the future, by their nature, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks, and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict. Our actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, without limitation, the risks outlined under “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report, changes in local, regional, national or global political, economic, business, competitive, market (supply and demand) and regulatory conditions and the following:
· Adverse economic conditions;
· Our ability to effectively execute our business plan;
· Inability to raise sufficient additional capital to operate our business;
· Our ability to manage our expansion, growth and operating expenses;
· Our ability to evaluate and measure our business, prospects and performance metrics;
· Our ability to compete and succeed in highly competitive and evolving industries;
· Our ability to respond and adapt to changes in technology and customer behavior;
· Our ability to protect our intellectual property and to develop, maintain and enhance a strong brand; and
· Other specific risks referred to in the section entitled “Risk Factors”.
We caution you therefore that you should not rely on any of these forward-looking statements as statements of historical fact or as guarantees or assurances of future performance. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Annual Report. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements or other information contained herein unless required by law.
Information regarding market and industry statistics contained in this Annual Report is included based on information available to us that we believe is accurate. It is generally based on academic and other publications that are not produced for purposes of securities offerings or economic analysis. Forecasts and other forward-looking information obtained from these sources are subject to the same qualifications and the additional uncertainties accompanying any estimates of future market size, revenue and market acceptance of products and services. Except as required by U.S. federal securities laws, we have no obligation to update forward-looking information to reflect actual results or changes in assumptions or other factors that could affect those statements. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” for a more detailed discussion of risks and uncertainties that may have an impact on our future results.
In this Annual Report, the “Company,” “ADRT,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Ault Disruptive Technologies Corporation, a Delaware corporation.
Recent Developments
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from February 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, relates to the Company’s formation and its initial public offering held on December 15, 2021 (the “Initial Public Offering”). The Company will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of its initial business combination. The Company is currently in the process of locating suitable targets for its initial business combination. We intend to use the cash proceeds from the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Placement Warrants (defined below) as well as additional issuances, if any, of our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt to complete the initial business combination.
The registration statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on December 15, 2021. On December 20, 2021, the Company’s commenced the Initial Public Offering of 10,000,000 units at $10.00 per unit (the “Unit”). Each Unit consisted of one share of common stock, par value $0.001 per share, and three-fourths of one redeemable warrant. Each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. On December 20, 2021, the underwriters exercised their full over-allotment option and purchased the additional Units available to them. The aggregate Units sold in the Initial Public Offering and subsequent over-allotment were 11,500,000 and generated gross proceeds of $115,000,000.
The Company’s Sponsor is Ault Disruptive Technologies Company, LLC (the “Sponsor”).
Simultaneously with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the private placement of 7,100,000 warrants (the “Placement Warrants”) to the Sponsor, at a price of $1.00 per Placement Warrant. The sale of the Placement Warrants in connection with the Initial Public Offering and subsequent over-allotment option exercise generated gross proceeds of $7,100,000.
Overview
We are a newly-organized blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to as our initial business combination throughout this Annual Report. While our efforts to identify a target business may span many industries and regions worldwide, we are likely to focus our search for prospects within the technology sector, which has experienced significant disruption from new and emerging products and services. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Placement Warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (including pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
While we may pursue an initial business combination opportunity in any business, industry, sector or geographical location, we intend to focus on opportunities to acquire companies with innovative and emerging technologies, products or services that have the potential to transform major industries and radically impact society. We intend to acquire a target business or businesses with disruptive technologies that our management team believes can achieve mainstream adoption and create opportunities for long-term appreciation in value.
We are not prohibited from pursuing an initial business combination with a business that is owned by the Sponsor or any of the related companies, or making the acquisition through a joint venture or other form of shared ownership with any of them.
Our executive offices are located at 11411 Southern Highlands Parkway, Suite 240, Las Vegas, Nevada 89141, and our telephone number is (949) 444-5464.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for and consummate the Initial Public Offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until we consummate our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective business combination candidates.
For the period February 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $29,535, which primarily consisted of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 20, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 11,500,000 units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $115,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 7,100,000 Private Placement Warrants to the sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $7,100,000.
Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $116,725,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $7,087,891 in transaction costs, including $6,338,333 of underwriting fees ($3,450,000 consisted of deferred underwriting fees) and $749,558 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $116,725,166 (including approximately $166 of income from investments held in trust account) consisting of U.S. government securities with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest income from the trust account to pay our tax obligations. The prepaid balance of $770,000 primarily consist of prepaid directors and officers insurance attributed to our two-year policy.
For the period from February 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $33,043. The net loss of $29,535 was primarily attributed to formation and operating costs. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $62,744 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,849,679. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We anticipate that the $1,849,679 outside of the trust account as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least the next 12 months, assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the trust account, and any additional Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5 to our financial statements) from the our sponsor, an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our directors and officers (which is described in Note 5 to our financial statements), for identifying and evaluating target businesses, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structuring, negotiating and completing a business combination. If we are unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the initial stockholder or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
On June 30, 2021, we issued a promissory note in the principal amount of $1,500,000 to our sponsor. Such promissory note bears no interest and is repayable in full at the date on which we consummate an initial business combination as contemplated by our amended and restated certificate of incorporation. If we do not consummate a business combination, we may use a portion of any funds held outside the trust account to repay the note; however, no proceeds from the trust account may be used for such repayment. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance under the note amounted to nil.
We may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and our sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. We will provide our public stockholders with the opportunity to redeem all or a portion of their shares of our common stock upon the consummation of our initial business combination, subject to the limitations described herein. In addition, if we are unable to consummate our initial business combination within 12 months following the effectiveness of the Initial Public Offering, which is December 15, 2022, we may, but are not obligated to, extend the period of time to complete an initial business combination up to two times by an additional three months each time (for a total of up to 18 months to consummate an initial business combination). If the period of time is not extended, we will be required to cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for at least one year from the date that the financial statements included in this Report were issued. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on January 1, 2022 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters of the IPO are entitled to a deferred fee of $3,450,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
On June 30, 2021, we issued a promissory note in the principal amount of $1,500,000 to our sponsor. Such promissory note bears no interest and is repayable in full at the date on which we consummate an initial business combination as contemplated by our amended and restated certificate of incorporation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in accounting standards codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our audited balance sheet.
Net Loss per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (‘FASB”) ASC Topic 260, Earnings Per Share. Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding common stock subject to forfeiture. Remeasurement associated with the redeemable shares of common stock is excluded from net loss per share as the redemption value approximates fair value. At December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted income per share is the same as basic income per share for the period presented.
Derivatives
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
We accounted for the 8,625,000 Warrants and the 7,100,000 Private Placement Warrants issued in connection with the IPO and Private Placement in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” and ASC 815 “Derivatives and Hedging”. The assessment considers whether the instruments are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, or whether the instruments meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the instruments are indexed to our common stock and whether the holders could potentially require "net cash settlement" in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. The Public and Private Placement Warrants were deemed to meet equity classification.
Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, a significant accounting estimate included in these financial statements is the valuation of the warrant. Such estimates may be subject to change as more current information becomes available.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.