ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
INTRODUCTION
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This section is intended to (i) provide material information relevant to the assessment of our results of operations and cash flows from operations and from outside sources; (ii) enhance the understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations; and (iii) discuss material events and uncertainties known to management that are reasonably likely to cause reported financial information not to be necessarily indicative of future performance or of future financial condition.
Included below are year-over-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020, as well as 2020 and 2019, where applicable, reflecting our current segment structure. Refer to Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for details regarding our segment change. For further information on year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 for those items not affected by our segment change, refer to Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Annual Report for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements about our business, operations, and financial performance based on current plans and estimates involving risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, which could differ materially from actual results. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in the sections of this Annual Report titled Item 1A “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
OVERVIEW AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION
We are a leading provider of security, interactive, and smart home solutions serving residential, small business, and commercial customers in the U.S, and with the acquisition of Sunpro Solar in December 2021, we are now also a leading provider of residential solar and energy storage solutions. Our mission is to empower people to protect and connect to what matters most - their families, homes, and businesses - by delivering safe, smart, and sustainable lifestyle-driven solutions through professionally installed, DIY, and mobile or other digital-based offerings supported by our 24/7 professional monitoring services.
All financial information presented in this section has been prepared in U.S. dollars in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and includes the accounts of ADT Inc. and its subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions have been eliminated. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021, we report financial and operating information in the following three segments: CSB, Commercial, and Solar.
For a more detailed discussion of our business and segments, refer to Item 1 “Business” and Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 “Exhibit and Financial Statement Schedules,” respectively.
FACTORS AFFECTING OPERATING RESULTS
We have been focused on building the right platform for growth, which includes: improving customer satisfaction, increasing our recurring monthly revenue through customer acquisition, improving customer retention, reducing our revenue payback period, increasing the value of our offerings to customers through new products and services, and increasing the rate at which new customers opt for our interactive services.
Our ability to add new customers depends on the overall demand for our products and services, which is driven by a number of external factors. The overall economic condition in the geographies in which we operate can impact our ability to attract new customers and grow our business in all customer channels:
•Growth in our residential and small business customer bases can be influenced by the overall state of the housing market, the perceived threat of crime, significant life events such as the birth of a child or opening of a new business, or incentives provided by insurance carriers.
•Growth in our commercial customer base can be influenced by the rate at which new businesses begin operations or existing businesses grow, as well as applicable building codes and insurance policies.
•Growth in our solar customer base can be influenced by the availability of rebates, tax credits, and other financial incentives, as well as traditional energy prices and grid reliability.
The demand for our products and services is also impacted by the price and quality of our products and services compared to those of our competitors.
As of December 31, 2021, we served approximately 6.6 million recurring revenue customers, excluding contracts monitored, but not owned. Our subscriber-based offerings require significant upfront investment to generate new customers, which in turn provides predictable recurring revenue generated from our monitoring and other services. While the economics of an installation can vary depending on the customer acquisition channel, type of customer, and product offering, we generally achieve revenue break-even in less than two and a half years, which remains relatively consistent year-over-year.
A portion of our subscriber base can be expected to cancel its service every year. Customers may choose not to renew or may terminate their contracts for a variety of reasons, including relocation, cost, loss to competition, or service issues. Attrition has a direct impact on our financial results, including revenue, operating income, and cash flows.
We believe advancements in technology, younger generations of consumers, and shifts to de-urbanization have increased consumer interest in smart home offerings and other mobile technology applications; and we have made significant progress toward increasing the variety of our offerings to accommodate these changing interests. As a result of this, we may experience an increase in service costs associated with items such as (i) offering a wider variety of products and services, (ii) providing more interactive and smart home solutions, (iii) replacing or upgrading certain system components due to technological advancements or otherwise, and (iv) rising costs due to supply chain disruptions. To aid in reducing the potential increase in service costs, we implemented Virtual Service Support in July 2021, which provides customers the ability to live video stream with our skilled technicians to troubleshoot and resolve service issues.
In November 2020, we announced the ongoing development of our ADT-owned next-generation professional security and automation technology platform, which is currently being developed in coordination with Google. We expect this platform will offer a seamless experience across security, life safety, automation, and analytics through a common application. Additionally, we expect the platform will integrate the user experience, customer service experience, and back-end support.
In December 2021, we completed the Sunpro Solar Acquisition, which expanded our offerings and allowed us to enter the residential solar market. Consumer acceptance of solar and battery storage as the future of energy technology is growing. We believe solar is the next logical extension for our offerings, which will provide us with the ability to offer an integrated home experience and increase our share in both markets.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
The COVID-19 Pandemic, including recent variants such as Delta and Omicron, caused certain notable adverse impacts on general economic conditions, including temporary and permanent closures of many businesses, increased governmental regulations, supply chain disruptions, and changes in consumer spending. The COVID-19 Pandemic impacted our commercial businesses to a greater extent than our residential businesses. However, we believe our recurring revenue and highly variable subscriber acquisition cost model provides a solid financial foundation for strong cash flow generation. While we have incurred additional costs associated with personal protective equipment for our employees and implemented certain work from home actions, we also instituted various cost control measures. In addition, we believe uncertainties around the economic environment and COVID-19 Pandemic have increased consumer and business awareness of the need for security. Accordingly, we anticipate having sufficient liquidity and capital resources to continue (i) providing essential services, (ii) satisfying our debt requirements, and (iii) having the ability to return capital to our stockholders in the form of a regular quarterly dividend.
We have not sought or requested government assistance as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic, but we did experience a favorable cash flow impact and other benefits associated with certain income tax and payroll tax provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). This included the delayed payment of payroll taxes, 50% of which we paid as of December 31, 2021, and the other 50% of which we expect to pay by the 2022 deadline.
Prior to 2020, new customer additions and our disconnect rates on residential security customers have typically been higher during the second and third calendar quarters of each year relative to the first and fourth quarters due to several factors, such as the timing of household moves. We believe the COVID-19 Pandemic affected these seasonal trends beginning in 2020. We also believe the lower volume of customer relocations we experienced during 2020 and our use of temporary pricing and retention initiatives for existing customers helped counterbalance any increase in gross customer revenue attrition as a result of changes in consumer or business spending caused by the COVID-19 Pandemic. During the second half of 2021, we began to experience an increase in relocations in line with pre-pandemic trends. However, we are currently unable to determine whether there will be any ongoing impact on our seasonality, and we may continue to experience fluctuations in certain trends, such as relocations, in the future.
We considered the emergence and pervasive economic impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in our assessment of our financial position, results of operations, cash flows, and certain accounting estimates as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021. Due to the evolving and uncertain nature of the COVID-19 Pandemic, it is possible that the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic could materially impact our estimates and consolidated financial statements in future reporting periods.
Equipment Ownership Model Changes
In February 2020, we launched a new revenue model initiative for certain residential customers, which (i) revised the amount and nature of fees due at installation, (ii) introduced a 60-month monitoring contract option, and (iii) introduced a new retail installment contract option allowing qualifying residential customers to pay the fees due at installation over a 24-, 36-, or 60-month interest-free period. Due to the requirements of our initial third-party consumer financing program, we transitioned our security system ownership model from a predominately Company-owned model to a predominately customer-owned model.
In March 2020, we entered into an uncommitted receivables securitization financing agreement (the “Receivables Facility”), which allowed us to receive financing secured by retail installment contract receivables from transactions under a customer-owned model. In April 2020, we amended the Receivables Facility to also permit financing secured by retail installment contract receivables from transactions occurring under a Company-owned model. As a result, we began transitioning our security system ownership model to a predominately Company-owned model in May 2020. In addition, our residential transactions included a temporary increase in transactions sold under a customer-owned model as a result of, and subsequent to, the Defenders Acquisition in January 2020. Substantially all new CSB transactions since March 2021 take place under a Company-owned model.
These equipment ownership model changes impacted our results of operations and cash flow presentation, as described in the following sections, during 2021 and 2020 due to different accounting policies applicable to a Company-owned model versus a customer-owned model. We cannot be certain our revenue model initiative, as described above, or the transition to a predominately Company-owned model, will achieve the desired outcomes.
As we introduce new products and services, enhance our current offerings, continue building our partnership with Google, and seek to satisfy consumer preferences, we may see additional shifts between ownership models, which could impact results in future periods; and these actions could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and key performance indicators.
Radio Conversion Costs
During 2019, we commenced a program to replace the 3G and CDMA cellular equipment used in many of our security systems as a result of the cellular network providers notifying us they will be retiring their 3G and CDMA networks during 2022. From inception of this program through December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $288 million of net radio conversion costs, of which $211 million was incurred during 2021. The cost and pace of this program have been influenced by our ability to access customer sites due to the COVID-19 Pandemic, among other reasons, and cost-sharing opportunities with suppliers, carriers, and customers, as well as new and innovative technologies.
As of December 31, 2021, we provided services to approximately 250 thousand customer sites transmitting signals via 3G or CDMA networks and having sunset dates in February and December 2022, respectively. As of the start of the 3G sunset process in February 2022, we do not expect the remaining radio conversion costs and related incremental revenue to be material.
Google Commercial Agreement
Pursuant to the Google Commercial Agreement, Google has agreed to supply us with Google Services for sale to our customers. Subject to customary termination rights related to breach and change of control, the Google Commercial Agreement has an initial term of seven years from the date that the Google Service is successfully integrated into our end-user security and automation platform. If the integrated service is not launched by June 30, 2022, Google has the contractual right to require us to offer Google Services without integration for professional installations except for existing customers who already have ADT Pulse or ADT Control interactive services until such integration has been made. Further, subject to certain carve-outs, we have agreed to exclusively sell Google Services and smart-home, security, and safety devices to our customers. The exclusivity restriction does not apply to, among others, sales of Blue by ADT DIY products and services, providing services to customers on certain of our legacy platforms, sales to large commercial customers, and sales of certain devices that Google does not supply to us. In January 2022, we successfully launched the integrated Google doorbell, and we are jointly solidifying the timeline for subsequent product launches with a focus on optimal customer experience and quality.
The Google Commercial Agreement specifies that each party will contribute $150 million in three equal tranches, subject to the attainment of certain milestones, towards the joint marketing of devices and services, customer acquisition, training of our
employees for the sales, installation, customer service, and maintenance for the product and service offerings, and technology updates for products included in such offerings. For a more detailed discussion of the Google Commercial Agreement, refer to Note 12 “Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 and below under “-Material Cash Requirements.”
Significant Acquisitions and Dispositions
•Sunpro Solar Acquisition - In December 2021, we acquired Sunpro Solar, a leading solar installer in the United States, for total consideration of approximately $750 million, which consisted of cash paid of $142 million, net of cash acquired, and approximately 75 million shares of our Common Stock with a fair value of $569 million at closing, of which approximately 5 million shares will be issued in 2022.
•Defenders Acquisition - In January 2020, we acquired Defenders for total consideration of approximately $290 million, which consisted of cash paid of $173 million, net of cash acquired, and the issuance of approximately 16 million shares of our Common Stock with a fair value of $114 million. Defenders was our largest independent dealer prior to the Defenders Acquisition.
•Disposition of Canadian Operations - In November 2019, we sold ADT Canada to TELUS for a selling price of $514 million (CAD $676 million). The sale of ADT Canada did not represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations and financial results, and therefore, did not meet the criteria to be reported as discontinued operations.
Refer to Note 4 “Acquisitions and Disposition” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on these acquisitions and disposition.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
We primarily evaluate our results using Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, as well as operating metrics such as recurring monthly revenue and gross customer revenue attrition. Computations of our key performance indicators may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Certain operating metrics are approximated, as there may be variations to reported results in each period due to certain adjustments we might make in connection with the integration over several periods of acquired companies that calculated these metrics differently, or otherwise, including periodic reassessments and refinements in the ordinary course of business. These refinements, for example, may include changes due to systems conversions or historical methodology differences in legacy systems.
Adjusted EBITDA
We believe the non-GAAP measure Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors to measure the operational strength and performance of our business. Our definition of Adjusted EBITDA, a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) (the most comparable GAAP measure), and additional information, including a description of the limitations relating to the use of Adjusted EBITDA, are provided under “-Non-GAAP Measures.”
Recurring Monthly Revenue (“RMR”)
RMR is generated by contractual recurring fees for monitoring and other recurring services provided to our customers.
We use RMR to evaluate our overall sales, installation, and retention performance. Additionally, we believe the presentation of RMR is useful because it measures the volume of revenue under contract at a given point in time. RMR is also a useful measure for forecasting future revenue performance as the majority of our revenue comes from recurring sources.
Gross Customer Revenue Attrition
Gross customer revenue attrition is defined as RMR lost as a result of customer attrition, net of dealer charge-backs and reinstated customers, excluding contracts monitored but not owned and DIY customers. Customer sites are considered canceled when all services are terminated. Dealer charge-backs represent customer cancellations charged back to the dealers because the customer canceled service during the charge-back period, which is generally thirteen months.
Gross customer revenue attrition is calculated on a trailing twelve-month basis, the numerator of which is the RMR lost during the period due to attrition, net of dealer charge-backs and reinstated customers, and the denominator of which is total annualized RMR based on an average of RMR under contract at the beginning of each month during the period, in each case, excluding contracts monitored but not owned and DIY customers.
We use gross customer revenue attrition to evaluate our retention and customer satisfaction performance, as well as evaluate subscriber trends by vintage year. Additionally, we believe the presentation of gross customer revenue attrition is useful as it provides a means to evaluate drivers of customer attrition and the impact of retention initiatives.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations and key performance indicators for the periods presented.
_______________________
(1)Refer to the “-Key Performance Indicators” section for the definitions of these key performance indicators.
(2)Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. Refer to the “-Non-GAAP Measures” section for the definition of this term and reconciliation to the most comparable GAAP measure.
N/A-Not applicable.
Monitoring and Related Services Revenue (“M&S Revenue”)
M&S Revenue in total and by segment were as follows:
_______________________
(1)M&S revenue is not applicable to the Solar segment.
2021 Compared to 2020
The increase in total M&S revenue for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to higher recurring revenue in CSB, which was driven by (i) improvements in average pricing as new and existing customers selected higher priced interactive and other services, and (ii) an increase in the number of customers over the period primarily due to a higher volume of dealer-generated and bulk account purchases. The increase in Commercial was driven by higher recurring revenue primarily due to an increase in the number of customers over the period, including the acquisition of businesses and customer accounts, as well as, improvements in customer retention.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in total M&S revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower recurring revenue in CSB, which was driven by the sale of ADT Canada in November 2019. The decrease was partially offset by higher recurring revenue in the U.S. primarily due to improvements in average pricing as new and existing customers selected higher priced interactive and other services, as well as temporary price escalations on our existing customer base. Commercial remained relatively flat and included higher recurring revenue primarily due to acquisitions, offset by a decrease due to the COVID-19 Pandemic in 2020.
RMR and Gross Customer Revenue Attrition
Total RMR was $359 million, $343 million, and $336 million as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The increase in RMR period over period was primarily due to RMR added as a result of improvements in average pricing and net customer additions.
Gross customer revenue attrition was 13.1%, 13.1%, and 13.4% as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively. Gross customer revenue attrition for 2021 was flat compared to 2020 and primarily included increases in relocations during 2021 as the COVID-19 Pandemic temporarily caused fewer relocations during 2020, and a lower volume of dealer charge-backs during 2021 primarily related to the Defenders Acquisition in 2020, offset by fewer non-payment disconnects and the benefit of customer retention initiatives. The decrease in gross customer revenue attrition for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to fewer customer relocations during 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the benefit of customer retention initiatives.
Installation and Other Revenue
Installation and other revenue in total and by segment were as follows:
2021 Compared to 2020
The decrease in total installation and other revenue for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to CSB, which was driven by a lower volume of outright sales transactions, partially offset by additional amortization of deferred subscriber acquisition revenue as a result of our transition to a predominately Company-owned model. The increase in Commercial was driven by an increase in installation revenue in the current period as compared to the prior period, which was impacted by the COVID-19
Pandemic, as well as from acquisitions. Installation and other revenue in Solar was due to the Sunpro Solar Acquisition in December 2021.
2020 Compared to 2019
The increase in total installation and other revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to CSB, which was driven by a higher volume of outright sales transactions, primarily due to the Defenders Acquisition and our temporary transition to a predominately customer-owned model, partially offset by the sale of ADT Canada. The decrease in Commercial was driven by a lower volume of outright sales transactions during 2020, which was impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic, partially offset by acquisitions.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue in total and by segment were as follows:
2021 Compared to 2020
The increase in cost of revenue for 2021 compared to 2020 was due to the decrease in CSB which was more than offset by an increase in Commercial and Solar from the Sunpro Solar Acquisition. The decrease in CSB was primarily driven by a decrease in installation costs due to a lower volume of outright sales transactions as a result of our transition to a predominately Company-owned model, partially offset by higher field service and call center costs in 2021 as compared to the prior period, which was impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic. The increase in Commercial was driven by an increase in installation costs, as well as field service and call center costs in 2021 as compared to the prior period, which was impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic, as well as from acquisitions.
2020 Compared to 2019
The increase in total cost of revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in CSB, which was driven by an increase in installation costs primarily due to a higher volume of outright sales transactions as a result of the Defenders Acquisition and our temporary transition to a predominately customer-owned model, partially offset by the sale of ADT Canada. The decrease in Commercial was driven by a decrease in installation costs due to a lower volume of outright sales transactions during 2020, which was impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic, partially offset by acquisitions.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
2021 Compared to 2020
The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by:
•an increase in radio conversion costs of $162 million primarily due to an increase in the number and cost of conversions, partially offset by;
•decreases in the provision for credit losses of $46 million and $30 million in our CSB and Commercial segments, respectively, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the prior year, as well as a lower volume of outright sales transactions in our CSB segment; and
•a decrease in commissions, partially offset by an increase in amortization of deferred subscriber acquisition costs, as a result of our transition to a predominantly Company-owned model.
The remainder of the change was attributable to higher general and administrative expenses primarily due to investments in our information technology infrastructure and higher selling costs, offset by lower share-based compensation expense.
2020 Compared to 2019
The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by:
•an increase in expenses, excluding provision for credit losses, of $282 million due to the Defenders Acquisition;
•an increase in radio conversion costs of $59 million primarily due to an increase in the number and cost of conversions; and
•increases in the provision for credit losses of $37 million and $21 million in our CSB and Commercial segments, respectively, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic during 2020, as well as a higher volume of longer duration receivables and acquisitions.
These increases were partially offset by lower advertising costs, excluding recent acquisitions, a decrease in expenses of $43 million due to the sale of ADT Canada, as well as recoveries on notes receivable from a former strategic investment and a decrease in financing and consent fees.
Depreciation and Intangible Asset Amortization
2021 Compared to 2020
Depreciation and intangible asset amortization remained relatively flat for 2021 compared to 2020 and included a decrease in the amortization of customer relationships acquired in the ADT Acquisition, offset by increases in the amortization of (i) customer contracts acquired under the ADT Authorized Dealer Program and from other third parties and (ii) other intangible assets.
The majority of the remaining net book value of customer relationships acquired in the ADT Acquisition will be fully amortized during 2022 with the remainder amortized during 2023.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in depreciation and intangible asset amortization for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease of $70 million associated with the sale of ADT Canada as well as a decrease in the depreciation of subscriber system assets. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of the amortization of customer contracts acquired under the ADT Authorized Dealer Program.
Merger, Restructuring, Integration, and Other
Merger, restructuring, integration, and other represents certain direct and incremental costs resulting from acquisitions, integration costs as a result of those acquisitions, costs related to restructuring efforts, as well as fair value remeasurements and impairment charges on certain strategic investments. These amounts vary year over year and included:
•For 2021, costs primarily included an $18 million impairment charge in CSB due to lower than expected benefits from the developed technology intangible asset acquired as part of our acquisition of Cell Bounce as a result of recent worldwide shortages for certain electronic components, as well as acquisitions costs related to the Sunpro Solar Acquisition.
•For 2020, costs primarily included losses of $81 million in CSB associated with the settlement of a pre-existing relationship in connection with the Defenders Acquisition.
•For 2019, costs primarily related to restructuring and integration activities and the sale of ADT Canada, as well as losses on a strategic investment.
Goodwill Impairment and Loss on Sale of Business
During 2019, we recorded a goodwill impairment loss of $45 million and a loss on sale of business of $62 million in connection with the sale of ADT Canada, which was included in the CSB segment prior to sale.
Interest Expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net, was primarily driven by an unrealized gain of $158 million on interest rate swap contracts not designated as cash flow hedges in 2021 as compared to an unrealized loss of $60 million in 2020 primarily due to an increase in forward LIBOR and the redemption of the ADT Notes due 2021 during September 2020, as well as the $300 million prepayment in December 2020 and the January 2021 refinance on the First Lien Term Loan due 2026. The decrease was partially offset by the issuance of the First Lien Notes due 2029 during 2021 and the First Lien Notes due 2027 during 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
For 2021, loss on extinguishment of debt totaled $37 million and was primarily due to the call premium and write-off of unamortized fair value adjustments in connection with the $1.0 billion redemption of the 3.50% notes due 2022 (“ADT Notes due 2022”) in August 2021 (“ADT Notes due 2022 Redemption”).
For 2020, loss on extinguishment of debt totaled $120 million and primarily included (i) $66 million associated with the call premium and write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs in connection with the $1.2 billion redemption of second lien notes in February 2020, and (ii) $49 million associated with the call premium and write-off of unamortized fair value adjustments in connection with the $1.0 billion redemption of first lien notes in September 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
For 2021, income tax benefit was $130 million, resulting in an effective tax rate for the period of 27.7%. The effective tax rate primarily represents the federal income tax rate of 21.0%, a state statutory tax rate, net of federal benefits, of 2.7%, and a 1.3% favorable impact related to the revaluation of our deferred tax liabilities in connection with our 2021 acquisitions.
For 2020, income tax benefit was $147 million, resulting in an effective tax rate for the period of 18.8%. The effective tax rate primarily represents the federal income tax rate of 21.0%, a state statutory tax rate, net of federal benefits, of 2.9%, a 3.1% unfavorable impact from non-deductible charges primarily due to the Defenders Acquisition, and a 1.5% unfavorable impact from an increase in valuation allowances primarily due to tax credits and state net operating losses not expected to be utilized prior to expiration.
NON-GAAP MEASURES
To provide investors with additional information in connection with our results as determined in accordance with GAAP, we disclose Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure. Adjusted EBITDA is not a financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for net income, operating income, or any other measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
We believe the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA is useful as it provides investors additional information about our operating profitability adjusted for certain non-cash items, non-routine items we do not expect to continue at the same level in the future, as well as other items not core to our operations. Further, we believe Adjusted EBITDA provides a meaningful measure of operating profitability because we use it for evaluating our business performance, making budgeting decisions, and comparing our performance against other peer companies using similar measures.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss adjusted for (i) interest; (ii) taxes; (iii) depreciation and amortization, including depreciation of subscriber system assets and other fixed assets and amortization of dealer and other intangible assets; (iv) amortization of deferred costs and deferred revenue associated with subscriber acquisitions; (v) share-based compensation expense; (vi) merger, restructuring, integration, and other; (vii) losses on extinguishment of debt; (viii) radio conversion costs, net; and (ix) other income/gain or expense/loss items such as impairment charges, financing and consent fees, or acquisition-related adjustments.
There are material limitations to using Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA does not take into account certain significant items, including depreciation and amortization, interest, taxes, and other adjustments which directly affect our net income or loss. These limitations are best addressed by considering the economic effects of the excluded items independently and by considering Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with net income or loss as calculated in accordance with GAAP.
The table below reconciles Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss):
___________________
(1)Refer to Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further details.
(2)Represents fees expensed associated with financing transactions.
(3)Represents amortization of purchase accounting adjustments and compensation arrangements related to acquisitions. During 2021, primarily related to the Sunpro Solar Acquisition. During 2019, primarily related to compensation arrangements as a result of Commercial acquisitions.
(4)Represents other charges and non-cash items. 2020 included recoveries of $10 million associated with notes receivable from a former strategic investment. 2019 included losses of $10 million associated with notes receivable from a former strategic investment and $6 million associated with an estimated legal settlement, net of insurance.
Adjusted EBITDA in total and by segment were as follows:
The explanations below exclude amounts outside of our definition of Adjusted EBITDA, as applicable.
2021 Compared to 2020
Adjusted EBITDA remained relatively flat for 2021 compared to 2020 and included an increase in Commercial partially offset by a decrease in CSB. The increase in Commercial was primarily attributable to (i) an increase in M&S Revenue, (ii) a decrease in the provision for credit losses, and (iii) an increase in installation revenue, net of the associated installation costs and commissions. These increases were partially offset by an increase in field service and call center costs. The decrease in CSB was primarily attributable to (i) a decrease in installation revenue, net of the associated installation costs and commissions, from a lower volume of outright sales transactions, (ii) an increase in field service and call center costs, and (iii) an increase in selling and general and administrative expenses. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in M&S Revenue and a decrease in the provision for credit losses.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in total Adjusted EBITDA for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to CSB, which was driven by an increase in selling and general and administrative costs primarily due to the Defenders Acquisition and an increase in the provision for credit losses, as well as the sale of ADT Canada. These decreases were partially offset by higher installation revenue, net of the associated installation costs and commissions, from a higher volume of outright sales transactions. The decrease in Commercial was primarily attributable to a decrease in installation revenue, net of the associated installation costs and commissions, and an increase in the provision for credit losses primarily as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic, partially offset by acquisitions.
Refer to the discussions above under “-Results of Operations” for further details.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2021, liquidity and capital resources primarily consisted of the following:
Liquidity
Our principal liquidity requirements are to finance current operations, invest in acquiring and retaining customers, purchase property and equipment, service our debt, and finance potential mergers and acquisitions. Our future cash needs are expected to include cash for operating activities, working capital, capital expenditures, strategic investments, periodic principal and interest payments on our debt, and potential dividend payments to our stockholders.
Our liquidity requirements are primarily funded by our cash flows from operations, which include cash received from customers related to monthly recurring revenue from providing monitoring and other services, as well as cash from the sale and installation of our security and solar systems (including cash received from third-party lenders who provide loan products for customers), less cash costs to provide services to our customers, including general and administrative costs, certain costs associated with acquiring new customers, and interest payments. In addition to cash generated from operations, we expect our ongoing sources of liquidity to include borrowings under our revolving credit facility and Receivables Facility, as well as the issuance of equity and/or debt securities as appropriate given market conditions.
We are a highly leveraged company with significant debt service requirements. We may, from time to time, seek to repay, redeem, repurchase, or refinance our indebtedness, or seek to retire or purchase our outstanding securities through cash purchases in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions or through a 10b5-1 repurchase plan or otherwise, and any such transactions may involve material amounts.
Our ability to meet our debt service obligations and other capital requirements, including capital expenditures, as well as finance acquisitions, will depend on our future operating performance, which is subject to future general economic, financial, business, competitive, legislative, regulatory, and other conditions, many of which are beyond our control. Changes in our operating plans, material changes in anticipated sales, increased expenses, acquisitions, or other events may cause us to seek equity and/or debt financing in future periods. There can be no guarantee that financing will be available on acceptable terms or at all. Debt financing, if available, could impose additional cash payment obligations and subject us to additional covenants and operating restrictions.
We believe our cash position, borrowing capacity available under our revolving credit facility and Receivables Facility, and cash provided by operating activities are, and will continue to be, adequate to meet our operational and business needs in the next twelve months, as well as our long-term liquidity needs.
Material Cash Requirements
Our cash requirements within the next twelve months primarily include current maturities of long-term debt and leases, accounts payable and other current liabilities, and purchase commitments and other obligations entered into in the ordinary course of business.
As of December 31, 2021, our significant short-term and long-term cash requirements, excluding cash required for operations, under our various contractual obligations and commitments primarily included:
•Debt principal - As of December 31, 2021, our expected future debt principal payments, excluding finance leases, totaled approximately $9.8 billion, with approximately $79 million due in 2022.
Refer to Note 6 “Debt” for further details of our debt and the timing of expected future principal payments.
•Interest payments - Interest payments on our fixed-rate debt are calculated based on the contractual terms. Interest payments on our variable-rate debt, including the effects of our interest rate swaps, are calculated based on a forward LIBOR curve plus the applicable margin in effect as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, our expected future interest payments related to our debt and interest rate swap contracts totaled approximately $2.6 billion, with approximately $494 million due in 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we expect to incur annual interest payments related to our debt and interest rate swap contracts of approximately $350 - $450 million during the years 2023 - 2026.
•Operating and finance leases - As of December 31, 2021, our expected future lease payments, including interest, totaled approximately $249 million, with approximately $84 million due in 2022.
Refer to Note 13 “Leases” for further details of our obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
•Purchase obligations - Our material cash requirements for purchases of goods or services entered into in the ordinary course of business, including purchase orders and contractual obligations, primarily consist of information technology services and equipment, including investments in our information technology infrastructure, direct materials, and telecommunication services.
As of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations entered into in the ordinary course of business, including agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and have a remaining term in excess of one year, totaled approximately $320 million, with approximately $120 million expected to be paid in 2022. Refer to Note 12 “Commitments and Contingencies” for the amounts and timing of such payments.
In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding purchase orders of approximately $200 million primarily related to direct materials and information technology and marketing services, which are expected to be materially satisfied in 2022. Our future purchase obligations may be impacted by changes in our business or other internal or external factors. As our business continues to grow organically and through acquisitions, our obligations may grow as well.
•Google Commercial Agreement - The Google Commercial Agreement requires us and Google to each contribute $150 million towards certain joint commercial efforts. As of December 31, 2021, we expect to contribute the majority of these amounts by the end of 2024. However, the timing of these contributions is still uncertain.
•Customer account purchases - In 2021, we entered into agreements for potential future purchases of customer accounts from two distinct third parties, assuming certain conditions are met over the course of those agreements. As of December 31, 2021, remaining commitments for those potential future customer account purchases could total approximately $100 million through January 2023.
•Sunlight Financial LLC (“Sunlight”) - We use Sunlight, a related party controlled by Apollo, to provide financing alternatives to certain ADT Solar customers. Amounts paid to Sunlight since the Sunpro Solar Acquisition were not material; however, these amounts may be material in future periods.
•Unrecognized tax benefits - We have approximately $66 million of unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties, related to various tax positions we have taken. These liabilities may increase or decrease over time primarily as a result of tax examinations, and given the status of the examinations, we cannot reliably estimate the period of any cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities.
Refer to Note 8 “Income Taxes” for further details.
•Off-balance sheet arrangements - We have guarantees primarily related to standby letters of credit on our insurance programs totaling $76 million. We do not have any other arrangements giving rise to material obligations that are not reported in our consolidated balance sheets, as described in Item 303 of SEC Regulation S-K.
Long-Term Debt
As of December 31, 2021, our debt (excluding finance leases, deferred financing costs, discount, premium, and fair value adjustments) consisted of the following (in thousands):
First Lien Credit Agreement
Concurrently with the consummation of the Formation Transactions, we entered into a first lien credit agreement dated as of July 1, 2015 (together with subsequent amendments and restatements, the “First Lien Credit Agreement”), which has since been amended and restated on May 2, 2016, June 23, 2016, December 28, 2016, February 13, 2017, June 29, 2017, March 16, 2018, December 3, 2018, March 15, 2019 (effective April 4, 2019), September 23, 2019, January 27, 2021, and July 29, 2021.
The First Lien Credit Agreement consists of a term loan facility (the “First Lien Term Loan due 2026”) and a revolving credit facility (the “First Lien Revolving Credit Facility”). Below is a summary of key events related to the First Lien Credit Agreement during 2021 and 2020:
•In December 2020, we made a $300 million prepayment on the First Lien Term Loan due 2026.
•In January 2021, we amended and restated the First Lien Credit Agreement to refinance the First Lien Term Loan due 2026, which reduced the applicable margin for Adjusted LIBOR loans from 3.25% to 2.75% and reduced the floor from 1.00% to 0.75%.
•In July 2021, we further amended and restated the First Lien Credit Agreement with respect to the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility, which extended its maturity date to June 23, 2026, subject to certain conditions, and obtained an additional $175 million of commitments. After giving effect to this amendment and restatement, aggregate commitments under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility were $575 million.
•In December 2021, we borrowed $185 million under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility in connection with the Sunpro Solar Acquisition and repaid $160 million.
As a result of the January 2021 amendment to the First Lien Credit Agreement, beginning in the second quarter of 2021, we are required to make scheduled quarterly principal payments equal to 0.25% of the then-outstanding aggregate principal amount of the First Lien Term Loan due 2026, with the remaining balance payable at maturity. We may make voluntary prepayments on the First Lien Term Loan due 2026 at any time prior to maturity at par. Additionally, we are required to make annual prepayments on the outstanding First Lien Term Loan due 2026 with a percentage of our excess cash flow, as defined in the First Lien Credit Agreement, if our excess cash flow exceeds a certain specified threshold. As of December 31, 2021, we were not required to make any annual prepayments based on our excess cash flow.
The First Lien Term Loan due 2026 has an interest rate calculated as, at our option, either (a) LIBOR determined by reference to the costs of funds for Eurodollar deposits for the interest period relevant to such borrowing, adjusted for certain additional
costs (“Adjusted LIBOR”) with a floor of 0.75%, or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.50% per annum, (ii) the prime rate published by The Wall Street Journal, and (iii) one-month Adjusted LIBOR plus 1.00% per annum (“Base Rate”), in each case, plus the applicable margin of 2.75% for Adjusted LIBOR loans and 1.75% for Base Rate loans and is payable on each interest payment date, at least quarterly, in arrears.
Borrowings under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility will bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (a) Adjusted LIBOR, or (b) the Base Rate, plus the applicable margin of 2.75% for Adjusted LIBOR loans and 1.75% for Base Rate loans. Additionally, we are required to pay a commitment fee between 0.375% and 0.50% (determined based on a net first lien leverage ratio) with respect to the unused commitments under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility.
By June 2023, USD LIBOR will be replaced with SOFR (the “SOFR Transition Date”), at which point the applicable benchmark for all existing and new issuances with a variable rate debt component will be based on SOFR. Our First Lien Term Loan due 2026 and First Lien Revolving Credit Facility will continue to be based on LIBOR until the SOFR Transition Date. However, any modification, such as a repricing, entered into after December 31, 2021 will require transition to SOFR. Additionally, any new issuances with a variable rate debt component entered into after December 31, 2021 will utilize SOFR per the terms of the credit agreement.
Second Lien Notes due 2028
The 6.250% second-priority senior secured notes due 2028 (the “Second Lien Notes due 2028”) were issued in January 2020 to refinance and redeem the then-outstanding $1.2 billion aggregate principal amount of our 9.250% second-priority senior secured notes due 2023 (the “Prime Notes”).
The Second Lien Notes due 2028 will mature on January 15, 2028 with semi-annual interest payment dates of January 15 and July 15, and may be redeemed at our option as follows:
•Prior to January 15, 2023, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, (a) at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2028 redeemed, plus a make-whole premium and accrued and unpaid interest as of, but excluding, the redemption date or (b) for up to 40% of the original aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2028 and in an aggregate amount equal to the net cash proceeds of any equity offerings, at a redemption price equal to 106.250%, plus accrued and unpaid interest, so long as at least 50% of the original aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2028 shall remain outstanding after each such redemption.
•On or after January 15, 2023, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to 103.125% of the principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2028 redeemed and accrued and unpaid interest as of, but excluding, the redemption date. The redemption price decreases to 101.563% on or after January 15, 2024 and decreases to 100% on or after January 15, 2025.
Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we must offer to repurchase the Second Lien Notes due 2028 at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date. The indenture governing the Second Lien Notes due 2028 also provides for customary events of default.
First Lien Notes due 2024 and First Lien Notes due 2026
The 5.250% first-priority senior secured notes due 2024 (the “First Lien Notes due 2024”) and the 5.750% first-priority senior secured notes due 2026 (the “First Lien Notes due 2026”) are due at maturity, and may be redeemed, in whole or in part, at any time at a make-whole premium plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we must offer to repurchase the notes at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date.
First Lien Notes due 2027
The 3.375% first-priority senior secured notes due 2027 (the “First Lien Notes due 2027”) were issued in August 2020 to refinance and redeem the then-outstanding $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the 6.250% ADT Notes due 2021 (the “ADT Notes due 2021”).
The First Lien Notes due 2027 will mature on August 31, 2027 with semi-annual interest payment dates of June 15 and December 15, and may be redeemed at our option as follows:
•Prior to August 31, 2026, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a make-whole premium plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, thereon to the redemption date.
•On or after August 31, 2026, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the First Lien Notes due 2027 redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, thereon to the redemption date.
Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we must offer to repurchase the First Lien Notes due 2027 at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date. The indenture governing the First Lien Notes due 2027 also provides for customary events of default.
First Lien Notes due 2029
The 4.125% first-priority senior secured notes due 2029 (the “First Lien Notes due 2029”) were issued in July 2021 to refinance and redeem the then-outstanding $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the 3.50% ADT Notes due 2022.
The First Lien Notes due 2029 will mature on August 1, 2029, with semi-annual interest payment dates of February 1 and August 1 of each year, beginning February 1, 2022, and may be redeemed at our option as follows:
•Prior to August 1, 2028, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the principal amount of the First Lien Notes due 2029 to be redeemed and (ii) the sum of the present values of the aggregate principal amount of the First Lien Notes due 2029 to be redeemed and the remaining scheduled interest payments due on any date after the redemption date, to and including August 1, 2028, discounted at an adjusted treasury rate plus 50 basis points, plus, in either case accrued and unpaid interest as of, but excluding, the redemption date.
•On or after August 1, 2028, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the First Lien Notes due 2029 to be redeemed and accrued and unpaid interest as of, but excluding, the redemption date.
Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we may be required to purchase the First Lien Notes due 2029 at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date. The indenture also provides for customary events of default.
ADT Notes
Below is a summary of key events related to the ADT Notes during 2021 and 2020:
•September 2020 - We redeemed the outstanding $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the ADT Notes due 2021 at a price of $1.1 billion; and
•August 2021 - We redeemed the outstanding $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the ADT Notes due 2022 at a price of $1.0 billion.
The remaining outstanding ADT Notes are due at maturity, and may be redeemed, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus a make-whole premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest as of, but excluding, the redemption date. Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we must offer to repurchase the ADT Notes at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date.
Receivables Facility
During March 2020, we entered into the Receivables Facility whereby we obtain financing by selling or contributing certain retail installment contract receivables to our wholly-owned consolidated bankruptcy-remote special purpose entity (“SPE”). The SPE grants a security interest in those retail installment contract receivables as collateral for cash borrowings under the Receivables Facility. The SPE borrower under the Receivables facility is a separate legal entity with its own creditors who will be entitled, prior to and upon the liquidation of the SPE, to be satisfied out of the SPE’s assets prior to any assets of the SPE becoming available to us (other than the SPE). Accordingly, the assets of the SPE are not available to pay our creditors (other than the SPE), although collections from the transferred retail installment contract receivables in excess of amounts required to repay amounts then due and payable to the SPE’s creditors may be released to us and subsequently used by us (including to pay other creditors). The SPE’s creditors under the Receivables Facility have legal recourse to the transferred retail installment contract receivables owned by the SPE, and to us for certain performance and operational obligations relating to the Receivables Facility, but do not have any recourse to us (other than the SPE) for the payment of principal and interest on the advances under the Receivables Facility.
Significant amendments to the Receivables Facility were as follows:
•In March 2021, the Receivables Facility was amended to, among other things, extend the scheduled termination date for the uncommitted revolving period to March 4, 2022, and reduce the spread over LIBOR payable in respect of borrowings thereunder from 1.00% to 0.85%.
•In July 2021, the Receivables Facility was amended into the form of a Receivables Financing Agreement, which continued the uncommitted secured lending arrangement contemplated among the parties and, among other things, provided for certain revisions to funding, prepayment, reporting, and other provisions in preparation for a potential future syndication of the advances made under the Receivables Facility.
•In October 2021, the documentation governing the Receivables Facility was further amended in connection with the syndication of the advances thereunder to two additional lenders: MUFG Bank, Ltd. and Starbird Funding Corporation (a conduit lender related to BNP Paribas). As part of the amendment, the Receivables Facility’s uncommitted lending limit was increased from $200 million to $400 million, and the scheduled termination date for the Receivables Facility’s uncommitted revolving period was extended to October 28, 2022.
We service the transferred retail installment contract receivables and are responsible for ensuring related collections are remitted to a segregated account in the SPE’s name. On a monthly basis, the segregated bank account is utilized to make required principal, interest, and other payments due under the Receivables Facility. The segregated account is considered restricted cash and is reflected in prepaid expenses and other current assets in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
During 2021 and 2020, proceeds under the Receivables Facility were $254 million and $83 million, respectively, and repayments were $130 million and $7 million, respectively. Both the proceeds and repayments during 2021 include the non-cash impact of approximately $88 million from the Receivables Facility amendment in October 2021.
Debt Covenants
The First Lien Credit Agreement and indentures associated with the borrowings above contain certain covenants and restrictions that limit our ability to, among other things, incur additional debt or issue certain preferred equity interests; create liens on certain assets; make certain loans or investments (including acquisitions); pay dividends on or make distributions in respect of the capital stock or make other restricted payments; consolidate, merge, sell, or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets; sell assets; enter into certain transactions with affiliates; enter into sale-leaseback transactions; restrict dividends from our subsidiaries or restrict liens; change our fiscal year; and modify the terms of certain debt or organizational agreements.
We are also subject to a springing financial maintenance covenant under the First Lien Credit Agreement, which requires us to not exceed a specified first lien leverage ratio at the end of each fiscal quarter if the testing conditions are satisfied. The covenant is tested if the outstanding loans under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility, subject to certain exceptions, exceed 30% of the total commitments under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility at the testing date (i.e., the last day of any fiscal quarter).
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenant and other maintenance tests for all our debt obligations, and we do not believe there is a material risk of future noncompliance with our financial covenant and other maintenance tests as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic, or otherwise.
Dividends
Stockholders are entitled to receive dividends when, as, and if declared by the Company’s board of directors out of funds legally available for that purpose.
During 2021, we declared aggregate dividends of $0.14 per share on Common Stock ($111 million) and $0.14 per share on Class B Common Stock ($8 million). During 2020, we declared aggregate dividends of $0.14 per share on Common Stock ($108 million) and $0.07 per share on Class B Common Stock ($4 million). Refer to Note 9 “Equity” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
On March 1, 2022, we announced a dividend of $0.035 per share to holders of Common Stock and Class B Common Stock of record on March 17, 2022, which will be distributed on April 4, 2022.
Other Share Activity
In February 2019, we approved a dividend reinvestment plan (the “DRIP”), which allowed stockholders to designate all or a portion of the cash dividends on their shares of common stock for reinvestment in additional shares of our Common Stock. The DRIP terminated in accordance with its terms on February 27, 2021. Prior to termination, dividends settled in shares of Common Stock were not material during 2021 or 2020.
In February 2019, we approved the Share Repurchase Program, which authorized us to repurchase shares of our Common Stock (up to a certain amount). The Share Repurchase Program terminated in accordance with its terms on March 23, 2021. Prior to termination, repurchases of shares of Common Stock under the Share Repurchase Program were not material during 2021 or 2020.
Refer to Note 9 “Equity” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Cash Flow Analysis
The following table is a summary of our cash flow activity for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to:
•a lower volume of residential outright sales transactions as compared to Company-owned transactions as a result of our equipment ownership model changes;
•a decrease in outflows of $81 million related to a payment in the first quarter of 2020 for the settlement of a pre-existing relationship in connection with the Defenders Acquisition;
•a decrease in outflows of $58 million related to lower incentive compensation payments in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to our 2019 annual incentive payment and the acceleration of the majority of our 2020 annual incentive payment, which were both paid in 2020; and
•a decrease in cash interest of $54 million from various long-term debt refinancing transactions.
These activities were partially offset by:
•an increase of $155 million in payments related to radio conversion costs, net of the related incremental revenue; and
•an increase in payroll tax payments primarily related to deferrals of such payments in 2020 under the CARES Act, a portion of which were paid in 2021.
The remainder of the activity related to changes in assets and liabilities due to the volume and timing of other operating cash receipts and payments with respect to when the transactions are reflected in earnings.
Refer to the discussions above under “-Results of Operations” for further details.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The increase in net cash used in investing activities for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to:
•an increase in dealer generated customer account and bulk account purchases of $294 million due to a higher volume of purchases including the impact from bulk purchases; and
•an increase in subscriber system assets expenditures of $276 million primarily due to a higher volume of residential Company-owned transactions as compared to outright sales transactions as a result of our equipment ownership model changes, partially offset by;
•a decrease in cash paid for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The increase in net cash used in financing activities for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to:
•a decrease in inflows of $448 million related to proceeds, net of expenses, received in 2020 from the issuance of Class B Common Stock; and
•an increase in payments on interest rate swap contracts that included an other-than-insignificant financing element at inception.
These activities were partially offset by:
•a decrease in net outflows on long-term borrowings of $359 million primarily due to the $300 million prepayment in December 2020 on the First Lien Term Loan due 2026, as well as a decrease in call premiums related to various debt redemptions during 2020;
•an increase in net proceeds of $47 million from the Receivables Facility due to additional months of activity in 2021 as compared to 2020; and
•a decrease in payments for deferred financing costs.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires us to select accounting policies and make estimates that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes.
Management’s estimates are based on the relevant information available at the end of each period. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or market conditions.
The following critical accounting estimates include estimates prepared in accordance with GAAP that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the financial condition or results of operations, and are based on, among other things, estimates, assumptions, and judgments made by management that include inherent risks and uncertainties. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Refer to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion of our significant accounting policies and the effect on our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company generates revenue primarily through contractual monthly recurring fees received for monitoring and related services provided to customers. For CSB and Commercial, the Company’s performance obligations generally include monitoring, related services (such as maintenance agreements), and the sale and installation of a security system or a material right in transactions in which the Company retains ownership of the security system (as discussed below). For Solar, the Company’s performance obligations generally include the sale and installation of a solar system, and may include additional performance obligations such as roofing services or the sale and installation of additional products such as batteries.
The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on relative standalone selling price, which is determined using observable internal and external pricing, profitability, and operational metrics.
The portion of the transaction price associated with the material right is deferred upon initiation of a monitoring contract and reflected as deferred subscriber acquisition revenue in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Deferred subscriber acquisition revenue is amortized on a pooled basis over the estimated life of the customer relationship using an accelerated method consistent with the treatment of subscriber system assets and deferred subscriber acquisition costs (discussed below).
Revenue associated with the sale and installation of a security system is recognized either at a point in time or over time based upon the nature of the transaction and contractual terms. For revenue recognized over time, progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation is primarily measured using a cost-to-cost measure of progress method. The cost input is based primarily on contract cost incurred to date compared to total estimated contract cost. This measure of progress method includes forecasts based on the best information available and reflects our judgment to faithfully depict the value of the services transferred to the customer.
Subscriber System Assets, net and Deferred Subscriber Acquisition Costs, net
Subscriber system assets and any related deferred subscriber acquisition costs resulting from customer acquisitions are accounted for on a pooled basis based on the month and year of acquisition. We depreciate and amortize our pooled subscriber system assets and related deferred subscriber acquisition costs using an accelerated method over the estimated life of the customer relationship, which is 15 years. We periodically perform lifing studies to estimate the expected life of the customer relationship and the attrition pattern of our customers and assess the continued reasonableness of our existing depreciation and amortization policies.
The lifing studies are based on historical customer terminations and are used to establish the amortization rates of our customer account pools in order to reflect the pattern of future benefit. The results of the lifing studies indicate that we can expect attrition to be the greatest in the initial years of asset life; therefore, an accelerated method best matches the future amortization cost with the estimated revenue stream from these customer pools. In order to align the depreciation and amortization of subscriber system assets and related deferred costs to the pattern in which their economic benefits are consumed, the accelerated method utilizes an average declining balance rate of approximately 250% and converts to straight-line methodology when the resulting charge is greater than that from the accelerated method, resulting in an average charge of approximately 55% of the pool within the first five years, 25% within the second five years, and 20% within the final five years. The accelerated method and estimated life used have not changed during the periods presented.
Definite-Lived Intangible Assets
Definite-lived intangible assets primarily relate to customer relationships and dealer relationships that originated from business acquisitions, as well as contracts with customers purchased under the ADT Authorized Dealer Program or from other third parties.
Customer relationships are amortized over a period of up to 20 years based on management estimates about the amounts and timing of estimated future revenue from customer accounts and average customer account life that existed at the time of the related business acquisition. Dealer relationships originated from the Formation Transactions and the ADT Acquisition and are primarily amortized over 19 years based on management estimates about the longevity of the underlying dealer network and the attrition of those respective dealers that existed at the time of the related business acquisition.
Purchases of contracts with customers under the ADT Authorized Dealer Program, or from other third parties, are considered asset acquisitions and are recorded at their contractually determined purchase price. We may charge back the purchase price of any end-user contract if the contract is canceled during the charge-back period, which is generally thirteen months from the date of purchase. We record the amount of the charge back as a reduction to the purchase price. Similar to above, we periodically perform lifing studies to estimate the expected life of the customer relationship and the attrition pattern of our customers and assess the continued reasonableness of our existing depreciation and amortization policies.
These purchases of contracts with customers are accounted for on a pooled basis based on the month and year of acquisition. We amortize our pooled contracts with customers using an accelerated method over the estimated life of the customer relationship, which is 15 years. The accelerated method for amortizing these contracts utilizes an average declining balance rate of approximately 300% and converts to straight-line methodology when the resulting amortization charge is greater than that from the accelerated method, resulting in an average amortization of approximately 65% of the pool within the first five years, 25% within the second five years, and 10% within the final five years. The accelerated method and estimated life used have not changed during the periods presented.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Impairment
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized and are tested for impairment at least annually as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each year and more often if an event occurs or circumstances change which indicate it is more-likely-than-not that fair value is less than carrying amount. We make certain estimates and judgments in relation to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which include considerations made in the valuation of certain acquired identifiable indefinite-lived assets as a result of business combinations as well as considerations in impairment assessments of goodwill.
Goodwill
Under a qualitative approach, we assess whether it is more-likely-than-not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. Under a quantitative approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit and compare it to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
We estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using the income approach, which discounts projected cash flows using market participant assumptions. The income approach includes significant assumptions including, but not limited to, forecasted revenue, operating profit margins, operating expenses, cash flows, perpetual growth rates, and discount rates. The estimated fair value of a reporting unit calculated using the income approach is sensitive to changes in the underlying assumptions. In developing these assumptions, we rely on various factors including operating results, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows, and other market data. Examples of events or circumstances that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the underlying judgments and factors and ultimately impact the estimated fair value determinations may include such items as a prolonged downturn in the business environment, changes in economic conditions that significantly differ from our assumptions in timing or degree, volatility in equity and debt markets resulting in higher discount rates, and unexpected regulatory changes. As a result, there are inherent uncertainties related to these judgments and factors in applying them to the goodwill impairment tests.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, subsequent to our annual goodwill impairment tests, our reporting units changed in connection with the integration of Red Hawk and other commercial acquisitions, which reflected the finalization and integration of financial information and internal reporting structure, as well as changes in the review and availability of discrete financial information. Since the fourth quarter of 2020, the Commercial reporting unit is comprised of the former Red Hawk reporting unit, as well as assets and liabilities and accompanying financial results related to operations associated with commercial customers that were previously assigned to the U.S. reporting unit. The Company also reallocated a portion of goodwill from the former U.S. reporting unit to the Commercial reporting unit on a relative fair value basis using a market approach that consisted of the application of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (“EBITDA”) multiples from a selected peer group of publicly-traded companies to arrive at the estimated fair values. In addition, we qualitatively tested our former reporting units immediately prior to the reporting unit change during the fourth quarter of 2020 and quantitatively tested our new reporting units immediately following the change. Based on the results of these tests, no impairment charges were recorded.
On October 1, 2021, we completed our annual goodwill impairment tests by qualitatively testing the goodwill associated with the CSB reporting unit and quantitatively testing the goodwill associated with the Commercial reporting unit. Additionally, we did not test the goodwill associated with the Solar reporting unit due to the recency of the Sunpro Solar Acquisition in December 2021.
Based on the results of the qualitative testing for the CSB reporting unit, we concluded it is more likely than not that the fair value of the CSB reporting unit exceeds its carrying value. Based on the results of the quantitative testing for the Commercial reporting unit, we concluded the fair value of the Commercial reporting unit exceeds its carrying value by approximately 20%. The Commercial reporting unit continues to deal with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and should certain pandemic-related issues continue, the reporting unit fair value could be adversely impacted and may decline below its carrying value.
Based on the results of these tests, we did not record any impairment losses associated with our reporting units.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
As of December 31, 2021, our only indefinite-lived intangible asset is the ADT trade name, which has a carrying value of $1.3 billion and was recognized in connection with the ADT Acquisition in May 2016.
Under a qualitative approach, the impairment test for an indefinite-lived intangible asset consists of an assessment of whether it is more-likely-than-not that an asset’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. Under a quantitative approach, we estimate the fair value of an asset, which is determined based on the nature of the underlying asset. The fair value of the ADT trade name is determined under a relief from royalty method, which is an income approach that estimates the cost savings that accrue to us that we would otherwise have to pay in the form of royalties or license fees on revenue earned through the use of the asset. The utilization of the relief from royalty method requires us to make significant assumptions including revenue growth rates, the implied royalty rate, and the discount rate.
As of our October 1, 2021 impairment test, the fair value of the ADT trade name significantly exceeded its carrying value. In connection with our quantitative impairment test, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the key assumptions used to determine the fair value of the ADT trade name. The results of our sensitivity analysis did not have a material impact on the conclusions reached.
Business Combinations
We account for business acquisitions under the acquisition method of accounting. The assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with business acquisitions are recorded at the date of acquisition at their estimated fair values, with any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired recorded as goodwill. Significant judgment is required in estimating the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and in assigning useful lives to certain definite-lived
intangible and tangible assets. Accordingly, we may engage third-party valuation specialists to assist in these determinations. The fair value estimates are based on available information as of the acquisition date and assumptions deemed reasonable by management but are inherently uncertain.
We have not recorded any material measurement period adjustments to purchase price allocations during 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Loss Contingencies
We are subject to legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business, the outcomes of which are inherently uncertain. We record a liability for losses that are probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, the determination of which requires significant judgement. Additionally, we record insurance recovery receivables from third-party insurers when recovery has been determined to be probable.
The Company’s reasonably possible losses related to ongoing claims and lawsuits not within scope of an insurance program were not material, and in most cases, the Company has not accrued for any losses as the likelihood of loss cannot be assessed or the range of probable loss cannot be estimated.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the temporary differences between the recognition of revenue and expenses for income tax and financial reporting purposes and between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements. We record the effect of a tax rate or law change on our deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period of enactment. Future tax rate or law changes could have a material effect on our results of operations, financial condition, or cash flows.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, and our forecast of future taxable income. In estimating future taxable income, we develop assumptions related to the amount of future pre-tax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage our underlying businesses.
We recognize positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return in the consolidated financial statements when it is more-likely-than-not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50%) that the position would be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. A recognized tax position is then measured at the largest amount of benefit with greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We record liabilities for positions that have been taken but do not meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold. We adjust the liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits in light of changing facts and circumstances; however, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a change to the estimated liabilities.
ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Refer to Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 for further discussion about recent accounting pronouncements.