Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a biotech innovation company with a mission of prolonging life and enhancing its quality by improving the health of the immune system. We are developing biotechnologies specifically focused on improving the health of the immune system through immune reprogramming and monitoring. Our immune reprogramming technologies are currently at the pre-clinical stage and are designed to retrain the immune system to induce tolerance with an objective of addressing rejection of transplanted organs, autoimmune diseases, and allergies. Our immune monitoring technologies are designed to provide a personalized comprehensive profile of the immune system and we plan to utilize them in our upcoming reprogramming clinical trials to monitor subjects’ immune response before, during and after drug administration.
Recent Developments
Nasdaq Stock Market, LLC Notification:
On January 18, 2022, the Company was notified (the “Notification Letter”) by The Nasdaq Stock Market, LLC (“Nasdaq”) that it is not in compliance with the minimum bid price requirements set forth in Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2) for continued listing on The Nasdaq Capital Market. Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2) requires listed securities to maintain a minimum bid price of $1.00 per share, and Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A) provides that a failure to meet the minimum bid price requirement exists if the deficiency continues for a period of 30 consecutive business days. Based on the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock between December 1, 2021 and January 14, 2022, the Company no longer met the minimum bid price requirement. The Notification Letter had no immediate effect on the listing or trading of the Company’s common stock on The Nasdaq Capital Market and, at the time, the common stock continued to trade on The Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “ADTX.”
The Notification Letter provided the Company has 180 calendar days, or until July 18, 2022, to regain compliance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2). To regain compliance, the bid price of the Company’s common stock must have a closing bid price of at least $1.00 per share for a minimum of 10 consecutive business days. If the Company does not regain compliance by July 18, 2022, an additional 180 days may be granted to regain compliance, so long as the Company meets The Nasdaq Capital Market continued listing requirements (except for the bid price requirement) and notifies Nasdaq in writing of its intention to cure the deficiency during the second compliance period. If the Company does not qualify for the second compliance period or fails to regain compliance during the second 180-day period, then Nasdaq will notify the Company of its determination to delist the Company’s common stock, at which point the Company will have an opportunity to appeal the delisting determination to a Hearings Panel.
The Company intends to monitor the closing bid price of its common stock and will consider implementing available options to regain compliance with the minimum bid price requirement under the Nasdaq Listing Rules.
RSU Grant:
On January 28, 2022, the Compensation Committee approved the grant of 482,700 RSUs to employees pursuant to the Company’s 2021 Equity Incentive Plan. Included in this grant were 480,000 RSUs granted to officers of the Company.
Forbearance Agreement:
On January 31, 2022, the Company’s $14.5 million loan (“Loan”) to Cellvera Global became fully due and payable under the Secured Credit Agreement. On February 14, 2022, the Company entered into a Forbearance Agreement and Seventh Amendment to Secured Credit Agreement (the “Forbearance Agreement”) with AiPharma Global Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, which intends to change its name to Cellvera Global Holdings LLC (“Cellvera Global”), Cellvera Holdings Ltd., a company formed under the laws of the British Virgin Islands f/k/a AiPharma Holdings Limited (“Cellvera Holdings”), Cellvera Asia Limited, a company formed under the laws of Hong Kong f/k/a AiPharma Asia Limited (“Cellvera Asia” and together with Cellvera Global and Cellvera Holdings, the “Borrower”). As of January 31, 2022, the Company’s $14.5 million loan (the “Loan”) to Borrower became fully due and payable under that certain Secured Credit Agreement dated as of August 27, 2021, as amended to date (the “Credit Agreement”).
Pursuant to the Forbearance Agreement, the Company agreed to forbear from exercising its rights and remedies against the Borrower and certain affiliated guarantor parties until the earlier of (i) June 30, 2022 or (ii) the date of occurrence of any event of default under the Forbearance Agreement (the “Forbearance Period”). Given that the parties continue to conduct due diligence in connection with that certain Share Exchange Agreement dated as of December 28, 2021 by and between the Company and AiPharma Group Ltd. (see note 4), the Company and the Borrower also agreed that should the initial closing occur under the Share Exchange Agreement, the existing event of default will be waived. Under the Forbearance Agreement, the Company and the Borrower also agreed to certain amendments to the Credit Agreement, including, but not limited to: (i) the delivery by the Borrower of certain financial statements and forecasts, and (ii) certain regularly scheduled payments to be made by Borrower to the Company during the Forbearance Period.
Immune Reprogramming
The discovery of immunosuppressive (anti-rejection and monoclonal) drugs over 40 years ago has made possible life-saving organ transplantation procedures and blocking of unwanted immune responses in autoimmune diseases. However, immune suppression leads to significant undesirable side effects, such as increased susceptibility to life-threatening infections and cancers, because it indiscriminately and broadly suppresses immune function throughout the body. While the use of these drugs has been justifiable because they prevent or delay organ rejection, their use for treatment of autoimmune diseases and allergies may not be acceptable because of the aforementioned side effects. Furthermore, transplanted organs often ultimately fail despite the use of immune suppression, and about 40% of transplanted organs survive no more than 5 years.
New, focused therapeutic approaches are needed that modulate only the small portion of immune cells that are involved in rejection of the transplanted organ, as this approach can be safer for patients than indiscriminate immune suppression. Such approaches are referred to as immune tolerance, and when therapeutically induced, may be safer for patients and also potentially allow long-term survival of transplanted tissues and organs.
In the late 1990s, academic research on these approaches was conducted at the Transplant Center in Loma Linda University (“LLU”) in connection with a project that secured initial grant funding from the U.S. Department of Defense. The focus of that project was for skin grafting for burn victims. Twenty years of research at LLU and an affiliated incubator led to a series of discoveries that have been translated into a large patent portfolio of therapeutic approaches that may be applied to the modulation of the immune system in order to induce tolerance to self and transplanted organs.
We have an exclusive worldwide license for commercializing this nucleic acid-based technology (which is currently at the pre-clinical stage), named Apoptotic DNA Immunotherapy™ (ADI™) from LLU, which utilizes a novel approach that mimics the way the body naturally induces tolerance to our own tissues (“therapeutically induced immune tolerance”). While immune suppression requires continuous administration to prevent rejection of a transplanted organ, induction of tolerance has the potential to retrain the immune system to accept the organ for longer periods of time. Thus, ADI™ may allow patients to live with transplanted organs with significantly reduced immune suppression. ADI™ is a technology platform which we believe can be engineered to address a wide variety of indications.
We are developing ADI™ products for organ transplantation including skin grafting, autoimmune diseases, and allergies, with the initial focus on skin allografts and psoriasis, as we believe these indications will be most efficient in providing safety and efficacy data in clinical trials. To submit a Biologics License Application (“BLA”) for a biopharmaceutical product, clinical safety and efficacy must be demonstrated in a series of clinical studies conducted with human subjects. For products in our class of drugs, the first-in-human trials will be a combination of Phase I (safety/tolerability) and Phase II (efficacy) in affected subjects. To obtain approval to initiate the Phase I/IIa studies, an Investigational New Drug Application will be submitted to compiling non-clinical efficacy data as well as manufacturing and pre-clinical or clinical trial toxicology data. To date, we have conducted non-clinical studies in a stringent model of skin transplantation using genetically mismatched donor and recipient animals demonstrating a 3-fold increase in the survival of the skin graft in animals that were tolerized with ADI™ compared to animals that receive immune suppression alone. Prolongation of graft life was observed despite discontinuation of immune suppression after the first 5 weeks. Additionally, in an induced non-clinical model for psoriasis, ADI™ treatment resulted in a 69% reduction in skin thickness and a 38% decrease in skin flaking (two clinical parameters for assessment of psoriasis skin lesions). The Phase I/IIa studies in psoriasis will evaluate the safety/tolerability of ADI™ in patients diagnosed with psoriasis. Since the drug will be administered in subjects diagnosed with psoriasis, effectiveness of the drug to improve psoriatic lesions will also be evaluated. In another Phase I/IIa study, patients requiring skin allografts will receive weekly intra-dermal injections of ADI™ in combination with standard immune suppression to assess safety/tolerability and possibility of reducing levels of immunosuppressive drugs as well as prolongation of graft life. Later phase trials are planned after successful completion of these studies in preparation for submission for a BLA to regulatory agencies.
Immune Monitoring
We believe that understanding the status of an individual’s immune system is key to developing and administering immunotherapies such as ADI™. We have secured an exclusive worldwide license for commercializing a technology platform named AditxtScore™, which provides a personalized comprehensive profile of the immune system. It is intended to be informative for individual immune responses to viruses, bacterial antigens, peptides, drugs, bone marrow and solid organ transplants, and cancer. It has broad applicability to many other agents of clinical interest impacting the immune system, including those not yet identified such as future infectious agents.
AditxtScore™ is being designed to allow individuals to understand, manage and monitor their immune profiles in order to be informed about attacks on or by their immune system. We believe AditxtScore™ can also assist the medical community in anticipating possible immune responses and reactions to viruses, bacteria, allergens and transplanted organs. It can be useful in anticipating attacks on the body by having the ability to determine its potential response and for developing a plan to deal with an undesirable reaction by the immune system. Its advantages include the ability to provide a simple, rapid, accurate, high throughput, single platform assay that can be multiplexed to determine the immune status with respect to several factors simultaneously, in 3-16 hours, as well as detect antigen and antibody in a single test (i.e. infectious, recovered, immune). In addition, it can determine and differentiate between various types of cellular and humoral immune responses (T and B cells). It also provides for simultaneous monitoring of cell activation and levels of cytokine release (i.e., cytokine storms).
We plan to utilize AditxtScore™ in our upcoming clinical trials to monitor subjects’ immune response before, during and after ADI™ drug administration. We are also evaluating plans to obtain FDA approval for AditxtScore™’s use as a clinical assay and seeking to secure manufacturing, marketing and distribution partnerships for application in the Infectious Diseases market, by end of 2020. To obtain FDA approval to use AditxtScore™ as a clinical assay, we plan to conduct validation studies comparing AditxtScore™ to other immunological tests to demonstrate reproducibility of data and to demonstrate the sensitivity of the assays for use in different indications (e.g., detection of antigens present in infectious agents or antibodies against infectious agents). We believe that these data will show AditxtScore™’s ability to multiplex in two ways using a single assay: (i) evaluating the immune response to multiple antigens (from different infectious agents) and (ii) measuring quantities of multiple cytokines. Furthermore, we believe that the additional validation studies will demonstrate AditxtScore™’s ability to measure the presence of several antibody isotypes against several antigens in a single reaction. Our plan is to submit a 510(K) application to the FDA after successful completion of these studies. We have engaged consultants for our communications and submissions to the FDA. Beyond 2021, we plan to develop AditxtScore™ for applications in additional markets such as Organ Rejection, Allergies, Drug/Vaccine Response, and Disease Susceptibility.
The initial application of the platform will be AditxtScore™ for COVID-19 which has been designed to provide a more complete assessment of an individual’s infection and immunity status with respect to the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Infection status will be determined by evaluating the presence or absence of the virus, and immunity status by measuring levels of antibodies against viral antigens and their ability to neutralize the virus. We will soon be expanding the panel to measure other components of the immune response such as cellular immunity. In early 2021, we established our AditxtScore™ Immune Monitoring Center in Richmond, Virginia (the “Center”). The Center operates as a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) certified facility for the processing of our AditxtScore™ for COVID-19 Lab Developed Test (LDT) for our prospective channel partners, including labs and hospitals.
License Agreement with Loma Linda University
On March 8, 2018, we entered into an Assignment Agreement (the “Assignment Agreement”) with Sekris Biomedical, Inc. (“Sekris”). Sekris was a party to a License Agreement with Loma Linda University (“LLU”), entered into and made effective on May 25, 2011, and amended on June 24, 2011, July 16, 2012 and December 27, 2012 (the “Original Agreement,” and together with the Assignment Agreement, the “Sekris Agreements”). Pursuant to the Assignment Agreement, Sekris transferred and assigned all of its rights and obligations in and to the liabilities under the Original Agreement, of whatever kind or nature, to us. In exchange, on March 8, 2018, we issued a warrant to Sekris to purchase up to 500,000 shares of our common stock (the “Sekris Warrant”). The warrant was immediately exercisable and has an exercise price of $4.00 per share. The expiration date of the warrant is March 8, 2023. On March 15, 2018, as amended on July 1, 2020, we entered into a LLU License Agreement directly with Loma Linda University, which amends and restates the Sekris Agreements.
Pursuant to the LLU License Agreement, we obtained the exclusive royalty-bearing worldwide license in and to all intellectual property, including patents, technical information, trade secrets, proprietary rights, technology, know-how, data, formulas, drawings, and specifications, owned or controlled by LLU and/or any of its affiliates (the “LLU Patent and Technology Rights”) and related to therapy for immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (the ADI™ technology). In consideration for the LLU License Agreement, we issued 25,000 shares of common stock to LLU.
Pursuant to the LLU License Agreement, we are required to pay an annual license fee to LLU. Also, we paid LLU $455,000 in July 2020 in payment of outstanding milestone payments and license fees. We are also required to pay to LLU milestone payments in connection with certain development milestones. Specifically, we are required to make the following milestone payments: $175,000 on March 31, 2022; $100,000 on March 31, 2024; $500,000 on March 31, 2026; and $500,000 on March 31, 2027. Additionally, as consideration for prior expenses incurred by LLU to prosecute, maintain and defend the LLU Patent and Technology Rights, we were obligated to make the following payments to LLU:, $70,000 was paid at the end of December 2018, and a final payment of $60,000 due at the end of March 2019. We are required to defend the LLU Patent and Technology Rights during the term of the LLU License Agreement. Additionally, we will owe royalty payments of (i) 1.5% of Net Product Sales and Net Service Sales on any Licensed Products (defined as any finished pharmaceutical products which utilizes the LLU Patent and Technology Rights in its development, manufacture or supply), and (ii) 0.75% of Net Product Sales and Net Service Sales for Licensed Products and Licensed Services not covered by a valid patent claim for technology rights and know-how for a three (3) year period beyond the expiration of all valid patent claims. We also are required to produce a written progress report to LLU, discussing our development and commercialization efforts, within 45 days following the end of each year. All intellectual property rights in and to LLU Patent and Technology Rights shall remain with LLU (other than improvements developed by or on our behalf).
The LLU License Agreement shall terminate on the last day that a patent granted to us by LLU is valid and enforceable or the day that the last patent application licensed to us is abandoned. The LLU License Agreement may be terminated by mutual agreement or by us upon 90 days written notice to LLU. LLU may terminate the LLU License Agreement in the event of (i) non-payments or late payments of royalty, milestone and license maintenance fees not cured within 90 days after delivery of written notice by LLU, (ii) a breach of any non-payment provision (including the provision that requires us to meet certain deadlines for milestone events (each, a “Milestone Deadline”)) not cured within 90 days after delivery of written notice by LLU and (iii) LLU delivers notice to us of three or more actual breaches of the LLU License Agreement by us in any 12-month period. Additional Milestone Deadlines include: (i) the requirement to have submission of an IND/clinical trial application to initiate first-in-human clinical trials on or before March 31, 2022, (ii) the completion of first-in-human (phase I/II) clinical trials by March 31, 2024, (iii) the completion of Phase III clinical trials by March 31, 2026 and (iv) biologic licensing approval by the FDA by March 31, 2027.
License Agreement with Leland Stanford Junior University (“Stanford”)
On February 3, 2020, we entered into an exclusive license agreement (the “February 2020 License Agreement”) with Stanford with regard to a patent concerning a method for detection and measurement of specific cellular responses. Pursuant to the February 2020 License Agreement, other than as described below, we received an exclusive worldwide license to Stanford’s patent with regard to use, import, offer, and sale of Licensed Products (as defined in the agreement). The license to the patented technology is exclusive, including the right to sublicense, beginning on the effective date of the agreement and ending when the patent expires. Under the exclusivity agreement, we acknowledged that Stanford had already granted a non-exclusive license in the Nonexclusive Field of Use, under the Licensed Patents in the Licensed Field of Use in the Licensed Territory (as those terms are defined in the February 2020 License Agreement”). However, Stanford agreed to not grant further licenses under the Licensed Patents in the Licensed Field of Use in the Licensed Territory. On December 29, 2021, we entered into an amendment to the February 2020 License Agreement which extended our exclusive right to license the technology deployed in AditxtScoreTM and securing worldwide exclusivity in all fields of use of the licensed technology.
We were obligated to pay and paid a fee of $25,000 to Stanford within 60 days of February 3, 2020. We also issued 18,750 shares of the Company’s common stock to Stanford. An annual licensing maintenance fee is payable by us on the first anniversary of the February 2020 License Agreement in the amount of $40,000 for 2021 through 2024 and $60,000 starting in 2025 until the license expires upon the expiration of the patent. The Company is required to pay and has paid $25,000 for the issuances of certain patents. The Company will pay milestone fees of $50,000 on the first commercial sales of a licensed product and $25,000 at the beginning of any clinical study for regulatory clearance of an in vitro diagnostic product developed and a potential licensed product. We are also required to: (i) provide a listing of the management team or a schedule for the recruitment of key management positions by March 31, 2020 (which has been completed), (ii) provide a business plan covering projected product development, markets and sales forecasts, manufacturing and operations, and financial forecasts until at least $10,000,000 in revenue by June 30, 2020 (which has been completed), (iii) conduct validation studies by September 30, 2020 (which has been completed), (iv) hold a pre-submission meeting with the FDA by September 30, 2020 (which has been completed), (v) submit a 510(k) application to the FDA, Emergency Use Authorization (“EUA”), or a Laboratory Developed Test (“LDT”) by March 31, 2021 (which has been completed), (vi) develop a prototype assay for human profiling by December 31, 2021 (which has been completed), (vii) execute at least one partnership for use of the technology for transplant, autoimmunity, or infectious disease purposes by March 31, 2022and (viii) will provide further development and commercialization milestones for specific fields of use in writing by December 31, 2022.
In addition to the annual license maintenance fees outlined above, we will pay Stanford royalties on Net Sales (as such term is defined in the February 2020 License Agreement) during the of the term of the agreement as follows: 4% when Net Sales are below or equal to $5 million annually or 6% when Net Sales are above $5 million annually. The February 2020 License Agreement may be terminated upon our election on at least 30 days advance notice to Stanford, or by Stanford if we: (i) are delinquent on any report or payment; (ii) are not diligently developing and commercializing Licensed Product; (iii) miss certain performance milestones; (iv) are in breach of any provision of the February 2020 License Agreement; or (v) provide any false report to Stanford. Should any events in the preceding sentence occur, we have a thirty (30) day cure period to remedy such violation.
On December 29, 2020, the Company entered into an amendment to the February 2020 License Agreement extending the Company’s exclusive right to license the technology deployed in AditxtScoreTM and securing worldwide exclusivity in all fields of use of the licensed technology.
Our Team
We have assembled a team of experts from a variety of scientific fields and commercial backgrounds, with many years of collective experience that ranges from founding startup biotech companies, to developing and marketing biopharmaceutical products, to designing clinical trials, and to management of private and public companies.
Going Concern
We were incorporated on September 28, 2017 and have not generated significant revenues to date. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we had a net loss of $46,371,364 and cash of $7,872,061. The Company will require significant additional capital to operate in the normal course of business and fund clinical studies in the long-term. As a result of the January 2021 Securities Purchase Agreement, the August 2021 Offering, the October 2021 Offering, and the December 2021 Offering we received net proceeds of approximately $35,000,000 during the last twelve months. We believe that the funds raised will not be sufficient to fund our operations for the next 12 months and such creates substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern beyond one year.
Financial Results
We have a limited operating history. Therefore, there is limited historical financial information upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. Our prospects must be considered in light of the uncertainties, risks, expenses, and difficulties frequently encountered by companies in their early stages of operations. Our financial statements as of December 31, 2021, show a net loss of $46,371,364. We expect to incur additional net expenses over the next several years as we continue to maintain and expand our existing operations. The amount of future losses and when, if ever, we will achieve profitability are uncertain.
On July 2, 2020, we completed an IPO. In connection therewith, we issued 1,226,668 Units, excluding the underwriters’ overallotment, at an offering price of $9.00 per Unit, resulting in gross proceeds of approximately $11.0 million. The Units issued in the IPO consisted of one share of common stock, one Series A warrant, and one Series B warrant. The Series A warrants originally had an exercise price of $9.00 and a term of 5 years. In addition, the Company issued a Unit Purchase Option at an exercise price of $11.25 per unit to the underwriters to purchase up to 67,466 units, with each unit consisting of (i) one share of common stock and (ii) one Series A Warrant. On August 19, 2020 the Company modified the exercise price of the Series A Warrants from $9.00 per share to $4.50 per share. The term of the Series A Warrants was not modified. The Series B warrants have an exercise price of $11.25 per share and a term of 5 years. Substantially all of the Series B warrants issued in the IPO as part of the Units have been exercised pursuant to a cashless provision therein.
On September 10, 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering (“September 2020 Offering”). In connection therewith, we issued 2,400,000 units, or Follow-On Units, excluding the underwriters’ option to cover overallotments, at an offering price of $4.00 per Follow-On Unit, resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $9.6 million. Each of the Follow-On Units issued in the September 2020 Offering consisted of one share of common stock or Series A Preferred Stock for investors who would own more than 4.99% of the Company if they invested in common stock, one Series A-1 warrant, and one Series B-1 warrant. The Series A-1 warrants have an exercise price of $3.19 per share and a term of 5 years. The Series B-1 warrants have exercise price of $5.00 per share, a term of 5 years and contain a cashless exercise option upon certain criteria being met. In addition, the Company issued a warrant to the underwriters to purchase up to 60,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $5.00 per share.
On August 31, 2021, the Company completed a registered direct offering (“August 2021 Offering”). In connection therewith, the Company issued 4,583,334 shares of common stock, at a purchase price of $2.40 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of approximately $11.0 million. In a concurrent private placement, the Company issued warrants to purchase up to 4,583,334 shares. The warrants have an exercise price of $2.53 per share and are exercisable for a five-year period commencing six months from the date of issuance. The warrants exercise price was subsequently repriced to $1.50. In addition, the Company issued a warrant to the placement agent to purchase up to 229,166 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $3.00 per share.
On October 18, 2021, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement with Revere Securities LLC, relating to the public offering (the “October Offering”) of 2,833,333 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Shares”) by the Company. The Shares were offered, issued, and sold at a price to the public of $1.50 per share under a prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to an effective shelf registration statement filed with the SEC on Form S-3 (File No. 333-257645), which was declared effective by the SEC on July 13, 2021. The October Offering closed on October 20, 2021 for gross proceeds of $4.25 million. The Company utilized a portion of the proceeds, net of underwriting discounts of approximately $3.91 million from the October Offering to fund certain obligations under the Credit Agreement.
On December 1, 2021, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement with Dawson James Securities, Inc., as representative of the several underwriters identified therein, relating to the public offering by the Company of 16,575,000 units (the “Units”), with each unit comprised of one share of the Company’s common stock (the “Shares”) and one Series C warrant to purchase one Share at an exercise price of $1.15 per share (the “Series C Warrants”).
On December 6, 2021, the Company completed the offering for net proceeds of $16.0 million. As part of this offering, we issued 8,246,430 units consisting of shares of the Company’s common stock and one warrant to purchase one share of the Company’s common stock and 8,328,570 prefunded warrants. The warrant issued as part of the units had an exercise price of $1.15 and the prefunded warrants had an exercise price of $0.001.
Results of Operations
Results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a loss from operations of $41,961,983. This is due to general and administrative expenses of $22,084,389, which includes $3,927,551 in stock-based compensation, research and development of $5,042,617, which includes $713,130 in stock-based compensation, sales and marketing expenses of $334,977, and impairment on note receivable of $14,500,000. The $5,042,617 in research and development is comprised of $76,455 in licensing fees, $1,960,196 in product development, $2,039,533 in compensation, and $966,433 in other research and development expense.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a loss from operations of $8,872,209. This is due to general and administrative expenses of $7,852,256, which includes $3,188,840 in stock-based compensation, research and development of $937,966, and sales and marketing expenses of $81,987. The $937,966 in research and development is comprised of $258,635 in licensing fees, $519,171 in product development, and $160,160 in other research and development expense.
The increase in expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the Company continuing to execute its business plan and incur costs of being a public company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred substantial operating losses since inception and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future and may never become profitable. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $67,352,809. We had working capital of $5,809,544 as of December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we purchased $1,837,615 in fixed assets, for which we made cash payments of $1,015,752 and financed $821,863. These fixed assets were purchased to continue the buildout of our operations. Purchases of fixed assets consisted of, $1,489,594 for lab equipment, $257,910 for computers, $80,350 for office furniture, and $9,761 for other fixed assets. We made loans of $15,000,000 during 2021 related to potential acquisition targets; of which $14,500,000 is believed to be impaired.
We have funded our operations from proceeds from the sale of equity and debt securities. On July 2, 2020, we completed our IPO and raised approximately $9.5 million in net proceeds. At the time of the IPO, we believed that these funds would be sufficient to fund our operations for the foreseeable future.
On September 10, 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering. In connection therewith, we issued 2,400,000 units, or Follow-On Units, excluding the underwriters’ option to cover overallotments, at an offering price of $4.00 per Follow-On Unit, resulting in gross proceeds of approximately $9.6 million.
On January 25, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with an institutional accredited investor (the “Investor”) for the sale of a $6,000,000 senior secured convertible note (the “Convertible Note”). The Convertible Note had a term of 24 months, was originally convertible at a price of $4.00 per share and was issued at an original issuance discount of $1,000,000. On August 30, 2021, the Company entered into a defeasance and waiver agreement with the Investor, pursuant to which the Noteholder has agreed in exchange for (a) a cash payment by the Company to the Investor of $1.2 million (the Cash Payment”), (b) a waiver, in part of the conversion price adjustment provision such that the January 2021 Note shall be convertible into 4,802,497 shares of common stock (without giving effect to the conversion notice received by the company form the Noteholder prior to the date hereof totaling (1,005,748 shares) (the “Shares”), and (c) a voluntary and permanent reduction by the Company of the exercise price of the warrant to purchase 800,000 shares of the common stock of the Company (the “January 2021 Warrant”) to $2.53 per share. As of September 30, 2021, the outstanding principle of the convertible note had been converted to 4,802,497 shares of common stock.
On August 31, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering and raised approximately $10.1 million in net proceeds.
On October 20, 2021, we completed an offering for net proceeds of $3.8 million. As part of this offering, we issued 2,833,333 shares of the Company’s common stock
On December 6, 2021, we completed an offering for net proceeds of $16.0 million. As part of this offering, we issued 8,246,430 units consisting of shares of the Company’s common stock and warrant to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock and 8,328,570 prefunded warrants. The warrant issued as part of the units had an exercise price of $1.15 and the prefunded warrants had an exercise price of $0.001.
We may need to raise significant additional capital to continue to fund our operations and the clinical trials for our product candidates. We may seek to sell common stock, preferred stock or convertible debt securities, enter into a credit facility or another form of third-party funding or seek other debt financing. In addition, we may seek to raise cash through collaborative agreements or from government grants. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and certain of those securities may have rights senior to those of our common shares. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of preferred stock, convertible debt securities, or other debt financing, these securities or other debt could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Any other third-party funding arrangement could require us to relinquish valuable rights.
The source, timing, and availability of any future financing will depend principally upon market conditions, and, more specifically, on the progress of our clinical development program. Funding may not be available when needed, at all, or on terms acceptable to us. Lack of necessary funds may require us to, among other things, delay, scale back or eliminate expenses including some or all our planned development, including our clinical trials. As we may need to raise funds in the future, we do not believe the current cash reserves are sufficient to fund our operations for the foreseeable future. Because of these factors, we believe that this creates doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Contractual Obligations
The following table shows our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We believe that of our critical accounting policies described under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Plan of Operations-Critical Accounting Policies” in our Prospectus, dated September 1, 2020, filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b), are critical to fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations. The following involve the most judgment and complexity:
● Research and development
● Stock-based compensation expense
● Fair value of common stock
Accordingly, we believe the policies set forth above are critical to fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations. If actual results or events differ materially from the estimates, judgments and assumptions used by us in applying these policies, our reported financial condition and results of operations could be materially affected.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We have chosen to take advantage of the extended transition periods available to emerging growth companies under the JOBS Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies provided under the JOBS Act.
We are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we intend to rely on certain of these exemptions, including without limitation, (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (“PCAOB”) regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the completion of this offering; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the accompanying financial statements for a description of other accounting policies and recently issued accounting pronouncements.