ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those we currently anticipate as a result of the factors we describe under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and other risks as well as other factors that are not currently known to us, that we currently consider immaterial or that are not specific to us, such as general economic conditions. The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, included in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) can be found in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a home care services provider operating three segments: personal care, hospice and home health. Our services are principally provided in-home under agreements with federal, state and local government agencies, managed care organizations, commercial insurers and private individuals. Our consumers are predominantly “dual eligible,” meaning they are eligible to receive both Medicare and Medicaid benefits. Managed care revenues accounted for 37.2%, 38.6% and 37.8% of our revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively.
A summary of certain consolidated financial and statistical data results for 2021, 2020 and 2019 are provided in the table below.
(1)
The Company defines adjusted EBITDA as earnings before discontinued operations, net interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization, acquisition and de novo expenses, stock-based compensation expense, restructure expenses and other costs, gain or loss on the sale of assets and secondary offering costs. The Company defined adjusted EBITDA to exclude net COVID expenses arising from the pandemic from the second quarter of 2020 to the first quarter of 2021. Adjusted EBITDA is a performance measure used by management that is not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). It should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income, operating income or any other measure of financial performance calculated in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors, management and others in evaluating the Company’s operating performance, to provide investors with insight and consistency in the Company’s financial reporting and to present a basis for comparison of the Company’s business operations among periods, and to facilitate comparison with the results of the Company’s peers. Additionally, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a measure widely used by securities analysts, investors and others to evaluate the financial performance of other public companies. The financial results presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP and a reconciliation of this non-GAAP measure included within this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be carefully evaluated.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
COVID-19, the disease caused by a novel coronavirus, continues to be widespread throughout the United States and other parts of the world. Although vaccines became widely available in 2021, there continues to be a significant number of COVID-19 cases and deaths in the United States. In response, various governmental authorities and private businesses in the United States have implemented, or reinstituted, certain mitigation strategies, such as masking and vaccine requirements. Economic conditions in the United States significantly improved during 2021 compared to earlier pandemic levels, although inflationary pressures and supply chain disruptions have recently impacted the U.S. economy. The long-term trends of new cases and deaths in the United States and the future impact of the pandemic continues to be unknown.
In September 2021, President Biden announced a federal six-point plan for responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. As part of this plan, OSHA adopted a rule in November 2021 which would require all employers with 100 or more employees to require their
workforce to be fully vaccinated or, alternatively, to provide a negative COVID-19 test result on a weekly basis. Also, CMS issued an interim rule in November 2021 requiring COVID-19 vaccinations for workers in Medicare- and Medicaid-certified providers and suppliers, including hospices and home health agencies, that covers clinical staff, individuals providing services under arrangements, volunteers and staff who are not involved in direct patient care. On January 13, 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court blocked the implementation of the OSHA rule but allowed the CMS interim rule to take effect. In response, President Biden rescinded the private employer mandate and called on states and businesses to voluntarily institute vaccination requirements to protect workers, customers and the broader community. Additionally, some states have implemented, or may implement in the future, vaccine mandates with respect to healthcare personnel. It is currently difficult to predict the impact that any of these vaccine mandates may have on us or the extent to which these vaccine mandates will ultimately become effective. However, we expect that these rules, to the extent that they become effective, will impact our home health and hospice segments.
We are monitoring developments as information becomes available, including with respect to national, state and local vaccine mandates, to access the possible impact on our workforce in personal care, home health, hospice and our corporate support centers. While the Company has not mandated vaccines for our employees, we have developed a multistep program in order to strongly encourage our employees to get the COVID-19 vaccine, which included offering a vaccine stipend and incentives as well as creating educational and motivational leadership communication. These educational and motivational leadership communications are ongoing. We are actively engaged in an effort to track vaccination rates among caregivers and to continue to improve those rates. However, it is difficult to predict the future impact of the pandemic or the federal six-point COVID-19 plan and state and local vaccine mandates on economic conditions in the United States and our business at this time.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, COVID-19-related expenses in our personal care segment were approximately $16.5 million and $7.0 million, respectively, which were offset by $12.3 million and $1.4 million, respectively, related to the utilization of the amounts received from the Provider Relief Fund in November 2020 and are included in cost of service revenues on the Consolidated Statements of Income. Additionally, we recognized revenue of $7.1 million and $4.9 million attributable to temporary rate increases from certain payors in our personal care segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, COVID-19-related expenses in our hospice segment were approximately $1.9 million, which were offset by $1.9 million related to the utilization of a portion of the funds received from the Queen City Hospice Provider Relief Fund and included in cost of service revenues on the Consolidated Statements of Income.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company deferred the recognition of $6.5 million of payments received from payors for COVID-19 reimbursement, included within accrued expenses, which will be recognized as we incur specific expenses related to the pandemic, such as expenses related to acquiring additional PPE and COVID-19 related paid time off, or will be returned to the extent COVID-19-related expenses are not incurred. We are not able to reasonably predict the total costs we will incur related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and such costs could be substantial.
As the labor market has tightened and unemployment has declined in comparison to earlier levels, the competition for new caregivers, including skilled healthcare staff, has increased significantly. To the extent that we continue to experience a shortage of caregivers, it may continue to hinder our ability to attract and retain sufficient caregivers to meet the continuing demand for both our non-clinical and clinical services. The increased staffing challenges may also result in increased labor cost to satisfy our staffing requirements.
Federal and state agencies continue to issue regulations and guidance related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the public health situation continues to evolve, and, therefore, we cannot currently predict with certainty the extent to which our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity will ultimately be impacted by the pandemic. We will continue to assess the impact and consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and government responses to the pandemic, including the enactment and implementation of the CARES Act, the PPPHCE Act, the CAA, the ARPA and other stimulus and relief legislation, as well as the implementation of the President’s federal six-point COVID-19 plan and any federal and state vaccine mandates on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the related financial effect cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but is not expected to materially adversely impact our business. See Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors - “The COVID-19 pandemic could negatively affect our operations, business and financial condition, and our liquidity could also be negatively impacted, particularly if the U.S. economy remains unstable for a significant amount of time” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional information regarding funds received related to COVID-19 pandemic relief.
Acquisitions
In addition to our organic growth, we have grown through acquisitions that have expanded our presence in current markets, with the goal of having all three levels of in-home care in our markets, or facilitating our entry into new markets where in-home care has been moving to managed care organizations.
On July 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of A Plus Health Care, Inc. (“A Plus”) for approximately $14.5 million, including the amount of excess cash held by A Plus at the closing of the acquisition (approximately $2.8 million), with funding provided by available cash. With the purchase of A Plus, we expanded our personal care services in the state of Montana.
On November 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of County Homemakers, Inc. (“County Homemakers”) for approximately $15.8 million, including the amount of acquired excess cash held by County Homemakers at the closing of the acquisition (approximately $1.1 million), with funding provided by available cash. With the purchase of County Homemakers, we expanded our personal care services in the state of Pennsylvania.
On December 4, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Queen City Hospice for approximately $194.8 million, including the amount of acquired excess cash held by Queen City Hospice at the closing of the acquisition (approximately $15.4 million). With the purchase of Queen City Hospice, we expanded our hospice services in the state of Ohio. Additionally, on December 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of SunLife Home Care (“SunLife”) for approximately $1.7 million. With the purchase of SunLife, we expanded our personal care services in the state of Arizona. We funded these acquisitions through a combination of our revolving credit facility and available cash.
On August 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Armada Skilled Homecare of New Mexico LLC, Armada Hospice of New Mexico LLC and Armada Hospice of Santa Fe LLC (collectively, “Armada”) for approximately $29.8 million, including the amount of acquired excess cash held by Armada at the closing of the acquisition (approximately $0.7 million), with funding provided by our revolving credit facility. With the purchase of Armada, we expanded our home health and hospice services in the state of New Mexico.
On October 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Summit Home Health, LLC (“Summit”) for approximately $8.1 million, with funding provided by available cash. With the purchase of Summit, we added clinical services in Illinois to our home health segment.
Revenue by Payor and Significant States
Our payor clients are principally federal, state and local governmental agencies and managed care organizations. The federal, state and local programs under which the agencies operate are subject to legislative and budgetary changes and other risks that can influence reimbursement rates. We are experiencing a transition of business from government payors to managed care organizations, which we believe aligns with our emphasis on coordinated care and the reduction of the need for acute care.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our revenue by payor and significant states by segment were as follows:
With the acquisition of Queen City Hospice, the Company expanded its hospice services in the state of Ohio.
With the acquisition of Summit, the Company expanded its home health services in the state of Illinois.
We derive a significant amount of our net service revenues in Illinois, which represented 38.2% and 37.7% of our net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. A significant amount of our revenue is derived from one payor client, the Illinois Department on Aging, the largest payor program for our Illinois personal care operations, which accounted for 21.4% and 23.0% of our net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Changes in Reimbursement Rates
Illinois
On November 26, 2019, the City of Chicago voted to approve additional increases in the Chicago minimum wage to $14 per hour beginning July 1, 2020 and to $15 per hour beginning July 1, 2021.
Effective January 1, 2021, the state of Illinois fiscal year 2021 budget increased in-home care rates through the Community Care Program by 7.1%, to $23.40 from $21.84. However, the rate increase was delayed and did not take effect until April 1, 2021, as a result of on-going state revenue declines due to COVID-19 and the failure of the November 2020 referendum to revise the Illinois income tax code. On June 29, 2021, the Governor announced the authorization of bonus payments to providers in an amount equivalent to the rate increase for services delivered from January 1, 2021 to March 31, 2021 for state reimbursed hours of care provided in the fee-for-service context. The bonus payment of $3.0 million was recognized and received during the year ended December 31, 2021. On December 3, 2021, in connection with the same rate increase for in-home care, the Department of Family Services provided approval and direction for retroactive payments for the same period for all claims billed to managed care organizations. The Company recognized $2.0 million related to the rate increase for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Illinois fiscal year 2022 budget funds a further increase of in-home care rates to $24.96 effective January 1, 2022. On July 12, 2021, in connection with the temporary increase in federal funding for Medicaid home and community-based services authorized by the ARPA, the State of Illinois submitted its Initial Spending Plan and Narrative to CMS for approval. Included in that plan is the acceleration of the rate increase to $24.96 from January 1, 2022, to November 1, 2021. The Company recognized $3.6 million related to the rate increase for the year ended December 31, 2021. CMS granted partial approval of the Illinois plan, but highlighted that the state will need to submit an amendment for certain Medicaid waiver programs with regard to any rate change methodology. The state is preparing this amendment and has not yet spent any funds in connection with the rate acceleration.
Our business will benefit from the rate increases noted above as planned for 2022, but there is no assurance that there will be additional offsetting rate increases in Illinois for fiscal years beyond fiscal year 2022, and our financial performance will be adversely impacted for any periods in which an additional offsetting reimbursement rate increase is not in effect.
Impact of Changes in Medicare and Medicaid Reimbursement
Home Health
Home health services provided to Medicare beneficiaries are paid under the Medicare Home Health Prospective Payment System (“HHPPS”), which uses national, standardized 30-day period payment rates for periods of care that meet a certain threshold of home health visits (periods of care that do not meet the visit threshold are paid a per-visit payment rate for providing care). Although payment is made for each 30-day period, the HHPPS permits continuous 60-day certification periods through which beneficiaries are verified as eligible for the home health benefit. The daily home health payment rate is adjusted for case-mix and area wage levels. CMS uses the PDGM as the case-mix classification model to place periods of care into payment categories, classifying patients based on clinical characteristics and their resource needs. An outlier adjustment may be paid for periods of care where costs exceed a specific threshold amount.
CMS updates the HHPPS payment rates each calendar year. For calendar year 2022, CMS increased HHPPS rates by an estimated 3.2%, which reflects a 3.1% market basket update and a productivity adjustment of negative 0.5 percentage points, among other changes. Home health providers that do not comply with quality data reporting requirements are subject to a 2 percentage point reduction to their market basket update. In addition, beginning January 1, 2022, Medicare requires home health agencies to submit a one-time Notice of Admission (“NOA”) for each patient that establishes that the beneficiary is under a Medicare home health period of care. Failure to submit the NOA within five calendar days from the start of care will result in a reduction to the 30-day period payment amount for each day from the start of care date until the date the NOA is submitted.
Effective January 1, 2022, CMS began implementing a nationwide expansion of the Home Health Value-Based Purchasing (“HHVBP”) Model. Under the model, home health agencies will receive adjustments to their Medicare fee-for-service payments of up to 5%, based on performance against specific quality measures relative to the performance of other home health providers. Data
collected in each performance year will impact Medicare payments two years later. Calendar year 2023 is the first performance year under the expanded HHVBP Model, which will affect payments in calendar year 2025.
In certain states, payment of claims may be impacted by the Review Choice Demonstration for Home Health Services, a program intended to identify and prevent fraud, reduce the number of Medicare appeals and improve provider compliance with Medicare program requirements. The program applies to home health agencies in Illinois, Ohio, North Carolina, Florida and Texas and may expand, in the future, into additional states. Providers in states subject to the Review Choice Demonstration may initially select from the following claims review and approval processes: pre-claim review, post-payment review or a minimal post-payment review with a 25% payment reduction. Home health agencies that maintain high compliance levels will be eligible for additional options that may be less burdensome. We are currently unable to predict what impact, if any, this program may have on our result of operations or financial position.
Hospice
Hospice services provided to Medicare beneficiaries are paid under the Medicare Hospice Prospective Payment System, under which CMS sets a daily rate for each day a patient is enrolled in the hospice benefit. CMS updates these rates each federal fiscal year. Effective October 1, 2021, CMS increased hospice payment rates by 2.0%. This reflects a 2.7% market basket increase and a negative 0.7 percentage point productivity adjustment. Hospices that do not satisfy quality reporting requirements are subject to a 2 percentage point reduction to the market basket update. Beginning in 2024, the reduction to the market basket update for failure to report quality data will increase to 4 percentage points.
Overall payments made by Medicare to each hospice provider number are subject to an inpatient cap and an aggregate cap, which is set each federal fiscal year. The inpatient cap limits the number of days of inpatient care to no more than 20% of total patient care days. The aggregate cap, which limits the total Medicare reimbursement that a hospice may receive based on an annual per-beneficiary cap amount and the number of Medicare patients served, was updated to $31,297.61 for federal fiscal year 2022. If a hospice’s Medicare payments exceed its inpatient or aggregate caps, it must repay Medicare the excess amount.
New York CDPAP
The New York Consumer Directed Personal Assistance Program (“CDPAP”) is a self-directed care alternative program that allows eligible individuals who need help with activities of daily living or skilled nursing services to choose their caregivers. We provide support services as a CDPAP fiscal intermediary. In 2019, New York initiated a new Request for Offer (“RFO”) process to competitively procure CDPAP fiscal intermediaries. On February 11, 2021, the New York Department of Health announced its initial selection of parties to enter into contracts as a Lead Fiscal Intermediary. The Company was not one of the selected entities in the initial RFO process. The Company has submitted a formal protest in response to the selection process, which was filed and accepted on March 19, 2021. The Company has not yet received a response to the formal protest. The Company recognized approximately $42 million and $3 million in revenue and operating income, respectively, from the program for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company continues to explore its options, including appeals, other arrangements under which the Company may continue to provide these services, and expense reductions to minimize any potential final impact of the RFO process.
The New York fiscal year 2022 state budget included a provision to add additional fiscal intermediaries (one or two entities per county with specified population sizes, plus entities that meet various other requirements) to those awarded contracts as a Lead Fiscal Intermediary under the initial RFO process, based on the scoring of the original RFO. As scoring of RFOs was not publicly released, it is unknown at this time if the Company’s score ranked high enough to qualify for these additional awards. The Company has submitted a response to the survey issued by the New York Department of Health to determine the additional contract awards. The New York Department of Health published an anticipated contract start date for all awards to be no earlier than November 1, 2021, but has not yet announced the exact start date. No later than the contract start date, we will be required to begin transitioning patients within the CDPAP to a fiscal intermediary that has been awarded a contract and cease providing services to those patients. We continue to consider other arrangements and to pursue our protest of the award. Given the uncertainty surrounding the program, the Company has suspended materially all of its new patient admissions under the New York CDPAP program.
Components of our Statements of Income
Net Service Revenues
We generate net service revenues by providing our services directly to consumers and primarily on an hourly basis in our personal care segment, on a daily basis in our hospice segment and on an episodic basis in our home health segment. We receive payment for providing such services from our payor clients, including federal, state and local governmental agencies, managed care organizations, commercial insurers and private consumers.
In our personal care segment, net service revenues are principally provided based on authorized hours, determined by the relevant agency, at an hourly rate, which is either contractual or fixed by legislation, and are recognized at the time services are
rendered. In our hospice segment, net service revenues are provided based on daily rates for each of the levels of care and are recognized as services are provided. In our home health segment, net service revenues are based on an episodic basis at a stated rate and recognized based on the number of days elapsed during a period of care within the reporting period. We also record estimated implicit price concessions (based primarily on historical collection experience) related to uninsured accounts to record revenues.
Cost of Service Revenues
We incur direct care wages, payroll taxes and benefit-related costs in connection with providing our services. We also provide workers’ compensation and general liability coverage for our employees. Employees are also reimbursed for their travel time and related travel costs in certain instances.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses include our costs for operating our network of local agencies and our administrative offices. Our agency expenses consist of costs for supervisory personnel, our community care supervisors and office administrative costs. Personnel costs include wages, payroll taxes and employee benefits. Facility costs include rents, utilities, and postage, telephone and office expenses. Our corporate and support center expenses include costs for accounting, information systems, human resources, billing and collections, contracting, marketing and executive leadership. These expenses consist of compensation, including stock-based compensation, payroll taxes, employee benefits, legal, accounting and other professional fees, travel, general insurance, rents, provision for doubtful accounts and related facility costs. Expenses related to streamlining our operations such as costs related to terminated employees, termination of professional services relationships, other contract termination costs and asset write-offs are also included in general and administrative expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciable assets consist principally of furniture and equipment, network administration and telephone equipment and operating system software. Depreciable and leasehold assets are depreciated or amortized on a straight-line method over their useful lives or, if less and if applicable, their lease terms. We amortize our intangible assets with finite lives, consisting of customer and referral relationships, trade names, trademarks and non-competition agreements, using straight line or accelerated methods based upon their estimated useful lives.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is reported when incurred and principally consists of interest and unused credit line fees on the credit facility.
Income Tax Expense
All of our income is from domestic sources. We incur state and local taxes in states in which we operate. Our effective income tax rate was 25.2% and 21.0% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, compared to our federal statutory rate of 21.0%. Our higher effective income tax rate in 2021 was principally due to the inclusion of state taxes and non-deductible compensation, partially offset by an excess tax benefit and the use of federal employment tax credits.
Discontinued Operations
Effective March 1, 2013, we sold substantially all of the assets used in our then home health business (the “2013 Home Health Business”) in Arkansas, Nevada and South Carolina, and 90% of the 2013 Home Health Business in California and Illinois. Effective October 1, 2017, we sold the remaining 10% ownership interest in the 2013 Home Health Business in California and Illinois. Therefore, we have segregated the 2013 Home Health Business operating results and presented them separately as discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, see Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our consolidated results of operations.
Net service revenues increased by 13.0% to $864.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $764.8 million in 2020. Net service revenue increased by $38.6 million and $51.0 million in our personal care and hospice segments, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. Net service revenue increased due to a 7.8% increase in revenues per billable hour for the year ended December 31, 2021 in our personal care segment compared to 2020. The increase in our hospice segment revenue was primarily due to an increase in average daily census and revenue per patient day, mainly attributed to the acquisition of Queen City Hospice on December 4, 2020, partially offset by a decrease in average daily census organic growth, compared to 2021.
Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues, increased to 31.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 29.6% in 2020. The increase was mainly attributed to the full-year effect in 2021 of the acquisition of our relatively higher margin hospice segment businesses in 2020.
General and administrative expenses increased to $189.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $169.7 million in 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to acquisitions that resulted in an increase in administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs of $14.0 million. In addition, stock-based compensation increased by $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. General and administrative expenses, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues slightly decreased to 21.9% for 2021, from 22.2% in 2020.
Depreciation and amortization increased to $14.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $12.1 million in 2020, primarily due to the increase of intangible asset amortization related to the full-year effect in 2021 of our fiscal year 2020 acquisitions and fiscal year 2021 acquisitions.
Interest expense increased to $5.5 million from $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to higher outstanding borrowings under our credit facility for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020.
All of our income is from domestic sources. We incur state and local taxes in states in which we operate. The effective income tax rate was 25.2% and 21.0% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, compared to our federal statutory rate of 21.0%. Our higher effective income tax rate in 2021 was principally due to the inclusion of state taxes and non-deductible compensation, partially offset by an excess tax benefit and the use of federal employment tax credits. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the effective tax rates were inclusive of an excess tax benefit of 2.0% and 5.6%, respectively. The excess tax benefit is a discrete item, primarily related to the vesting of equity shares, which requires the Company to recognize the benefit fully in the period.
Results of Operations - Segments
The following tables and related analysis summarize our operating results and business metrics by segment:
Personal Care Segment
(1)
Average billable census is the number of unique clients receiving a billable service during the year and is the total census divided by months in operation during the period.
(2)
Billable hours is the total number of hours served to clients during the period. Average billable hours per census per month is billable hours divided by average billable census. Billable hours per day is total billable hours divided by the number of business days in the period. Revenues per billable hour is revenue, attributed to billable hours, divided by billable hours.
(3)
Same store growth reflects the change in year-over-year revenue for the same store base. We define the same store base to include those stores open for at least 52 full weeks. This measure highlights the performance of existing stores, while excluding the impact of acquisitions, new store openings and closures. In addition, the Company has suspended materially all of its new patient admissions under the New York CDPAP program based on program uncertainty and therefore excludes associated revenues from this calculation.
*
Management deems these metrics to be key performance indicators. Management uses these metrics to monitor our performance, both in our existing operations and acquisitions. Many of these metrics serve as the basis of reported revenues and assessment of these, provide direct correlation to the results of operations from period to period and facilitate comparison with the results of our peers. Historical trends established in these metrics can be used to evaluate current operating results, identify trends affecting our business, determine the allocation of resources and assess the quality and potential variability of our cash flows and earnings. We believe they are useful to investors in evaluating and understanding our business but should not be used solely in assessing the Company’s performance. These key performance indicators should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented herein to fully evaluate and understand the business as a whole. These measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled performance indicators used by other companies.
The personal care segment derives a significant amount of net service revenues from operations in Illinois, which represented 47.9% and 44.6% of our net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. One payor client, the Illinois Department on Aging, accounted for 21.4% and 23.0% of net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net service revenues from state, local and other governmental programs accounted for 49.3% and 50.2% of net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Managed care organizations accounted for 45.5% and 44.3% of net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, with commercial insurance, private pay and other payors accounting for the remainder of net service revenues.
Net service revenues increased by 6.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of an increase in revenues per billable hour of 7.8%, mainly attributed to rate increases discussed above. The Company experienced a decrease in New York net service revenues of $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by a decrease in the New York CDPAP program as discussed above, compared to 2020.
Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues, increased from 25.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 26.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to a decrease in direct service employee wages, taxes and benefit costs of 0.7%.
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. General and administrative expenses, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 9.0% and 9.3% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily due to synergies from acquisitions.
Hospice Segment
(1)
Represents referral process and new patients on service during the period.
(2)
Average daily census is total patient days divided by the number of days in the period, adjusted for patient days for acquisitions beginning on date of acquisition.
(3)
Average length of stay is the average number of days a patient is on service, calculated upon discharge, and is total patient days divided by total discharges in the period.
(4)
Patient days is days of service for all patients in the period.
(5)
Revenue per patient day is hospice revenue divided by the number of patient days in the period.
(6)
Revenue organic growth and average daily census organic growth reflect the change in year-over-year revenue and average daily census for the same store base. We define the same store base to include those stores open for at least 52 full weeks. These measures highlight the performance of existing stores, while excluding the impact of acquisitions, new store openings and closures.
*
Management deems these metrics to be key performance indicators. Management uses these metrics to monitor our performance, both in our existing operations and acquisitions. Many of these metrics serve as the basis of reported revenues and assessment of these, provide direct correlation to the results of operations from period to period and facilitate comparison with the results of our peers. Historical trends established in these metrics can be used to evaluate current operating results, identify trends affecting our business, determine the allocation of resources and assess the quality and potential variability of our cash flows and earnings. We believe they are useful to investors in evaluating and understanding our business but should not be used solely in assessing the Company’s performance. These key performance indicators should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented herein to fully evaluate and understand the business as a whole. These measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled performance indicators used by other companies.
Hospice generates revenue by providing care to patients with a life expectancy of six months or less, as well as related services for their families. Hospice offers four levels of care, as defined by Medicare, to meet the varying needs of patients and their families. The four levels of hospice include routine care, continuous care, general inpatient care and respite care. Our hospice segment principally provides routine care, but with the acquisition of Queen City Hospice, the Company expanded continuous care services.
Net service revenues from Medicare accounted for 93.3% and 92.9% and managed care organizations accounted for 3.7% and 4.9% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net service revenues increased by $51.0 million for the year
ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increases in average daily census and revenue per patient day, mainly attributed to the acquisition of Queen City Hospice on December 4, 2020, partially offset by a decrease in average daily census organic growth, compared to 2021.
Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 50.6% and 53.4% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of net service revenues was mainly attributed to an increase of direct employee wages, taxes and benefit costs of 3.0%.
The hospice segment’s general and administrative expenses primarily consist of administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs, rent, information technology and office expenses. General and administrative expenses, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 22.7% and 25.1% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily due to synergies from acquisitions. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to acquisitions that resulted in a $7.3 million increase in administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs and a $0.5 million increase in rent expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Home Health Segment
(1)
Represents new patients during the period.
(2)
A home health certification period begins with a start of care visit and continues for 60 days. If at the end of the initial certification, the patient continues to require home health services, a recertification is required. This represents the number of recertifications during the period.
(3)
Total volume is total admissions and total recertifications in the period.
(4)
Represents number of services to patients in the period.
(5)
Revenue organic growth and new admissions organic growth reflect the change in year-over-year revenue and new admissions for the same store base. We define the same store base to include those stores open for at least 52 full weeks. These measures highlight the performance of existing stores, while excluding the impact of acquisitions, new store openings and closures.
*
Management deems these metrics to be key performance indicators. Management uses these metrics to monitor our performance, both in our existing operations and acquisitions. Many of these metrics serve as the basis of reported revenues and assessment of these, provide direct correlation to the results of operations from period to period and facilitate comparison with the results of our peers. Historical trends established in these metrics can be used to evaluate current operating results, identify trends affecting our business, determine the allocation of resources and assess the quality and potential variability of our cash flows and earnings. We believe they are useful to investors in evaluating and understanding our business but should not be used solely in assessing the Company’s performance. These key performance indicators should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented herein to fully evaluate and understand the business as a whole. These measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled performance indicators used by other companies.
Home health generates revenue by providing home health services on a short-term, intermittent or episodic basis to individuals, generally to treat an illness or injury. Net service revenues from Medicare accounted for 78.4% and 78.6% and managed care organizations accounted for 16.9% and 19.6% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Home health services provided to Medicare beneficiaries are paid under the Medicare Home Health Prospective Payment System, which uses national,
standardized 30-day period payment rates for periods of care. CMS uses the PDGM as the case-mix classification model to place periods of care into payment categories, classifying patients based on clinical characteristics. An outlier adjustment may be paid for periods of care in which costs exceed a specific threshold amount.
Net service revenues increased by $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Total visits increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, mainly attributed to organic growth and the acquisition of Armada on August 1, 2021.
Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 33.9% and 31.4% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of net service revenues was due to a decrease in direct employee wages, taxes and benefit costs of 1.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2021 improved compared to 2020, due to PDGM case mix and improvements as restrictions related to COVID-19 eased.
The home health segment’s general and administrative expenses consist of administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs, rent, information technology and office expenses. General and administrative expenses, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 21.6% and 23.2% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily due to synergies from acquisitions. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to acquisitions that resulted in a $1.6 million increase in administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that has limitations as an analytical tool, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations as reported under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The financial results presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP and a reconciliation of this non-GAAP measure included within this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be carefully evaluated.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before discontinued operations, net interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization, acquisition and de novo expenses, stock-based compensation expense, restructure and other costs, gain or loss on the sale of assets, and secondary offering costs. The Company defined adjusted EBITDA to exclude net COVID expenses arising from the pandemic from the second quarter of 2020 to the first quarter of 2021. Adjusted EBITDA is a performance measure used by management that is not calculated in accordance with GAAP. It should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income, operating income or any other measure of financial performance calculated in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors, management and others in evaluating our operating performance for the following reasons:
•
By reporting Adjusted EBITDA, we believe that we provide investors with insight and consistency in our financial reporting and present a basis for comparison of our business operations between current, past and future periods. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA allows management, investors and others to evaluate and compare our core operating results, including return on capital and operating efficiencies, from period to period, by removing the impact of our capital structure (interest expense), asset base (amortization and depreciation), tax consequences, stock-based compensation expense and other identified adjustments.
•
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a measure widely used by securities analysts, investors and others to evaluate the financial performance of other public companies.
•
We recorded stock-based compensation expense of $9.4 million, $6.0 million and $5.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. By comparing our Adjusted EBITDA in different periods, our investors can evaluate our operating results without stock-based compensation expense, which is a non-cash expense which we believe is not a key measure of our operations.
In addition, management has chosen to use Adjusted EBITDA as a performance measure because we believe that the amount of non-cash expenses, such as depreciation, amortization and stock-based compensation expense, may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations, and because such expenses can vary significantly from period to period as a result of new acquisitions, full amortization of previously acquired tangible and intangible assets or the timing of new stock-based awards, as the case may be. This facilitates internal comparisons to historical operating results, as well as external comparisons to the operating results of our competitors and other companies in the personal care services industry. Because management believes Adjusted EBITDA is useful as a performance measure, management uses Adjusted EBITDA:
•
as one of our primary financial measures in the day-to-day oversight of our business to allocate financial and human resources across our organization, to assess appropriate levels of marketing and other initiatives and to generally enhance the financial performance of our business;
•
in the preparation of our annual operating budget, as well as for other planning purposes on a quarterly and annual basis, including allocations in order to implement our growth strategy, to determine appropriate levels of investments in acquisitions and to endeavor to achieve strong core operating results;
•
to evaluate the effectiveness of business strategies, such as the allocation of resources, the mix of organic growth and acquisitive growth and adjustments to our payor mix;
•
as a means of evaluating the effectiveness of management in directing our core operating performance, which we consider to be performance that can be affected by our management in any particular period through their allocation and use of resources that affect our underlying revenue and profit-generating operations during that period;
•
for the valuation of prospective acquisitions, and to evaluate the effectiveness of integration of past acquisitions into our Company; and
•
in communications with our Board concerning our financial performance.
Although Adjusted EBITDA is frequently used by investors and securities analysts in their evaluations of companies, Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or other contractual commitments;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense or interest income;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for income taxes;
•
although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated or amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for these replacements;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any acquisition and de novo expenses;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any stock-based compensation;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any restructure expense and other costs;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any net COVID-19 expense arising from the pandemic from the second quarter of 2020 to the first quarter of 2021;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any gains or losses on the sale of assets;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any secondary offering costs; and
•
other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Management compensates for these limitations by using GAAP financial measures in addition to Adjusted EBITDA in managing the day-to-day and long-term operations of our business. We believe that consideration of Adjusted EBITDA, together with a careful review of our GAAP financial measures, is the most informed method of analyzing our Company.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
(a)
The selected historical Consolidated Statements of Income data for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, were derived from our audited Consolidated Financial Statements.
(b)
Excludes net COVID expenses arising from the pandemic from the second quarter of 2020 to the first quarter of 2021.
*Management deems these metrics to be key performance indicators. Management uses these metrics to monitor our performance, both in our existing operations and acquisitions. Many of these metrics serve as the basis of reported revenues and assessment of these, provide direct correlation to the results of operations from period to period and facilitate comparison with the results of our peers. Historical trends established in these metrics can be used to evaluate current operating results, identify trends affecting our business, determine the allocation of resources and assess the quality and potential variability of our cash flows and earnings. We believe they are useful to investors in evaluating and understanding our business but should not be used solely in assessing the Company’s performance. These key performance indicators should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented herein to fully evaluate and understand the business as a whole. These measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled performance indicators used by other companies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash on hand and cash from operations and borrowings under our credit facility. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash balances of $168.9 million and $145.1 million, respectively. Cash flows from operating activities represent the inflow of cash from our payor clients and the outflow of cash for payroll and payroll taxes, operating expenses, interest and taxes.
We drew approximately $29.0 million on the revolver portion of our credit facility to fund, in part, the acquisition of Armada on August 1, 2021. Additionally, we reallocated and refinanced $17.4 million of our outstanding initial term loans as revolving loans, as discussed below. At December 31, 2021, we had a total of $224.9 million in revolving loans, with an interest rate of 2.10% outstanding on our credit facility. After giving effect to the amount drawn on our credit facility, approximately $8.2 million of outstanding letters of credit and borrowing limits based on an advance multiple of Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Agreement), we had $376.6 million of capacity and $143.6 million available for borrowing under our credit facility. At December 31, 2020, we had a total of $178.5 million revolving credit loans, with an interest rate of 1.90%, and $18.1 million term loans, with an interest rate of 1.90%. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company drew approximately $135.0 million on the revolver portion of its credit facility to fund, in part, the purchase price for the Queen City Hospice acquisition on December 4, 2020.
Our credit facility requires us to maintain a total net leverage ratio not exceeding 3.75:1.00. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our financial covenants under the Credit Agreement. Although we believe our liquidity position remains strong, we can provide no assurance that we will remain in compliance with the covenants in our Credit Agreement, and in the future, it may prove necessary to seek an amendment with the bank lending group under our credit facility. Additionally, there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise additional funds on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
Borrowing Capacity
On July 30, 2021, the Company entered into a Second Amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to our Credit Agreement. The Second Amendment, among other things, reallocated and refinanced $17.4 million of our outstanding initial term loans as revolving loans (such that the Company has no outstanding initial term loans and no further initial term loans may be borrowed) and increased the Company’s revolving credit facility to an aggregate amount of $600.0 million. Moreover, the Second Amendment increased the Company’s incremental loan facility to an aggregate amount $125.0 million, which incremental loan facility may be for term loans or an increase to the revolving loan commitments. The maturity of the revolving credit facility was also extended from May 8, 2023 to July 30, 2026. Additionally, the Credit Agreement contains hardwired fallback language that contemplates a transition from LIBOR and specifically it identifies SOFR as the replacement reference rate and details the mechanism for transition at LIBOR cessation, which is anticipated to occur on June 30, 2023. The transition to SOFR is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations or liquidity. In connection with the Second Amendment, we incurred approximately $3.0 million of debt issuance costs.
See Note 8, Long-Term Debt, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details of our long-term debt.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Any deterioration in economic conditions in the United States, including as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic, would pose a risk to states’ revenues, which in turn could affect our reimbursements and collections received for services rendered. Depending on the severity and length of any potential economic downturn, states could face significant fiscal challenges and revise their revenue forecasts and adjust their budgets, and sales tax collections and income tax withholdings could be depressed in fiscal year 2021 (which began July 1 in most states), and, potentially, future fiscal years. In this regard, Illinois, New Mexico and New York, our top three personal care markets, previously revised revenue estimates downward for the 2021 fiscal year as the result of earlier negative economic conditions arising from the pandemic. Also in response to reduced revenues, the state of New York authorized the issuance of short-term bonds and implemented uniform reductions to Medicaid payments. Effective for dates of service on or after April 2, 2020, the uniform reduction rate is 1.5%. The reduction applies to home health and personal care services but hospice services are exempt.
Government Stimulus and Relief Measures
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, federal and state governments have passed legislation, promulgated regulations, and taken other administrative actions intended to assist healthcare providers in providing care to COVID-19 patients and other patients during the public health emergency. These temporary measures include relief from Medicare conditions of participation requirements for healthcare providers, relaxation of licensure requirements for healthcare professionals, relaxation of privacy restrictions for telehealth remote communications, promoting use of telehealth by expanding the scope of services for which Medicare reimbursement is available, and limited waivers of fraud and abuse laws for activities related to COVID-19 during the emergency period. The current federal public health emergency declaration expires April 16, 2022, but HHS has indicated it will provide states with 60 days’ notice prior to termination of the declaration.
The ARPA, which became law on March 11, 2021, provides for $350 billion in relief funding for eligible state, local, territorial, and Tribal governments to mitigate the fiscal effects of the COVID-19 public health emergency. Additionally, the law provides for a 10 percentage point increase in federal matching funds for Medicaid HCBS from April 1, 2021, through March 30, 2022, provided the state satisfies certain conditions. States must use the monies attributable to this matching fund increase to supplement, not supplant, their level of spending for the implementation of activities enhanced under the Medicaid HCBS in effect as of April 1, 2021. States will be permitted to use the state funds equivalent to the additional federal funds through March 31, 2024.
Provider Relief Fund
One of the primary sources of relief for healthcare providers is the Provider Relief Fund, which has been funded through the CARES Act and related legislation. Provider Relief Fund payments are intended to compensate healthcare providers for lost revenues and health care related expenses incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and are not required to be repaid, provided that recipients attest to and comply with certain terms and conditions, including limitations on balance billing and not using funds received from the Provider Relief Fund to reimburse expenses or losses that other sources are obligated to reimburse.
In November 2020, the Company received grants in an aggregate principal amount of $13.7 million from the Provider Relief Fund, for which we had previously applied. The Company utilized $12.3 million and $1.4 million of these funds during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for healthcare related expenses, including retention payments attributable to COVID-19 that were unreimbursed by other sources. We are required to properly and fully document the use of such funds in reports to HHS, which must be submitted no later than March 31, 2022. Queen City Hospice administered retention payments totaling $1.9 million to caregivers for the year ended December 31, 2021, which we believed to be necessary to secure and maintain adequate personnel. Commercial organizations that receive and expend annual total awards of $750,000 or more in federal funding, including payments received through the Provider Relief Fund, are subject to federal audit requirements.
Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program - Queen City Hospice
In addition, the CARES Act expands the Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program to increase cash flow to providers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Hospice and home health providers were able to request an advance or accelerated payment of up to 100% of the Medicare payment amount for a three-month period (not including Medicare Advantage payments). The Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program payments are a loan that providers must repay. In April 2020, Queen City Hospice received an amount equal to $10.8 million pursuant to the Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program. Queen City Hospice did not repay the funds prior to the completion of our acquisition of Queen City Hospice. However, Queen City Hospice repaid such funds following its acquisition in March 2021, prior to any CMS recoupment and before any interest accrual.
Payroll tax deferral
The CARES Act also provides for certain federal income and other tax changes, including allowing for the deferral of the employer portion of Social Security payroll taxes through December 31, 2020. The payroll tax deferral requires that the deferred payroll taxes be paid over two years, with half of the eligible deferred amount required to be paid by December 31, 2021 and the other half by December 31, 2022. The Company received a cash benefit of approximately $7.1 million related to the deferral of employer payroll taxes for 2020 under the CARES Act, for the period April 2, 2020 through June 30, 2020. Effective July 1, 2020, the Company began paying its deferred portion of employer Social Security payroll taxes and repaid $3.0 million of the $7.1 million in 2021.
Medicare sequester
The CARES Act and related legislation also include other provisions offering financial relief, for example temporarily lifting the Medicare sequester, which would have otherwise reduced payments to Medicare providers by 2% as required by the Budget Control Act of 2011, from May 1, 2020, through December 31, 2021 (but also extending sequestration through 2030). Congress further delayed these sequestration cuts through March 31, 2022, and reduced the sequestration adjustment to 1% from April 1 through June 30, 2022. The full 2% reduction is currently scheduled to resume July 1, 2022. These sequestration cuts have been extended through 2030, with the reductions for 2030 set to increase to 2.25% for the first six months and to 3% for the second six months.
In our hospice segment, Medicare sequester relief resulted in an increase in net service revenues of $2.9 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In our home health segment, Medicare sequester relief resulted in an increase in net service revenues of $0.5 million and $0.2 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
However, the ARPA increases the federal budget deficit in a manner that triggers an additional statutorily mandated sequestration under the PAYGO Act. As a result, an additional Medicare payment reduction of up to 4% was required to take effect in January 2022. However, Congress has delayed implementation of this payment reduction until 2023. We cannot currently determine if, or to what extent, our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity will ultimately be impacted by mandated sequestration triggers under the PAYGO Act, or if or when the mandated sequestration will occur.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes historical changes in our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash provided by operating activities was $39.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $109.4 million in 2020 primarily due to the timing of receipts on accounts receivable and the timing of government stimulus funds. The changes in accounts receivable were primarily related to the growth in revenue and a decrease in days sales outstanding (“DSO”) during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, as described below. The related receivables due from the Illinois Department on Aging represented 16.1% and 15.9% of net accounts receivable at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities was $42.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $214.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $29.1 million primarily for the acquisition of Armada, $8.2 million for the acquisition of Summit and $4.6 million in purchases of property and equipment primarily related to technology infrastructure. Our investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $194.8 million for the acquisition of Queen City Hospice, $15.8 million for the acquisition of County Homemakers, $14.5 million for the acquisition of A Plus and $6.8 million in purchases of property and equipment primarily related to our ongoing investments in our technology infrastructure and investments in expanding our corporate office.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $138.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 included borrowings of $29.0 million on the revolver portion of our credit facility to fund the Armada acquisition, the reallocation and refinancing of $17.4 million of our outstanding initial term loans as revolving loans and cash paid for debt issuance costs of $3.0 million. Our financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to borrowings of approximately $135.0 million on the revolver portion of our credit facility to fund, in part, the Queen City Hospice acquisition and $3.9 million in cash received from the exercise of stock options.
Outstanding Accounts Receivable
Gross accounts receivable as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $138.4 million and $133.4 million, respectively. Outstanding accounts receivable, net of the allowance for doubtful accounts, increased by $4.3 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. The open receivable balance from the Illinois Department on Aging, the largest payor program for the Company’s Illinois personal care operation, increased by $0.8 million from $21.2 million as of December 31, 2020 to $22.0 million as of December 31, 2021. Our collection procedures include review of account aging and direct contact with our payors. We have historically not used collection agencies. An uncollectible amount is written off to the allowance account after reasonable collection efforts have been exhausted.
We calculate our DSO by taking the accounts receivable outstanding, net of the allowance for doubtful accounts, divided by the net service revenues for the last quarter, multiplied by the number of days in that quarter. Our DSOs were 54 and 61 days at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The DSOs for our largest payor, the Illinois Department on Aging, at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 43 and 46 days, respectively.
As discussed above in “COVID-19 Pandemic”, any deterioration in economic conditions in the United States, including as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic, would pose a risk to states’ revenues, which in turn could affect our reimbursements and collections received for services rendered. Depending on the severity and length of any potential economic downturn, states could face significant fiscal challenges and revise their revenue forecasts and adjust their budgets, and sales tax collections and income tax withholdings could be depressed in fiscal year 2021 (which began July 1 in most states), and, potentially, future fiscal years. We cannot determine if Congress will provide additional relief with additional stimulus and relief legislation.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet guarantees or arrangements with unconsolidated entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our Consolidated Financial Statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expense and related disclosures.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it involves a significant level of estimation uncertainty and has had or is reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other sources and factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, however, actual results may differ from these estimates. Our critical accounting policies requiring estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition, Accounts Receivable and Allowances
Net service revenue is recognized at the amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for providing services directly to consumers. Receipts are from federal, state and local governmental agencies, managed care organizations, commercial insurers and private consumers for services rendered. The Company assesses the consumers’ ability to pay at the time of their admission based on the Company’s verification of the customer’s insurance coverage under the Medicare, Medicaid, and other commercial or managed care insurance programs. Laws and regulations governing the governmental programs in which we participate are complex and subject to interpretation. Net service revenues related to uninsured accounts, or self-pay, is recorded net of implicit price concessions estimated based on historical collection experience to reduce revenue to the estimated amount we expect to collect. Amounts collected from all sources may be less than amounts billed due to implicit price concessions resulting from client eligibility issues, insufficient or incomplete documentation, services at levels other than authorized, pricing differences and other reasons unrelated to credit risk. We monitor our net service revenues and collections from these sources and record any necessary adjustment to net service revenues based upon management’s assessment of historical write offs and expected net collections, business and economic conditions, trends in federal, state and private employer health care coverage and other collection indicators.
Accounts receivable is reduced to the amount expected to be collected in future periods for services rendered to customers prior to the balance sheet date. Management estimates the value of accounts receivable, net of allowances for implicit price concessions based upon historical experience and other factors, including an aging of accounts receivable, evaluation of expected adjustments, past adjustments and collection experience in relation to amounts billed, current contract and reimbursement terms, shifts in payors and other relevant information. Collection of net service revenues we expect to receive is normally a function of providing complete and correct billing information to the payors within the various filing deadlines. The evaluation of these historical and other factors involves complex, subjective judgments impacting the determination of the implicit price concession assumption. In addition, we compare our cash collections to recorded net service revenues and evaluate our historical allowances, including implicit price concessions, based upon the ultimate resolution of the accounts receivable balance.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Under business combination accounting, assets and liabilities are generally recognized at their fair values and the difference between the consideration transferred, excluding transaction costs, and the fair values of the assets and liabilities is recognized as goodwill. The Company’s significant identifiable intangible assets consist of customer and referral relationships, trade names and trademarks and state licenses. The Company uses various valuation techniques to determine initial fair value of its intangible assets, including relief-from-royalty, income approach, discounted cash flow analysis, and multi-period excess earnings, which use significant unobservable inputs, or Level 3 inputs, as defined by the fair value hierarchy. Under these valuation approaches, we are required to make estimates and assumptions about future market growth and trends, forecasted revenue and costs, expected periods over which the assets will be utilized, appropriate discount rates and other variables. The Company estimates the fair values of the trade names using the relief-from-royalty method, which requires assumptions such as the long-term growth rates of future revenues, the relief from royalty rate for such revenue, the tax rate and the discount rate. The Company estimates the fair value of existing indefinite-lived state licenses based on a blended approach of the replacement cost method and cost savings method, which involves estimating the total process costs and opportunity costs to obtain a license, by estimating future earnings before interest and taxes and applying an estimated discount rate, tax rate and time to obtain the license. The Company estimates the fair value of existing finite-lived state licenses based on a method of analyzing the definite revenue streams with the license and without the license, which involves estimating revenues and expenses, estimated time to build up to a current revenue base, which is market specific, and the non-licensed revenue allocation, revenue growth rates, discount rate and tax amortization benefits. The Company estimates the fair value of customer and referral relationships based on a multi-period excess earnings method, which involves identifying revenue streams associated with the assets, estimating the attrition rates based upon historical financial data, expenses and cash flows associated with the assets, contributory asset charges, rates of return for specific assets, growth rates, discount rate and tax amortization benefits. The Company estimates the fair value of non-competition agreements based on a method of analyzing the factors to compete and factors not to compete, which involves estimating historical financial data, forecasted financial statements, growth rates, tax amortization benefit, discount rate, review of factors to compete and factors not to compete as well as an assessment of the probability of successful competition for each non-competition agreement.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, goodwill was $504.4 million and $469.1 million, respectively, included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The carrying value of our goodwill is the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired from various acquisitions. In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized. We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis, as of October 1, or whenever potential impairment triggers occur, such as a significant change in business climate or regulatory changes that would indicate that an impairment may have occurred. We may elect to use a qualitative test to determine whether impairment has occurred, focused on various factors including macroeconomic conditions, market trends, specific reporting unit financial performance and other entity specific events, to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, including goodwill. We may also bypass the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative test. Additionally, it is our policy to update the fair value calculation of our reporting units and perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test on a periodic basis. The quantitative goodwill impairment test involves comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, then goodwill is not impaired. If the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then goodwill is impaired to the extent of the difference.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we performed the quantitative analysis to evaluate whether an impairment occurred. Since quoted market prices for our reporting units are not available, we rely on widely accepted valuation techniques to determine fair value, including discounted cash flow and market multiple approaches, which capture both the future income potential of the reporting unit and the market behaviors and actions of market participants in the industry that includes the reporting unit. These types of models require us to make assumptions and estimates regarding future cash flows, industry-specific economic factors and the profitability of future business strategies. The discounted cash flow model uses a projection of estimated operating results and cash flows that are discounted using a weighted average cost of capital. The market multiple model estimates fair value based on market multiples of earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation and amortization. Under the discounted cash flow model, the projection uses management’s best estimates of economic and market conditions over the projected period for each reporting unit using significant assumptions such as revenue growth rates and the weighted-average cost of capital.
Based on the totality of the information available, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the estimated fair values of our reporting units were greater than their carrying values. Consequently, we concluded that there were no impairments for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 or 2019. For the fiscal year 2021 impairment tests, the fair value of the reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values (commonly referred to as “headroom”) by at least 100% in the personal care and home health reporting units, and by 20% in the hospice reporting unit. The headroom percentage for the hospice reporting unit decreased as compared to the prior year primarily due to prior acquisitions increasing the carrying value combined with a decline in estimates to average daily census and an increase in estimates for labor costs both driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in lower discounted cash flows compared to 2020. We performed a sensitivity analysis on this reporting unit and determined that a more than 1.5% increase to the weighted- average cost of capital, the most sensitive assumption used in the estimate, would result in the fair value being lower than the carrying value. The Company bases its fair value estimates on assumptions management believes to be reasonable but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, intangibles, net of accumulated amortization, was $64.3 million and $71.5 million, respectively, included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Our identifiable intangible assets consist of customer and referral relationships, trade names, trademarks, state licenses and non-competition agreements. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized using straight-line and accelerated methods based upon the estimated useful lives of the respective assets, which range from one to twenty-five years, and assessed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Customer and referral relationships are amortized systematically over the periods of expected economic benefit, which range from five to ten years. We would recognize an impairment loss when the estimated future non-discounted cash flows associated with the intangible asset are less than the carrying value. An impairment charge would then be recorded for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value. We estimate the fair value of these intangible assets using the income approach. In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized. We test intangible assets with indefinite useful lives for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis, as of October 1, or whenever potential impairment triggers occur, such as a significant change in business climate or regulatory changes that would indicate that an impairment may have occurred. No impairment charge was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 or 2019. Amortization of intangible assets is reported in the statement of income caption, “Depreciation and amortization” and not included in the income statement caption cost of service revenues.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Standby letters of credit
We had outstanding letters of credit of $8.2 million at December 31, 2021. These standby letters of credit benefit our third-party insurer for our high deductible workers’ compensation insurance program. The amount of the letters of credit is negotiated annually in conjunction with the insurance renewals.
Material Cash Requirements
We believe that our existing cash on hand, our anticipated cash flows from operations and amounts available under our Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operating and investing needs for the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future thereafter. Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and other risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors”.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had outstanding debt on our revolving loan under our credit facility of $224.9 million, payable on July 30, 2026. Interest payments associated with the debt totals $27.6 million, with $6.3 million payable within 12 months. As described in Note 8 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, interest on borrowings under the revolving loan are variable. The calculated interest payable amounts use actual rates available through January 2021 and assumes the January rates of 2.10%, respectively, for all future interest payable on the revolving loans. See Note 8, Long-Term Debt, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details of our long-term debt.
Leases
The Company has lease arrangements for local branches, our corporate headquarters and certain equipment. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had fixed lease payment obligations of $48.5 million, with $11.0 million payable within 12 months. See Note 2, Leases, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details of our leases.
Impact of Inflation
The United States has recently experienced inflationary conditions, which we believe generally commenced in the latter half of 2021. The impact of inflation on us is reflected in, and may continue to result in, increased operating costs, particularly the wages we pay our caregivers and other personnel and our ability to attract and retain personnel. Rising price levels might allow us to increase our fees to private pay clients, but our ability to realize rate increases from government programs might be limited despite inflation. Inflation may also raise our financing costs. For additional information regarding the risks to us from the current competitive labor market and increasing labor costs, see Item 1A - Risk Factors - “We may not be able to attract and retain qualified personnel or we may incur increased costs in doing so.”