Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Financial Overview
Summary
We have not generated positive cash flow or net income from operations since our inception and as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $648.1 million. We expect to incur substantial expenses and increasing losses from operations in the foreseeable future as we continue our research and development efforts, advance our product candidates through nonclinical and clinical development, manufacture clinical study materials, seek regulatory approval, and prepare for and, if approved, proceed to commercialization. We are at an early stage of development and may never be successful in developing or commercializing our product candidates.
While we may in the future generate revenue from a variety of sources, including license fees, milestone and research and development payments in connection with strategic partnerships, and potentially revenue from product sales if any of our product candidates are approved, to date we have not generated any revenue from product sales.
We currently have no operational clinical or commercial manufacturing facilities, and all of our clinical manufacturing activities are currently contracted out to third parties. Additionally, we use third-party CROs to carry out our clinical development and we do not have a sales organization.
We expect to incur substantial and increasing expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. We will need substantial additional funding in the future to support our operating activities as we advance our product candidates through nonclinical and clinical development, seek regulatory approval and prepare for and, if approved, proceed to commercialization. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital, or to do so on acceptable terms, when needed, or to form additional collaboration partnerships to support our efforts, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or potential commercialization efforts.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $305.2 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments are sufficient to fund operations into 2024.
Revenue
To date we have not generated any revenue from the sale of our products. We have generated revenue through research, collaboration and license arrangements with strategic partners. Our ability to generate product revenue and become profitable depends upon our ability to successfully develop and commercialize our product candidates. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the amount or timing of product revenue. Even if we are able to generate revenue from the sale of our products, our sales may not be sufficient to generate cash from operations, in which case we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce our operations.
We recognized $7.5 million of license revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not recognize any revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Conducting a significant amount of research and development is central to our business model. Research and development expenses primarily include personnel-related costs, stock-based compensation expenses, laboratory supplies, consulting costs, external contract research and development expenses, including expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical study materials, and overhead expenses, such as rent, equipment depreciation, insurance and utilities.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We defer and expense advance payments for goods or services for future research and development activities as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
We estimate nonclinical study and clinical trial expenses based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage nonclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. We estimate the amounts incurred through communications with third party service providers and our estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date are based on information available at the time. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or aggregate costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of any of our product candidates. The successful development and commercialization of a product candidate is highly uncertain, and clinical development timelines, the probability of success, and development and commercialization costs can differ materially from expectations.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily include personnel-related costs, stock-based compensation, professional fees for legal, consulting, audit and tax services, overhead expenses, such as rent, equipment depreciation, insurance and utilities, and other general operating expenses not otherwise included in research and development expenses. Our general and administrative expenses may increase in future periods if and to the extent we elect to increase our investment in infrastructure to support continued research and development activities and potential commercialization of our product candidates. We will continue to evaluate the need for such investment in conjunction with our ongoing consideration of our pipeline of product candidates. We anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal and regulatory functions, as well as director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily comprises interest income on our cash equivalents and investments in marketable securities.
Critical Accounting Judgments and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Accrued and Prepaid Research and Development Expense
We estimate our accrued and prepaid research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, reviewing the terms of our license agreements, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. Expenses that are paid in advance of performance are deferred as a prepaid expense and expensed as the services are provided.
Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees to:
•contract manufacturers in connection with the production of clinical trial materials;
•CROs and other service providers in connection with clinical studies;
•investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
•vendors in connection with nonclinical development activities; and
•services providers for professional service fees such as consulting and related services.
Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amount actually incurred. However, due to the nature of these estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not adjust our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical studies or other research activities. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no material changes from our estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Leases
We account for leases under Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“Topic 842”) effective January 1, 2019. For our long-term operating leases, we recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability on our consolidated balance sheets. The lease liability is determined as the present value of future lease payments reduced by lease incentives, if any, using an estimated rate of interest that we would pay to borrow equivalent funds on a collateralized basis at the lease commencement date. In order to determine the incremental borrowing rate, we estimate our credit rating, adjust the credit rating for the nature of the collateral, and benchmark the borrowing rate against observable yields on comparable securities with a similar term. We base the right-of-use lease asset on the lease liability adjusted for any prepaid or deferred rent. We determine the lease term at the commencement date by considering whether renewal options and termination options are reasonably assured of exercise.
Rent expense for operating lease is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term and is included in operating expenses on the statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Variable lease payments include lease operating expenses.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of amortizable long-lived assets, whenever events, or changes in business circumstances or the planned use of long-lived assets indicate that their carrying amounts may not be fully recoverable or that their useful lives are no longer appropriate. If these facts and circumstances exist, we assess for recovery by comparing the carrying values of long-lived assets with their future undiscounted net cash flows. If the comparison indicates that impairment exists, long-lived assets are written down to their respective fair values. For example, in connection with the early termination of a lease in 2021, we tested the recoverability of the carrying amount of the asset group. The carrying amount of the asset group, consisting of right-of-use assets and leasehold improvements, related to the lease termination exceeded our anticipated undiscounted cash flows. As a result of our evaluation, we recorded an impairment charge of $1.1 million, which includes $0.8 million associated with the right-of-use assets and $0.3 million associated with leasehold improvements, for the year ended December 31, 2021. The assets indicated as impaired were written down to the estimated fair value, which was determined using the terms of the termination and sublease agreements.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
We recognize compensation costs related to stock-based awards granted to employees based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We estimate the grant-date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes valuation model for stock options, and using intrinsic value, which is the closing price of our common stock on the grant date for the restricted stock units (“RSUs”). The fair value of performance stock units (“PSU”) is estimated based on the closing sale price of our common stock on the date of grant. Expense recognition of PSU commences when the associated performance-based criteria are determined to be probable.
We recognize the grant-date fair value of the stock-based awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards.
We use the Black-Scholes valuation model to assist us in determining the fair value of our stock options, which includes our employee stock purchase plan. The Black-Scholes valuation model requires the use of following assumptions:
Expected volatility. We base the expected volatility on our historical stock price volatility.
Expected term. We derive the expected term using the “simplified” method that determines the expected term as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. The expected term of the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) rights equals to the six-month look-back period.
Risk-free interest rate. We base the risk-free interest rate on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options.
Expected dividend yield. We have never paid any dividends and do not plan to pay dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, used an expected dividend yield of zero in the valuation model.
Income Tax
We recognize deferred income taxes for temporary differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial statement and income tax purposes. We periodically evaluate the positive and negative evidence bearing upon realizability of our deferred tax assets. Based upon the weight of available evidence, which includes our historical operating performance, reported cumulative net losses since inception and difficulty in accurately forecasting our future results, we maintained a full valuation allowance on the net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 of approximately $154.7 million and $94.6 million, respectively. We intend to maintain a full valuation allowance on the federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets until sufficient positive evidence exists to support reversal of the valuation allowance.
As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of approximately $393.4 million to offset future federal income. Approximately $57.3 million of NOLs expire at various years beginning with 2036. As of December 31, 2021, we also had U.S. state NOL carryforwards of approximately $227.1 million to offset future state income. U.S. state NOLs expire at various years beginning with 2037. At December 31, 2021, we also had approximately $50.1 million of foreign net operating loss carryforwards which may be available to offset future foreign income; these carryforwards do not expire.
Under Section 382 of the Code, our ability to utilize NOL carryforwards or other tax attributes such as research tax credits, in any taxable year may be limited if we have experienced an “ownership change.” Generally, a Section 382 ownership change occurs if there is a cumulative increase of more than 50 percentage points in the stock ownership of one or more stockholders or groups of stockholders who own at least 5% of a corporation’s stock within a specified testing period. Similar rules may apply under state tax laws. Due to a June 30, 2020 ownership change, we determined that certain NOLs and research and development tax credits for both federal and state purposes are subject to the 382 limitation; however, it was determined that there should be no material impact to the ability of the utilization before expiration.
We record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities and adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available. As of December 31, 2021, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that would affect our effective tax rate, if recognized, is $1.1 million.
Our policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to income taxes as a component of income tax expense. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we accrued $257,000 interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions. There are no ongoing examinations by tax authorities at this time.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue
The $7.5 million license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to an upfront payment received in January 2021 upon execution of a license agreement entered with Lexeo Therapeutics, Inc (“Lexeo”). We recognized no revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased $15.9 million to $89.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $73.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This overall increase was primarily related to a $10.3 million increase in personnel-associated costs including salaries, stock-based compensation expense, and bonus mainly driven by headcount increase from 114 employees as of December 31, 2020 to 133 employees as of December 31, 2021, a $5.1 million increase in facilities costs as we entered into new leases during the year, a $2.2 million increase in other research and development services, a $2.0 million increase in expenses for consultants and contractors and a $1.0 million in clinical trials-related expenses; partially offset by a decrease of $5.4 million in material productions and bioanalytics expenses due to timing of cost incurred related to product candidate ADVM-022 and earlier-stage research programs. Stock-based compensation expense included in research and development expenses was $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the periods presented, our research and development activities were attributable to our wet AMD, DME, rare disease programs and earlier-stage research programs. We expect that research and development expenses will increase in future periods as we continue to invest in advancing our gene therapy product candidate ADVM-022 and earlier-stage research programs.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased $19.8 million to $64.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $44.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to an increase of $7.3 million in personnel-associated costs including higher salaries and stock-based compensation expense as a result of higher average headcount during 2021. The overall increase also reflects increase of $6.0 million in professional services mainly for investor relations and legal fees in connection with our proxy contest ended in May 2021, $2.9 million in taxes, insurances, and license fees primarily due to state taxes on revenue and increase in insurance premiums, $2.3 million in rent and facilities related expenses for new leases that commenced in 2021, and $1.1 million of impairment charges for long-lived assets related to a leased facility terminated in November 2021. Stock-based compensation expense included in general and administrative expenses was $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods as we continue to support advancing our gene therapy programs. We anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal, finance and investor functions to support our organizational growth.
Other Income, Net
The decrease of $1.0 million in net other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in interest earned on lower average balances of our short-term investments.
Income Tax Provision
We recognized no income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2021. We recognized an income tax provision of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to foreign operations.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Plan of Operations
We have not generated positive cash flow or net income from operations since our inception and as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $648.1 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $305.2 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. compared to $429.7 million as of December 31, 2020. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to fund our operations and meet our existing contractual obligations and other cash requirements into 2024.
In February 2020, we sold an aggregate of 10,925,000 shares of our common stock for $140.8 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
In August 2020, we sold an aggregate of 16,675,000 shares of our common stock for $203.5 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates and ongoing internal research and development programs, and expenses to build out our new facility. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or aggregate amount of costs for our development, potential commercialization, and internal research and development programs. However, in order to complete our planned nonclinical trials and current and future clinical trials, and to complete the process of obtaining regulatory approval for our product candidates, as well as to build the sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure that we believe will be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved, we will require substantial additional funding in the future.
If and when we seek additional funding, we will do so through equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources or through other sources of financing. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital in the future could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. To complete development and commercialization of any of our product candidates, we anticipate that we will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements of which will depend on many factors, including:
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of nonclinical studies and any clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the outcome, timing of and costs involved in, seeking and obtaining approvals from the FDA and other regulatory authorities, including the potential for the FDA and other regulatory authorities to require that we perform more studies than those that we currently expect;
•the ability of our product candidates to progress through clinical development activities successfully;
•our need to expand our research and development activities;
•the rate of progress and cost of our commercialization of our products;
•the cost of preparing to manufacture our products on a larger scale;
•the costs of commercialization activities including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution;
•the degree and rate of market acceptance of any products launched by us or future partners;
•the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•our need to implement additional infrastructure and internal systems;
•our ability to hire additional personnel;
•our ability to enter into additional collaboration, licensing, commercialization or other arrangements and the terms and timing of such arrangements;
•the emergence of competing technologies or other adverse market developments; and
•the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license other technologies or clinical product candidates or programs that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented below:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $107.8 million, primarily as a result of net loss of $145.5 million due to the continued activities developing our product candidates, partially offset by $33.6 million of non-cash charges mainly related to $25.2 million of stock-based compensation expense, $4.6 million of depreciation and amortization expenses, $2.8 million of amortization of premium on marketable securities, and $1.1 million of impairment of long-lived assets, and $4.1 million of net decrease in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities, which fluctuate due to timing of expenses and payments.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $79.3 million, primarily as a result of net loss of $117.5 million due to the continued activities developing our product candidates, partially offset by $25.5 million of non-cash charges mainly related to $20.4 million of stock-based compensation expense and $4.2 million of depreciation and amortization expenses, and $12.7 million of net increase in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities, which fluctuate due to timing of expenses and payments.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $93.8 million of net maturities and sales of marketable securities, partially offset by $15.1 million of purchases of property and equipment primarily related to the new facilities.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $268.3 million of net purchases of marketable securities and $11.8 million of purchases of property and equipment primarily related to the new facility.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $1.7 million of net proceeds from the sale of our common stock, and $0.9 million in proceeds from employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $0.2 million repayment of loans.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $344.3 million of net proceeds from the sale of our common stock, $12.7 million of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $1.1 million in proceeds from employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $2.0 million in taxes paid relating to net share settlement of restricted stock units and repayment of loans.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Regulation S-K, Item 303(a)(4)(ii).