ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations and other portions of this report contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by the forward-looking information. Factors that may cause such differences include, but are not limited to, availability and cost of financial resources, product demand, market acceptance and other factors discussed in this report under the heading “Risk Factors”. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Advaxis, Inc. (“Advaxis” or the “Company”) is a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on the development and commercialization of proprietary Lm Technology antigen delivery products based on a platform technology that utilizes live attenuated Listeria monocytogenes, or Lm, bioengineered to secrete antigen/adjuvant fusion proteins. These Lm-based strains are believed to be a significant advancement in immunotherapy as they integrate multiple functions into a single immunotherapy by accessing and directing antigen presenting cells to stimulate anti-tumor T cell immunity, stimulate and activate the innate immune system with the equivalent of multiple adjuvants, and simultaneously reduce tumor protection in the Tumor Microenvironment, or TME, to enable the T cells to attack tumor cells.
The Company believes that Lm Technology immunotherapies can complement and address significant unmet needs in the current oncology treatment landscape. Specifically, our product candidates (i.e., ADXS-PSA, ADXS-503 and ADXS-504) have the potential to optimize checkpoint performance, while having a generally well-tolerated safety profile, and most of our product candidates have an expected low cost of goods.
Advaxis is currently winding down or has wound down clinical studies of Lm Technology immunotherapies in three program areas:
● Human Papilloma Virus (“HPV”)-associated cancers
● Personalized neoantigen-directed therapies
● Human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2) associated cancers
All these clinical program areas are anchored in the Company’s Lm TechnologyTM, a unique platform designed for its ability to safely and effectively target various cancers in multiple ways. While we are currently winding down clinical studies of Lm Technology immunotherapies in these three program areas, our license agreements continue with OS Therapies, LLC for ADXS-HER2 and with Global BioPharma, or GBP, for the exclusive license for the development and commercialization of AXAL in Asia, Africa, and the former USSR territory, exclusive of India and certain other countries.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Impact
The global health crisis caused by the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic and its resurgences has and may continue to negatively impact global economic activity, which, despite progress in vaccination efforts, remains uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. In addition, a new Omicron variant of COVID-19, which appears to be the most transmissible variant to date, has begun to spread globally. The impact of the Omicron variant cannot be predicted at this time, and could depend on numerous factors, including vaccination rates among the population, the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines against the Omicron variant and the response by governmental bodies and regulators.
In response to COVID-19, the Company implemented remote working and thus far, has not experienced a significant disruption or delay in its operations as it relates to the clinical development or drug production of our drug candidates by third parties. We continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and take steps intended to mitigate the potential risks to our workforce and our operations. The COVID-19 pandemic has, and may continue to, directly or indirectly affect the pace of enrollment in our clinical trials as patients may avoid or may not be able to travel to healthcare facilities and physicians’ offices unless due to a health emergency and clinical trial staff can no longer get to the clinic. Nonetheless, thus far, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a significant impact on our business or results of operations. However, we remain in contact with the clinical sites in our study and are in discussion with additional sites to combat any potential impact in enrollment. We are unable to determine or predict the extent, duration or scope of the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, financial condition or liquidity.
Termination of Merger Agreement; Strategic Considerations
On July 4, 2021, the Company entered into a Merger Agreement (the “Merger Agreement”), subject to shareholder approval, with Biosight Ltd. (“Biosight”) and Advaxis Ltd. (“Merger Sub”), a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of Advaxis. Under the terms of the agreement, Biosight was to merge with and into Merger Sub, with Biosight continuing as the surviving company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Advaxis (the “Merger”). Immediately after the merger, Advaxis stockholders as of immediately prior to the merger were expected to own approximately 25% of the outstanding shares of the combined company and former Biosight shareholders were expected to own approximately 75% of the outstanding shares of the combined company.
On December 30, 2021, the Company terminated the Merger Agreement, as the Company was unable to obtain shareholder approval to complete the transaction. As announced in December 2021, the Company plans to continue to explore additional options to maximize stockholder value.
Financings
On January 31, 2022, the Company closed on an offering with certain institutional investors for the private placement of 1,000,000 shares of Series D convertible redeemable preferred stock. The shares to be sold have an aggregate stated value of $5,000,000. Each share of the Series D preferred stock has a purchase price of $4.75, representing an original issue discount of 5% of the stated value. The shares of Series D preferred stock are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock, upon the occurrence of certain events, at a conversion price of $0.25 per share. The conversion, at the option of the stockholder, may occur at any time following the receipt of the stockholders’ approval for a reverse stock split. The Company will be permitted to compel conversion of the Series D preferred stock after the fulfillment of certain conditions and subject to certain limitations. The Series D preferred stock will also have a liquidation preference over the common stock, and may be redeemed by the investors, in accordance with certain terms, for a redemption price equal to 105% of the stated value, or in certain circumstances, 110% of the stated value. The Company and the holders of the Series D preferred stock will also enter into a registration rights agreement to register the resale of the shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of the Series D preferred stock. Total gross proceeds from the offering, before deducting the financial advisor’s fees and other estimated offering expenses, are $4.75 million.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year Ended October 31, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended October 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased approximately $3.0 million for the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to $0.3 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. In the current period, we recognized royalty payments from OST.
Research and Development Expenses
We invest in research and development to advance our Lm technology through our preclinical and clinical development programs. Research and development expenses for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 were categorized as follows (in thousands):
Hotspot/Off-the-Shelf Therapies (ADXS-HOT)
Research and development costs associated with our hotspot mutation-based therapy for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 increased approximately 21% to $4.3 million compared to the same period in 2020. The increase is attributable to the costs associated with the increase in patient enrollment in the HOT-503 study and the commencement of our investigator-sponsored HOT-504 study.
Prostate Cancer (ADXS-PSA)
Research and development costs associated with our prostate cancer therapy for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 decreased approximately $0.9 million, or 97%, compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease is attributable to the winding down of the Phase 1/2 study of our ADXS-PSA compound in combination with KEYTRUDA® (pembrolizumab), Merck’s humanized monoclonal antibody. We do not anticipate that we will continue to incur significant costs associated with the wind down of the study.
HPV-Associated Cancers (AXAL)
The majority of the HPV-associated research and development costs include clinical trial and other related costs associated with our AXAL programs in cervical and head and neck cancers. HPV-associated costs for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 decreased approximately $1.6 million, or 44%, compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease is attributable to wind down costs associated with the closure of our Phase 3 AIM2CERV study in high-risk locally advanced cervical cancer. We do not anticipate that we will continue to incur significant costs associated with the wind down of the study.
Personalized Neoantigen-Directed Therapies (ADXS-NEO)
Research and development costs associated with personalized neoantigen-directed therapies for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 decreased approximately $0.8 million, or 61%, compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease is attributable to wind down costs associated with the termination of our ADXS-NEO study. We do not anticipate that we will continue to incur significant costs associated with the wind down of the study.
Other Expenses
Other expenses include salary and benefit costs, stock-based compensation expense, professional fees, laboratory costs and other internal and external costs associated with our research & development activities. Other expenses for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 decreased approximately $2.5 million, or 40%, compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in salary related expenses, temporary worker expenses and consulting expenses due to a change in focus on the clinical development of our HOT-503 and HOT-504 programs and substantially less on our early research programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily include salary and benefit costs and stock-based compensation expense for employees included in our finance, legal and administrative organizations, outside legal and professional services, and facilities costs. General and administrative expenses for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses for the year ended October 31, 2021 increased approximately $0.4 million, or 3%, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase primarily relates to increases in (1) legal and consulting fees, including $1.4 million in legal and consulting fees related to the merger with Biosight (2) sublicense fees (3) proxy solicitation fees related to both the annual shareholder meeting and the merger with Biosight, (4) amounts paid in settlement of a shareholder demand letter and (5) losses on disposal of property and equipment in connection with the termination of our office lease at our former location. These increases were partially offset by decreases in (1) rent and utilities due to the termination of our office lease at our former location, (2) personnel costs and (3) charges related to the abandonment of non-strategic intellectual property.
Changes in Fair Values
For the year ended October 31, 2021, we recorded non-cash income from changes in the fair value of the warrant liability of approximately $1.0 million. The decrease in the fair value of liability warrants resulted primarily from the issuance of warrants in the April 2021 Private Placement. The warrants issued in the April 2021 Private Placement decreased in fair value from date of issuance to October 31, 2021 due to a decrease in our share price from $0.57 at April 14, 2021 to $0.485 at October 31, 2021.
For the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020, we recorded non-cash expense from changes in the fair value of the warrant liability of $0.
Loss on shares issued in settlement of warrants
On October 16, 2020, the Company entered into private exchange agreements with certain holders of warrants issued in connection with the Company’s January 2020 public offering of common stock and warrants. The warrants being exchanged provide for the purchase of up to an aggregate of 5,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per share. The warrants became exercisable on July 21, 2020 and have an expiration date of July 21, 2025. Pursuant to such exchange agreements, the Company agreed to issue 3,000,000 shares of common stock to the investors in exchange for the warrants. In connection with the exchange of warrants for common stock, the Company recorded a loss of approximately $77,000 as the fair value of the shares issued exceeded the fair value of warrants exchanged.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Management’s Plans
Similar to other development stage biotechnology companies, our products that are being developed have not generated significant revenue. As a result, we have historically suffered recurring losses and we have required significant cash resources to execute our business plans. These losses are expected to continue for the foreseeable future.
Historically, the Company’s major sources of cash have comprised proceeds from various public and private offerings of its securities (including common stock), debt financings, clinical collaborations, option and warrant exercises, income earned on investments and grants, and interest income. From October 2013 through October 31, 2021, the Company raised approximately $339.4 million in gross proceeds ($30.0 million during the year ended October 31, 2021) from various public and private offerings of our common stock. The Company has sustained losses from operations in each fiscal year since our inception, and we expect losses to continue for the indefinite future. As of October 31, 2021 and October 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $428.6 million and $410.7 million, respectively, and stockholders’ equity of approximately $38.9 million and $30.2 million, respectively.
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the global economy and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. An extended period of economic disruption could negatively affect the Company’s business, financial condition, and access to sources of liquidity. As of October 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $41.6 million in cash and cash equivalents. The actual amount of cash that the Company will need to continue operating is subject to many factors.
The Company recognizes that it will need to raise additional capital in order to continue to execute its business plan in the future. There is no assurance that additional financing will be available when needed or that the Company will be able to obtain financing on terms acceptable to it or whether the Company will become profitable and generate positive operating cash flow. If the Company is unable to raise sufficient additional funds, it will have to further scale back its operations. The Company believes it has sufficient capital to fund its obligations, as they become due, in the ordinary course of business into the 3rd fiscal quarter of 2023. The Company based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use available capital resources sooner than currently expected.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $15.4 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 compared to $21.9 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020. Net cash used in operating activities includes reduced spending associated with our clinical trial programs and general and administrative activities. The decrease was due to measures to control costs for non-essential items in areas that did not support our strategic direction, and as a result, we have continued to reduce non-strategic operating expenditures over the past several quarters.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $11,000 for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 compared to $0.7 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020. The decrease is a result of proceeds on disposal of property and equipment and the abandonment of certain non-strategic intellectual property in the prior period that led to less patent costs in the current period.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $31.9 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 as compared to $15.5 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020. In April 2021, the Company completed an offering of (i) 17,577,400 shares of common stock, (ii) 7,671,937 pre-funded warrants to purchase 7,671,937 shares of common stock and (iii) registered common share purchase warrants to purchase 11,244,135 shares of common stock (the “Registered Direct Offering”) with two healthcare focused, institutional investors. The Company also issued to the investors, in a concurrent private placement, unregistered common share purchase warrants to purchase 14,005,202 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Private Placement” and together with the Registered Direct Offering, the “April 2021 Offering”). We received gross proceeds of approximately $20 million, before deducting the fees and expenses payable by us in connection with the April 2021 Offering.
On November 27, 2020, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of 26,666,666 shares of common stock and common stock warrants to purchase up to 13,333,333 shares of common stock (the “November 2020 Offering”). On November 24, 2020, the underwriters notified us that they had exercised their option to purchase an additional 3,999,999 shares of common stock and 1,999,999 warrants in full. After giving effect to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option, we issued and sold an aggregate 30,666,665 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase up to 15,333,332 shares of common stock. We received gross proceeds of approximately $9.2 million, before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and fees and expenses payable by us in connection with the November 2020 Offering.
During the year ended October 31, 2021, warrant holders from the Company’s November 2020 offering exercised 10,754,932 warrants in exchange for 10,754,932 shares of the Company’s common stock and warrant holders from the Company’s April 2021 Offering exercised 7,671,937 pre-funded warrants in exchange for 7,671,937 shares of the Company’s common stock. Pursuant to these warrant exercises, the Company received aggregate proceeds of approximately $3.8 million which were payable upon exercise.
In January 2020, we completed a public offering of 10,000,000 shares of our common stock, which resulted in net proceeds of approximately $9.7 million. Additionally, during the year end October 31, 2020, we sold 2,489,104 shares under the ATM program for net proceeds of $1.531 million, and we sold 11,242,048 shares of common stock under the Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement for net proceeds of approximately $5.1 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of October 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Revenue Recognition
Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract, determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company enters into licensing agreements that are within the scope of ASC 606, under which it may exclusively license rights to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize its product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to the Company of one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; reimbursement of certain costs; customer option exercise fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under its agreements, the Company performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, the Company must use significant judgment to determine: (a) the number of performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above; (b) the transaction price under step (iii) above; and (c) the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract for the allocation of transaction price in step (iv) above. The Company uses judgment to determine whether milestones or other variable consideration, except for royalties, should be included in the transaction price as described further below. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which the Company recognizes revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied.
Amounts received prior to revenue recognition are recorded as deferred revenue. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current portion of deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion.
Exclusive Licenses. If the license to the Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. In assessing whether a performance obligation is distinct from the other performance obligations, the Company considers factors such as the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. In addition, the Company considers whether the collaboration partner can benefit from a performance obligation for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining performance obligation, whether the value of the performance obligation is dependent on the unsatisfied performance obligation, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining performance obligation, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining performance obligation. For licenses that are combined with other performance obligation, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. The measure of progress, and thereby periods over which revenue should be recognized, are subject to estimates by management and may change over the course of the research and development and licensing agreement. Such a change could have a material impact on the amount of revenue the Company records in future periods.
Milestone Payments. At the inception of each arrangement that includes research or development milestone payments, the Company evaluates whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. An output method is generally used to measure progress toward complete satisfaction of a milestone. Milestone payments that are not within the control of the Company or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The Company evaluates factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, the Company re-evaluates the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenue and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company has an equity plan which allows for the granting of stock options to its employees, directors and consultants for a fixed number of shares with an exercise price equal to the fair value of the shares at date of grant. The Company measures the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award. The fair value of the award is measured on the grant date and is then recognized over the requisite service period, usually the vesting period, in both research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statement of operations, depending on the nature of the services provided by the employees or consultants.
The process of estimating the fair value of stock-based compensation awards and recognizing stock-based compensation cost over their requisite service period involves significant assumptions and judgments. The Company estimates the fair value of stock option awards on the date of grant using the Black Scholes Model (“BSM”) for the remaining awards, which requires that the Company makes certain assumptions regarding: (i) the expected volatility in the market price of its common stock; (ii) dividend yield; (iii) risk-free interest rates; and (iv) the period of time employees are expected to hold the award prior to exercise (referred to as the expected holding period). As a result, if the Company revises its assumptions and estimates, stock-based compensation expense could change materially for future grants.
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation using fair value recognition and records forfeitures as they occur. As such, the Company recognizes stock-based compensation cost only for those stock-based awards that vest over their requisite service period, based on the vesting provisions of the individual grants.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company used the Monte Carlo simulation model and the Black-Scholes model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative liabilities are classified in the consolidated balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets primarily consist of legal and filing costs associated with obtaining patents and licenses and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their remaining useful lives which are estimated to be twenty years from the effective dates of the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) License Agreements, beginning in July 1, 2002. These legal and filing costs are invoiced to the Company through Penn and its patent attorneys.
Management has reviewed its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset might not be recoverable and its carrying amount exceeds its fair value, which is based upon estimated undiscounted future cash flows. Net assets are recorded on the consolidated balance sheet for patents and licenses related to AXAL, ADXS-HOT and ADXS-PSA and other products that are in development. However, if a competitor were to gain FDA approval for a treatment before us or if future clinical trials fail to meet the targeted endpoints, the Company would likely record an impairment related to these assets. In addition, if an application is rejected or fails to be issued, the Company would record an impairment of its estimated book value.
Leases
Effective November 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASC Topic 842, Leases (“ASC 842”) using the modified retrospective transition approach by applying the new standard to all leases existing as of the date of initial application. Results and disclosure requirements for reporting periods beginning after November 1, 2019 are presented under ASC 842, while prior period amounts have not been adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with the previous guidance in ASC 840, Leases.
At the inception of an arrangement, the Company determines whether an arrangement is or contains a lease based on the facts and circumstances present in the arrangement. An arrangement is or contains a lease if the arrangement conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Most leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the consolidated balance sheet as operating lease right-of-use assets and current and long-term operating lease liabilities, as applicable. The Company has elected not to recognize on the consolidated balance sheet leases with terms of 12 months or less. The Company typically only includes the initial lease term in its assessment of a lease arrangement. Options to extend a lease are not included in the Company’s assessment unless there is reasonable certainty that the Company will renew.
Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected remaining lease term. Certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset may be required for items such as prepaid or accrued rent. The interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is typically not readily determinable. As a result, the Company utilizes its incremental borrowing rate, which reflects the fixed rate at which the Company could borrow on a collateralized basis the amount of the lease payments in the same currency, for a similar term, in a similar economic environment. In transition to ASC 842, the Company utilized the remaining lease term of its leases in determining the appropriate incremental borrowing rates.
New Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to our financial statements that discusses new accounting standards.