Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following information should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report. Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the U.S.
Overview of Business
Adams Resources & Energy, Inc. and its subsidiaries are primarily engaged in crude oil marketing, transportation, terminalling and storage in various crude oil and natural gas basins in the lower 48 states of the U.S. We also conduct tank truck transportation of liquid chemicals, pressurized gases, asphalt and dry bulk primarily in the lower 48 states of the U.S. with deliveries into Canada and Mexico, and with nineteen terminals across the U.S.
We operate and report in three business segments: (i) crude oil marketing, transportation and storage; (ii) tank truck transportation of liquid chemicals, pressurized gases, asphalt and dry bulk; and (iii) pipeline transportation, terminalling and storage of crude oil. See Note 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our business segments.
Results of Operations
Crude Oil Marketing
Our crude oil marketing segment revenues, operating earnings and selected costs were as follows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
____________________
(1)Represents the percentage increase (decrease) from the prior year.
(2)Operating earnings included net inventory liquidation gains of $10.3 million, net inventory valuation losses of $15.0 million and net inventory liquidation gains of $3.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Volume and price information were as follows for the periods indicated:
____________________
(1)Reflects the volume purchased from third parties at the field level of operations.
2021 compared to 2020. Crude oil marketing revenues increased by $979.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of an increase in the market price of crude oil, which increased revenues by approximately $1,053.3 million, partially offset by lower crude oil volumes, which decreased revenues by approximately $73.7 million. The average crude oil price received was $36.90 for 2020, which increased to $65.48 for 2021. Revenues from legacy volumes are based upon the market price in our other market areas, primarily in the Gulf Coast. The market price of crude oil increased during 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily as a result of increased competition for supply from shippers and marketers to fill obligations to pipelines with the lower crude oil production available, partially offset by lower volumes in 2021.
Our crude oil marketing operating earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $22.3 million as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of inventory liquidation gains of $10.3 million in 2021 as compared to inventory valuation losses of $15.0 million in 2020 (as shown in the following table), and an increase in the average market price of crude oil, partially offset by decreases in crude oil volumes in 2021.
Driver compensation decreased by $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of a decrease in the number of drivers employed by us as well as lower volumes transported in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Insurance costs increased by $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to favorable adjustments to reserves in 2020 for insurance claims resulting from our favorable safety record over the policy period, partially offset by a lower driver count and lower miles driven in 2021. Fuel costs increased by $2.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to higher fuel prices in 2021.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to the timing of purchases and retirements of tractors and other field equipment during 2020 and 2021.
2020 compared to 2019. Crude oil marketing revenues decreased by $797.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of a decrease in the market price of crude oil, which decreased revenues by approximately $641.2 million, and lower crude oil volumes, which decreased revenues by approximately $156.4 million. The average crude oil price received was $56.28 for 2019, which decreased to $36.90 for 2020. The decrease in the market price of crude oil and the lower crude oil volumes produced and available for purchase were due to the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on the economy and the delay of OPEC to agree on crude oil production levels during the second quarter of 2020, both of which resulted in market disruptions that decreased the demand for and price of crude oil.
Our crude oil marketing operating earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $13.1 million as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of inventory valuation losses of $15.0 million in 2020 as compared to inventory liquidation gains of $3.7 million in 2019 (as shown in the following table), decreases in crude oil volumes in 2020, and a decrease in the average market price of crude oil.
Driver compensation decreased by $4.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of a decrease in the number of drivers required for volumes transported in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Insurance costs decreased by $1.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to a decreases in reserves for insurance claims resulting from our favorable safety record over the policy period, lower hours worked by drivers and lower miles driven in 2020. Fuel costs decreased by $3.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 consistent with the lower driver count and lower miles driven in 2020.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to the timing of purchases and retirements of tractors and other field equipment during 2019 and 2020.
Field Level Operating Earnings (Non-GAAP Financial Measure). Inventory valuations and forward commodity contract (derivatives or mark-to-market) valuations are two significant factors affecting comparative crude oil marketing segment operating earnings. As a purchaser and shipper of crude oil, we hold inventory in storage tanks and third-party pipelines. During periods of increasing crude oil prices, we recognize inventory liquidation gains while during periods of falling prices, we recognize inventory liquidation and valuation losses.
Crude oil marketing operating earnings can be affected by the valuations of our forward month commodity contracts (derivative instruments). These non-cash valuations are calculated and recorded at each period end based on the underlying data existing as of such date. We generally enter into these derivative contracts as part of a pricing strategy based on crude oil purchases at the wellhead (field level). The valuation of derivative instruments at period end requires the recognition of non-cash “mark-to-market” gains and losses.
The impact of inventory liquidations and derivative valuations on our crude oil marketing segment operating earnings is summarized in the following reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measure for the periods indicated (in thousands):
____________________
(1)Segment operating earnings included net inventory liquidation gains of $10.3 million, net inventory valuation losses of $15.0 million and net inventory liquidation gains of $3.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)The use of field level operating earnings is unique to us, not a substitute for a GAAP measure and may not be comparable to any similar measures developed by industry participants. We utilize this data to evaluate the profitability of our operations.
Field level operating earnings and field level purchase volumes depict our day-to-day operation of acquiring crude oil at the wellhead, transporting the product and delivering the product to market sales points. Field level operating earnings decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to higher fuel and insurance costs and lower crude oil volumes, partially offset by an increase in the market price of crude oil in 2021.
Field level operating earnings increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to lower operating expenses, partially offset by lower revenues resulting from lower volumes and a decrease in the market price of crude oil in 2020.
We held crude oil inventory at a weighted average composite price as follows at the dates indicated (in barrels and price per barrel):
Historically, prices received for crude oil have been volatile and unpredictable with price volatility expected to continue. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Transportation
Our transportation segment revenues, operating earnings and selected costs were as follows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
____________________
(1)Represents the percentage increase (decrease) from the prior year.
(2)The increase in mileage from 2019 to 2021 is primarily due to the CTL acquisition in June 2020, which added services to new and existing customers, new product lines and six new market areas.
Our revenue rate structure includes a component for fuel costs in which fuel cost fluctuations are largely passed through to the customer over time. Revenues, net of fuel costs, were as follows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
____________________
(1)Revenues, net of fuel costs, is a non-GAAP financial measure and is utilized for internal analysis of the results of our transportation segment.
2021 compared to 2020. Transportation revenues increased by $22.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020. Transportation revenues, net of fuel costs, increased by $19.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020. These increases were primarily due to the CTL acquisition in June 2020 (see Note 6 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), an increase in business activities as a result of continued market recovery after COVID-19 lockdowns, higher transportation rates and additional revenues associated with our new terminals. During 2021, we opened four new terminals in Charleston, West Virginia, West Memphis, Arkansas, Joliet, Illinois, and Augusta, Georgia. Our 2020 revenues were also lower due to fewer miles traveled as a result of decreases in certain business activities of our customers as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak.
Our transportation operating earnings increased by $5.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to increased transportation rates as well as higher revenues as a result of the CTL acquisition, partially offset by higher depreciation and amortization expense related to the timing of new assets placed into service and higher insurance, driver commissions and fuel costs.
Driver commissions increased by $2.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to a higher driver count, increased miles driven in 2021 and an increase in driver pay mid-2021, partially offset by the impact of Hurricane Ida in August 2021, which affected our Louisiana operations, resulting in a loss of days worked by drivers in the area, thus decreasing driver commissions. The impact of the storm affected our Louisiana locations through mid-September.
Fuel costs increased by $3.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of the CTL acquisition, which increased the number of miles traveled during 2021, and an increase in the price of fuel. Insurance costs increased $1.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to the CTL acquisition which resulted in a higher driver count, increased miles driven in 2021 and higher insurance premiums.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of the CTL acquisition in June 2020 and the purchase and lease of new tractors and trailers in 2020 and 2021.
2020 compared to 2019. Transportation revenues increased by $8.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the CTL acquisition in June 2020 and the purchase of transportation assets from EH Transport, Inc. and affiliates (“EH Transport”) in May 2019 (see Note 6 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), partially offset by a decrease in customer activity as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak resulting in lower miles traveled in 2020. Revenues, net of fuel costs, increased by $9.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the higher transportation revenues and miles traveled during 2020.
Our transportation operating earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 were consistent with the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher depreciation and amortization expense related to the CTL acquisition, the EH Transport acquisition and new assets placed into service, and higher insurance and certain other operating expenses, offset by higher revenues and increased miles traveled during 2020.
Fuel costs decreased by $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of lower fuel prices and fewer miles traveled during the first six months of 2020, partially offset by an increase in the number of miles traveled as a result of the CTL acquisition in June 2020. Insurance costs increased by $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to the CTL acquisition which resulted in a higher driver count and increased miles driven in 2020. Maintenance expense increased by $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, as a result of the purchase of new tractors and the retirement of older tractors, as the age of our fleet has decreased.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $3.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the CTL acquisition in June 2020, the EH Transport acquisition in May 2019 and the purchase and lease of new tractors and trailers in 2019 and 2020.
Equipment additions and retirements for the transportation fleet were as follows for the periods indicated:
________________
(1)2020 amounts do not include 163 tractors and 328 trailers purchased in connection with the CTL asset acquisition in June 2020.
(2)2020 amounts do not include 33 tractors and 40 trailers which were acquired under finance lease agreements.
The sales of retired equipment in our transportation segment produced gains of approximately $0.4 million, $0.2 million and $0.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our customers are primarily in the domestic petrochemical industry. Customer demand is affected by low natural gas prices (a basic feedstock cost for the petrochemical industry) and high export demand for petrochemicals.
Pipeline and Storage
Our pipeline and storage segment revenues, operating losses and selected costs were as follows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
____________________
(1)Represents the period from acquisition, October 22, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
(2)Segment revenues include intersegment revenues from our crude oil marketing segment, which are eliminated in consolidation in our consolidated statements of operations.
Volume information was as follows for the periods indicated (in barrels per day):
____________________
(1)2020 amounts represent the period from acquisition, October 22, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
In October 2020, we purchased the VEX Pipeline System. The VEX Pipeline System, with truck and storage terminals at both Cuero and the Port of Victoria, Texas, is a crude oil and condensate pipeline system, which connects the heart of the Eagle Ford Basin to the Gulf Coast waterborne market. The VEX Pipeline System includes 56 miles of 12-inch pipeline, which spans DeWitt County to Victoria County, Texas, with approximately 350,000 barrels of above ground storage, two 8 bay truck offload stations, and access to two docks at the Port of Victoria. The VEX Pipeline System can receive crude oil by pipeline and truck, and has downstream pipeline connections to two terminals today, with potential for additional downstream connection opportunities in the future and has a current capacity of 90,000 barrels per day.
We are focusing on opportunities to increase our pipeline and storage capacity utilization, by identifying opportunities with our existing and new customers to increase volumes. In addition, we are exploring new connections for the pipeline system both upstream and downstream of the pipeline, to increase the crude oil supply and take-away capability of the system.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to higher salaries and wages and related personnel costs, insurance costs and outside service costs, partially offset by lower legal fees and director fees.
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to higher personnel costs, including approximately $0.3 million of additional personnel expenses related to a voluntary early retirement program and terminations for certain employees, and higher rental expense and director fees in 2020, partially offset by lower insurance costs, audit fees and outside service fees.
Gain on Dissolution of Investment
During 2019, we received a cash payment from our upstream crude oil and natural gas exploration and production subsidiary, Adams Resources Exploration Company (“AREC”), totaling approximately $1.0 million, related to the final settlement of its bankruptcy and dissolution. Of the amount received, approximately $0.4 million was offset against a receivable that had been set up as of December 31, 2018 and $0.6 million was recorded as a gain in our consolidated statements of operations during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes is based upon federal and state tax rates, and variations in amounts are consistent with taxable income (loss) in the respective accounting periods.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted and signed into law in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits net operating losses (“NOL”) incurred in tax years 2018, 2019 and 2020 to offset 100 percent of taxable income and be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes.
We have determined that the NOL carryback provision in the CARES Act would result in a cash benefit to us for the fiscal years 2018, 2019 and 2020. We carried back our NOL for fiscal year 2018 to 2013, and in June 2020, we received a cash refund of approximately $2.7 million. We also carried back our NOL for the fiscal year 2019 to 2014, and in April 2021, we received a cash refund of approximately $3.7 million. We have an income tax receivable at December 31, 2021 of approximately $6.8 million for the benefit of carrying back our NOL for the fiscal year 2020 to 2015 and 2016. As we are carrying the losses back to years beginning before January 1, 2018, the receivables were recorded at the previous 35 percent federal tax rate rather than the current statutory rate of 21 percent.
We account for interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as part of our provision for federal and state income taxes. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have not recorded any uncertain tax benefits.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had deferred tax liabilities of approximately $11.3 million and $12.7 million, respectively.
See Note 14 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our primary sources of liquidity are (i) our cash balance, (ii) cash flow from operating activities, (iii) borrowings under our credit agreement and (iv) funds received from the sale of equity securities. Our primary cash requirements include, but are not limited to, (i) ordinary course of business uses, such as the payment of amounts related to the purchase of crude oil, and other expenses, (ii) discretionary capital spending for investments in our business and (iii) dividends to our shareholders. We believe we will have sufficient liquidity through our current cash balances, availability under our credit agreement, expected cash generated from future operations, and the ease of financing tractor and trailer additions through leasing arrangements (should the need arise) to meet our short-term and long-term liquidity needs for the reasonably foreseeable future. Our cash balance and cash flow from operating activities is dependent on the success of future operations. If our cash inflow subsides or turns negative, we will evaluate our investment plan accordingly and remain flexible.
We maintain cash balances in order to meet the timing of day-to-day cash needs. Cash and cash equivalents (excluding restricted cash) and working capital, the excess of current assets over current liabilities, were as follows at the dates indicated (in thousands):
Our cash balance at December 31, 2021 increased by 149.0 percent from December 31, 2020, as discussed further below.
On May 4, 2021, we entered into a Credit Agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Agent and Issuing Lender, under which we may borrow or issue letters of credit in an aggregate of up to $40.0 million under a revolving credit facility, which will mature on May 4, 2024, subject to our compliance with certain financial covenants. At December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Agreement and $6.1 million of letters of credit issued under the Credit Agreement at a fee of 1.75 percent per annum. See Note 12 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
On December 23, 2020, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (“ATM Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc., as agent (the “Agent”). Pursuant to the ATM Agreement, we may offer to sell shares of our common stock through or to the Agent for cash from time to time. We filed a registration statement initially registering an aggregate of $20.0 million of shares of common stock for sale under the ATM Agreement. The total number of shares of common stock to be sold, if any, and the price the shares will be sold at will be determined by us periodically in connection with any such sales, though the total amount sold may not exceed the limitations stated in the registration statement. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of approximately $2.8 million (net of offering costs to B. Riley Securities, Inc. of $0.1 million) from the sale of 97,623 of our common shares at an average price per share of approximately $30.70 under this agreement.
We utilize cash from operations to make discretionary investments in our crude oil marketing, transportation and pipeline and storage businesses. With the exception of operating and finance lease commitments primarily associated with storage tank terminal arrangements, leased office space, tractors, trailers and other equipment, our future commitments and planned investments can be readily curtailed if operating cash flows decrease. See below for information regarding our operating and finance lease obligations. We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably expected to have a material current or future effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The most significant item affecting future increases or decreases in liquidity is earnings from operations, and these earnings are dependent on the success of future operations. See “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
Our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities were as follows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating activities. Net cash flows provided by operating activities was $81.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net cash flows used in operating activities of $44.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash flows from operating activities of $125.0 million was primarily due to higher earnings in 2021 and changes in our working capital accounts.
Net cash flows used in operating activities was $44.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net cash flows provided by operating activities of $46.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net cash flows from operating activities of $90.9 million was primarily due to lower earnings in 2020 and changes in our working capital accounts.
At various times each month, we may make cash prepayments and/or early payments in advance of the normal due date to certain suppliers of crude oil within our crude oil marketing operations. Crude oil supply prepayments are recouped and advanced from month to month as the suppliers deliver product to us. In addition, in order to secure crude oil supply, we may also “early pay” our suppliers in advance of the normal payment due date of the twentieth of the month following the month of production. These “early payments” reduce cash and accounts payable as of the balance sheet date.
We also require certain customers to make similar early payments or to post cash collateral with us in order to support their purchases from us. Early payments and cash collateral received from customers increases cash and reduces accounts receivable as of the balance sheet date.
Early payments received from customers and prepayments made to suppliers were as follows at the dates indicated (in thousands):
We rely heavily on our ability to obtain open-line trade credit from our suppliers especially with respect to our crude oil marketing operations. During December 2019, we received several early payments from certain customers in our crude oil marketing operations, while during December 2020, we received significantly less in early payments from customers primarily due to the volatility in the price of crude oil. During December 2021, we received several early payments from certain customers primarily due to the increase in the price of crude oil, and as such, our cash balance increased by approximately $58.5 million at December 31, 2021 relative to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $9.6 million when compared to 2020. This decrease in net cash flows used in investing activities was primarily due a decrease of $20.2 million in cash paid for asset acquisitions ($10.0 million was paid in October 2020 for the purchase the VEX Pipeline System and $9.2 million was paid in June 2020 for the purchase of the CTL transportation assets (see Note 6 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information)). This decrease in net cash flows used in investing activities was partially offset by an increase of $7.4 million in capital spending for property and equipment (see “Capital Spending” below), a decrease of $2.2 million in cash proceeds from sales of assets and a decrease of $1.0 million in insurance and state collateral refunds in 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $16.4 million when compared to 2019. This decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to a decrease of $30.7 million in capital spending for property and equipment (see “Capital Spending” below), an increase of $0.8 million in cash proceeds from sales of assets and an increase of $0.4 million in insurance and state collateral refunds in 2020. These decreases in net cash flows used in investing activities were partially offset by an increase in cash paid for asset acquisitions ($10.0 million was paid in October 2020 for the purchase the VEX Pipeline System and $9.2 million was paid in June 2020 for the purchase of the CTL transportation assets, while $5.6 million was paid in May 2019 for the purchase of the EH Transport assets) and the receipt in 2019 of $1.0 million in cash proceeds related to the final settlement of AREC’s bankruptcy.
Financing activities. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $9.2 million when compared to 2020. This increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to the payment of the $10.0 million outstanding payable related to the purchase of the VEX Pipeline System in October 2020 and an increase of $2.0 million in principal repayments made for finance lease obligations (see “Material Cash Requirements” below for information regarding our finance lease obligations). During 2021, we borrowed and repaid $8.0 million under the Credit Agreement, the borrowing of which was used to repay the amount due for the remaining purchase price of the VEX Pipeline System. During both of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we paid aggregate cash dividends of $0.96 per common share, or totals of $4.1 million and $4.1 million, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of approximately $2.8 million from the sale of 97,623 of our common share under the ATM Agreement.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $0.9 million when compared to 2019. This increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to an increase of $0.6 million in principal repayments made for finance lease obligations. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we paid aggregate cash dividends of $0.96 per common share, or a total of $4.1 million, and $0.94 per common share, or a total of $4.0 million, respectively.
Capital Spending
We use cash from operations and existing cash balances to make discretionary investments in our businesses. Capital spending was as follows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
_______________
(1)Amounts for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, do not include approximately $2.1 million, $3.6 million and $4.1 million, respectively, of tractors and other equipment acquired under finance leases.
(2)Amounts for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 do not include approximately $9.2 million and $6.4 million of capital spending related to the acquisitions of CTL and EH Transport, respectively. Amount for the year ended December 31, 2020 does not include approximately $7.3 million of tractors and trailers acquired under finance leases.
(3)Amount for the year ended December 31, 2020 does not include approximately $10.0 million of capital spending related to the acquisition of the VEX Pipeline System.
(4)Amounts relate to the purchase of software and equipment and leasehold improvements at our corporate headquarters, which are not attributed or allocated to any of our reporting segments.
Crude oil marketing. Capital expenditures during 2021 were for the purchase of 16 tractors, 2 trailers and other field equipment. Capital expenditures during 2020 were primarily for the purchase of 16 tractors and other field equipment, and during 2019, amounts were primarily for the purchase of 43 tractors and other field equipment.
Transportation. Capital expenditures during 2021 were for the purchase of 28 tractors, 52 trailers and computer software and equipment. Capital expenditures during 2020 were for the purchase of other field equipment and computer software and equipment. As a result of the uncertainty relating to the economic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we significantly reduced our capital spending in 2020 and, as a result, entered into finance lease agreements for the use of 33 tractors and 40 trailers during 2020. Capital expenditures during 2019 were for the purchase of 152 tractors and 77 trailers. See “Material Cash Requirements” below for information regarding our finance lease obligations.
Pipeline and storage. Capital expenditures for 2021 were for the purchase of computer equipment and field equipment.
Material Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations with material cash requirements at December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
___________________
(1)Amounts represent our principal contractual commitments, including interest, outstanding under finance leases for certain tractors, trailers, tank storage and throughput arrangements and other equipment.
(2)Amounts represent rental obligations under non-cancelable operating leases and terminal arrangements with terms in excess of one year.
(3)Amount represents commitments to purchase certain quantities of crude oil substantially in January 2022 in connection with our crude oil marketing activities. These commodity purchase obligations are the basis for commodity sales, which generate the cash flow necessary to meet these purchase obligations.
(4)Amount represents commitments to purchase 43 new tractors in our transportation business and 52 new tractors and 2 new trailers in our crude oil marketing business.
We maintain certain lease arrangements with independent truck owner-operators for use of their equipment and driver services on a month-to-month basis. In addition, we enter into office space and certain lease and terminal access contracts in order to provide tank storage and dock access for our crude oil marketing business. These storage and access contracts require certain minimum monthly payments for the term of the contracts.
Rental expense was as follows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Insurance
Our primary insurance needs are workers’ compensation, automobile and umbrella liability coverage for our trucking fleet and medical insurance for our employees. See Note 18 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Insurance costs were as follows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Related Party Transactions
For information regarding our related party transactions, see Note 10 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Recent Accounting Developments
For information regarding recent accounting developments, see Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Outlook
Our focus in 2022 will be to expand our core businesses while delivering value to our shareholders. We will work to achieve positive results in markets with strong competition and margin pressures throughout all segments of our business.
Our major objectives for 2022 are as follows:
•Crude oil marketing - We plan to focus on increasing margins to maximize cash flow and capturing midstream opportunities in an increasingly volatile market. We will utilize a new fleet dispatch and maintenance software system to help drive more efficiency in our fleet operations and lower our operating costs, which we believe will help drive increased profitability. In addition, we will look for opportunities to increase our trucking fleet to add to our overall ability to gather and distribute crude oil.
•Transportation - We plan to continue to increase truck utilization, upgrade our fleet quality and enhance driver retention and recruitment. We also plan to capitalize on our recent acquisitions to improve quality of revenue through improved efficiencies, and we will continue to look for ways to expand our terminal footprint to put us in a position to better compete for new business.
•Pipeline and storage - We will focus on opportunities to increase our pipeline and storage capacity utilization, by identifying opportunities with our existing and new customers to increase volumes. In addition, we will explore new connections for the pipeline system both upstream and downstream of the pipeline, to increase the crude oil supply and take-away capability of the system.
•Strategic business development - We will deploy a disciplined investment approach to growth in our three segments and funding new growth opportunities that are adjacent and complimentary to existing operating activities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In our financial reporting processes, we employ methods, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of our financial statements. These methods, estimates and assumptions also affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for each reporting period. Investors should be aware that actual results could differ from these estimates if the underlying assumptions prove to be incorrect. The following sections discuss the use of estimates within our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Valuation and Amortization Methods of Customer Relationship Intangible Assets
Customer relationship intangible assets represent the estimated economic value assigned to relationships between an acquisition target and its various customers to whom we did not have a previous relationship. These customer relationships provide us with access to those customers to whom we did not have a previous relationship and allows us to enter product markets in which we have not previously participated.
In order to estimate the fair value of the customer relationships, we use a discounted cash flow analysis that relies on Level 3 fair value inputs. Level 3 fair values are based on unobservable inputs. Unobservable inputs are used to measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available, thereby allowing for situations in which there is little, if any, market activity for the asset at the measurement date. The Level 3 inputs generally include such items as the rate of retention of the current customers of the acquisition target as of the valuation date, our historical customer retention rate and projected future revenues associated with the customers. The customers expected to remain with us after the transaction are included in the valuation of the customer relationships. For our existing customer relationship intangible assets, we are amortizing these assets over a period of seven years, using a modified straight-line approach.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the carrying values of our customer relationship intangible assets were $3.3 million and $4.1 million, respectively. See Note 6 and Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Fair Value Accounting
We enter into certain forward commodity contracts that are required to be recorded at fair value, and these contracts are recorded as either an asset or liability measured at its fair value. Changes in fair value are recognized immediately in earnings unless the derivatives qualify for, and we elect, cash flow hedge accounting. We had no contracts designated for hedge accounting during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
We utilize a market approach to valuing our commodity contracts. On a contract by contract, forward month by forward month basis, we obtain observable market data for valuing our contracts that typically have durations of less than 18 months. At December 31, 2021, all of our market value measurements were based on inputs based on observable market data (Level 2 inputs). See discussion under “Fair Value Measurements” in Note 2 and Note 13 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our fair value contracts give rise to market risk, which represents the potential loss that may result from a change in the market value of a particular commitment. We monitor and manage our exposure to market risk to ensure compliance with our risk management policies. These risk management policies are regularly assessed to ensure their appropriateness given our objectives, strategies and current market conditions.
Liability and Contingency Accruals, including those related to Insurance Liabilities
We establish a liability under the automobile and workers’ compensation insurance policies for expected claims incurred but not reported on a monthly basis. We retain a third-party consulting actuary to establish loss development factors, based on historical claims experience as well as industry experience. We apply those factors to current claims information to derive an estimate of the ultimate claims liability. See Note 18 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
From time to time as incidental to our operations, we become involved in various accidents, lawsuits and/or disputes. As an operator of an extensive trucking fleet, we are a party to motor vehicle accidents, worker compensation claims or other items of general liability as are typical for the industry. In addition, we have extensive operations that must comply with a wide variety of tax laws, environmental laws and labor laws, among others. Should an incident occur, we evaluate the claim based on its nature, the facts and circumstances and the applicability of insurance coverage. When our assessment indicates that it is probable that a liability has occurred and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated, we make appropriate accruals or disclosure. We base our estimates on all known facts at the time and our assessment of the ultimate outcome, including consultation with external experts and counsel. We revise these estimates as additional information is obtained or resolution is achieved. At December 31, 2021, we do not believe any of our outstanding legal matters would have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, we adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) and all related Accounting Standards Updates by applying the modified retrospective approach to all contracts that were not completed on January 1, 2018. The new revenue standard’s core principle is that a company will recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The new revenue standard requires entities to recognize revenue through the application of a five-step model, which includes: identification of the contract; identification of the performance obligations; determination of the transaction price; allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and recognition of revenue as the entity satisfies the performance obligations.
Our revenues are primarily generated from the marketing, transportation, storage and terminalling of crude oil and other related products and the tank truck transportation of liquid chemicals, pressurized gases, asphalt and dry bulk. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account in ASC 606. To identify the performance obligations, we considered all of the products or services promised in the contracts with customers, whether explicitly stated or implied based on customary business practices. Revenue is recognized when, or as, each performance obligation is satisfied under terms of the contract. Payment is typically due in full within 30 days of the invoice date.
Crude oil marketing segment. Crude oil marketing activities generate revenues from the sale and delivery of crude oil purchased either directly from producers or on the open market. Most of our crude oil purchase and sale contracts qualify and are designated as non-trading activities, and we consider these contracts as normal purchases and sales activity. For normal purchases and sales, our customers are invoiced monthly based upon contractually agreed upon terms with revenue recognized in the month in which the physical product is delivered to the customer, generally upon delivery of the product to the customer. Revenue is recognized based on the transaction price and the quantity delivered.
The majority of our crude oil sales contracts have multiple distinct performance obligations as the promise to transfer the individual goods (e.g., barrels of crude oil) is separately identifiable from the other goods promised within the contracts. Our performance obligations are satisfied at a point in time. For normal sales arrangements, revenue is recognized in the month in which control of the physical product is transferred to the customer, generally upon delivery of the product to the customer.
Transportation segment. Transportation activities generate revenue from the truck transportation of liquid chemicals, pressurized gases, asphalt or dry bulk for customers. Each sales order is associated with our master transportation agreements and is considered a distinct performance obligation. The performance obligations associated with this segment are satisfied over time as the goods and services are delivered.
Pipeline and storage segment. Pipeline and storage activities generate revenue by transporting crude oil on our pipeline and providing storage and terminalling services for our customers. Our operations generally consist of fee-based activities associated with the transportation of crude oil and providing storage and terminalling services for crude oil. Revenues from pipeline tariffs and fees are associated with the transportation of crude oil at a published tariff. We primarily recognize pipeline tariff and fee revenues over time as services are rendered, based on the volumes transported. As is common in the pipeline transportation industry, our tariffs incorporate a loss allowance factor. We recognize the allowance volumes collected as part of the transaction price and record this non-cash consideration at fair value, measured as of the contract inception date.
Storage fees are typically recognized in revenue ratably over the term of the contract regardless of the actual storage capacity utilized as our performance obligation is to make available storage capacity for a period of time. Terminalling fees are recognized as the crude oil enters or exits the terminal and are received from or delivered to the connecting carrier or third-party terminal, as applicable.
See Note 3 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.