Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Authentic Equity Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Item 1. Business, Item 1A. Risk Factors, and Item 15. Financial Statements and the accompanying notes and other data, all of which appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands company on September 29, 2020. We were formed for the purpose entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more target businesses (the “Business Combination”).
Our sponsor is Authentic Equity Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for the initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on January 14, 2021. On January 20, 2021, we consummated an Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 3,000,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $230.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $13.3 million, of which approximately $8.1 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 6,600,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.8 million, in a private placement to the Sponsor and the sale of a certain rights to General Electric Pension Trust (“GEPT”) for gross proceeds of $824,500 which will allow GEPT to purchase up to $50.0 million of Forward Purchase Units (as defined in Note 5 to the accompanying financial statements included in Item 15 to this Form Annual Report on Form 10-K) immediately prior to the closing of an initial Business Combination.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $230.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, the sale of Private Placement Warrants and the sale of the GEPT Rights, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a Business Combination successfully. Our initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on the interest earned on the trust account) at the time of the signing of the agreement to enter into the initial Business Combination. However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its tax obligations, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $442,000 in operating bank account and a working capital deficit of approximately $201,000.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from Sponsor to cover for certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, a loan of approximately $97,000 from the Sponsor pursuant to a promissory note originally issued on September 30, 2020 (the “Note”), and certain portion of the proceeds from the Private Placement and sale of the GEPT Right held outside of the Trust Account. We repaid the Note in full on January 20, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
We may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, an affiliate of our Sponsor, or our officers or directors. Our officers, directors and Sponsor, or their affiliates, may, but are not obligated to, loan our Company funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, reducing overhead expenses, and extending the terms and due dates of certain accrued expenses and other liabilities. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have determined that the working capital deficit and mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 20, 2023. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception to December 31, 2021 was for our formation, preparation for our Initial Public Offering, and, since the closing of our Initial Public Offering, a search for business combination candidates. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $7.0 million, which consisted of approximately $10.6 million of gain from change in fair value of derivative instruments, approximately $22,000 of net gain from investments held in Trust Account, partially offset by approximately $1.5 million of general and administrative expenses, approximately $702,000 offering costs associated with issuance of public and private placement warrants, approximately $1.4 million loss on excess of fair value over cash received for private placement warrant and approximately $114,000 of related party administrative fees.
For the period from September 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $34,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On October 1, 2020, our Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for issuance of 5,750,000 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001, (the “Founder Shares”). In December 2020, we effected a share capitalization with respect to the Class B ordinary shares resulting in an aggregate of 7,000,000 Founder Shares outstanding. The Sponsor subsequently transferred 25,000 Class B ordinary shares to each of the independent directors, which shares were not subject to forfeiture in the event the underwriters’ over-allotment option was not exercised. The Sponsor agreed to forfeit (a) up to 750,000 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters and (b) up to 1,250,000 Founder Shares depending on the number of units purchased under the Forward Purchase Agreement if such number is below 5,000,000. The forfeiture would be adjusted to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering plus the number of Class A ordinary shares that may be sold pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement. On January 20, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its over-allotment option; thus, 750,000 Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The Sponsor, our directors and executive officers and GEPT agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (a) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (b) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share subdivisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public Shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 6,600,000 Private Placement Warrants for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.8 million, in a private placement to our Sponsor and the sale of certain rights to GEPT for the gross proceeds of $824,500 that allow them to purchase up to $50.0 million of Forward Purchase Units that closed simultaneously with the Initial Public Offering.
Each whole Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by our Sponsor, GEPT or their permitted transferees.
Our Sponsor and officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On September 30, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover for expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant the Note. This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed $96,500 under the Note and fully repaid the Note on January 20, 2021.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the effective date of the prospectus, we agreed to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $114,000 in expense for these services. As of December 31, 2021, there was $10,000 in accounts payable - related party outstanding, as reflected in the accompanying balance sheets. There were no such amounts for the period from September 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
Forward Purchase Agreement
In connection with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, we entered into a forward purchase agreement (the “Forward Purchase Agreement”) with GEPT, pursuant to which, in exchange for $824,500 of proceeds paid to us simultaneously with the closing of the Initial public Offering, GEPT has the right, in its discretion, to purchase up to the lesser of (i) $50.0 million of units and (ii) a number of units equal to 19.99% of the pro forma equity outstanding at the time of the closing of our initial Business Combination, including but not limited to, any ordinary shares issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering, the Forward Purchase Agreement or any private placement or other offering or to any seller in the initial Business Combination (the “Forward Purchase Units”), with each unit consisting of one Class A ordinary share (the “Forward Purchase Shares”) and 0.425 of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment (the “Forward Purchase Warrants”), for a purchase price of $10.00 per unit, in a private placement to occur immediately prior to the closing of the initial Business Combination.
In consideration for the purchase for the Forward Purchase Units, if GEPT purchases the maximum number of Forward Purchase Units available to it under the Forward Purchase Agreement, we will issue to GEPT, at the closing of our initial Business Combination and prior to the conversion of the Class B ordinary shares into Class A ordinary shares in accordance with the terms thereof (the “GEPT Issuance”):
● a number of Class B ordinary shares (the “GEPT Class B ordinary shares”) that is equal to 12.5% of the aggregate number of Class B ordinary shares outstanding at the time of the initial Business Combination prior to the conversion of such Class B ordinary shares into Class A ordinary shares pursuant to the terms thereof and after giving effect to the issuance of the GEPT Class B ordinary shares and any other Class B ordinary shares as a result of anti-dilution rights or other adjustments and the number of Class B ordinary shares transferred, assigned, sold or forfeited in connection with the initial Business Combination but excluding 115,000 Class B ordinary shares from such calculation (the “Post-Business Combination Class B ordinary shares”) (provided, however, that if the Founder Shares are converted into Class A ordinary shares prior to the date of our initial Business Combination, GEPT will receive a number of Class A ordinary shares equal to the number of Class A ordinary shares that it would have been entitled to pursuant to the GEPT Issuance); and
● a number of Private Placement Warrants equal to 12.5% of the aggregate number of Private Placement Warrants outstanding at the time of the Company’s initial business combination prior to the conversion of such Class B ordinary shares into Class A ordinary shares pursuant to the terms thereof and after giving effect to any Private Placement Warrants transferred, assigned, sold or forfeited in connection with the initial Business Combination (the “Post-Business Combination Private Placement Warrants”).
In connection with such issuance, our Sponsor agreed to forfeit to us for no consideration a number of Class B ordinary shares and Private Placement Warrants (the “Sponsor Forfeiture”) such that after the Sponsor Forfeiture and the GEPT Issuance, our Sponsor will own (i) a number of Class B ordinary shares equal to 87.5% of the number of Post-Business Combination Class B ordinary shares plus 15,000 Class B ordinary shares, and (ii) a number of Private Placement Warrants equal to 87.5% of the number of Post-Business Combination Private Placement Warrants.
We will determine the number of Forward Purchase Units to be sold under the Forward Purchase Agreement and GEPT’s obligation to purchase such units will be subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including, among others, the delivery by GEPT of a notice to us that it will purchase the Forward Purchase Units in whole or in part. The rights of GEPT under the Forward Purchase Agreement do not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by our public shareholders. If GEPT does not purchase the maximum number of forward purchase units available to it under the Forward Purchase Agreement, GEPT will not be entitled to receive any of the Founder Shares or Private Placement Warrants described above, and we will be entitled to retain the $824,500 paid to us by GEPT.
The Forward Purchase Warrants purchased by GEPT under the Forward Purchase Agreement will have the same terms as the Public Warrants. The Private Placement Warrants to be issued to GEPT as described above will have the same terms and be subject to the same transfer restrictions as the Private Placement Warrants held by our Sponsor.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders were entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provide that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement, we agreed to use reasonable best efforts to: (i) file within 30 days after the closing of the initial Business Combination a registration statement with the SEC for a secondary offering of the Forward Purchase Shares and the Forward Purchase Warrants (and underlying Class A ordinary shares); (ii) cause such registration statement to be declared effective promptly thereafter but in no event later than sixty (60) days after the initial filing; (iii) maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement until the earliest of (A) the date on which our Sponsor or its assignees cease to hold the securities covered thereby, and (B) the date all of the securities covered thereby can be sold publicly without restriction or limitation under Rule 144 of the Securities Act; and (iv), after such registration statement is declared effective, cause us to conduct firm commitment underwritten offerings, subject to certain limitations. In addition, the Forward Purchase Agreement provides for certain “piggy-back” registration rights to the holders of forward purchase securities to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the cost of registering these securities.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 20, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $4.6 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $8.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 23,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets. There were no Class A ordinary shares outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Under ASC 480-10S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of the redeemable Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (loss) per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants to purchase 18,100,000 Class A ordinary shares since their exercise is contingent upon future events. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Derivative Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of its financial instruments, including issued share purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (the “Public Warrants”), the Private Placement Warrants and units committed to be issued in connection with forward purchase agreement are recognized as derivative assets or liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments and forward purchase units as derivative assets or liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The assets and liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering was initially measured using a binomial lattice model and subsequently been measured at each measurement date based on the market price of such warrants. The fair value of warrants issued in connection with the Private Placement was initially measured using Black-Scholes Option Pricing model and subsequently using the market value of the public warrants when they were separately listed and traded. The fair value of the units committed to be issued in connection with the forward purchase agreement has been estimated using Black-Scholes Option Pricing model at each measurement date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021 using a modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.