Item 7. Management’s Discussion And Analysis of Financial Condition And Results of Operations
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K
including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K,
words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “initial business combination”). We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement that occurred simultaneously with the completion of our initial public offering, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of shares of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one
basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
•
other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
In the short term, we expect to incur costs in connection in the pursuit of our Initial Business Combination plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our Initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the period from February 9, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $11,639,507, which consists of formation and administrative costs of $640,595 which were offset by net other income of $12,280,102. Other income consisted of interest income on the funds in Trust of $16,146 and an increase in the fair value of the warrant liabilities of $17,270,000 which were offset by warrant related costs of $926,044 and excess fair value of private placement warrants over proceeds of $4,080,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
,” management believes that the funds held outside the Trust Account, as well as access to funds pursuant to a commitment letter from the Sponsor, will enable the Company to sustain operations for a period of at least one (1) year from the issuance date of these financial statements Accordingly, management has since reevaluated the Company’s liquidity and financial condition and determined that, following the completion of the Initial Public Offering and the availability of funds pursuant to a commitment letter from the Sponsor, sufficient capital exists to sustain operations during the Combination Period and therefore substantial doubt has been alleviated.
On November 2, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 23,000,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 12,000,000 private placement warrants (to the sponsor and underwriters at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $6,550,000.
Following the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement units, a total of $234,600,000 was placed in the trust account and we had $2,817,141 of cash held outside of the trust account, after payment of costs related to the initial public offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $13,355,589 in transaction costs, including $4,600,000 of underwriting fees, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $705,589 of other costs.
For the period from February 9, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,128,074, consisting primarily of net income of $11,639,507, offset by interest income on the funds held in the Trust $16,146 and an increase in the fair value of the warrant liabilities of $17,270,000 which were offset by warrant related costs of $926,044 and excess fair value of private placement warrants over proceeds of $4,080,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $487,509 of cash from operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account (excluding deferred underwriting fees) to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $979,226 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into private placement units at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business a year from the date that the financial statements are issued. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement units, and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space, utilities and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on August 7, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policy:
Common stock subject to possible redemption
We account for common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.”
Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable shares of Class A Common Stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized a measurement adjustment from initial book value to redemption amount value.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging
.” The Company’s derivative instruments are recorded at fair value as of the closing date of the Initial Public Offering (November 2, 2021) and re-valued
at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current
based on whether or not net-cash
settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. The Company has determined the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are derivative instruments. As the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants meet the definition of a derivative, the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement
, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Warrants Instruments
We evaluated the Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40,
“Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity
”, and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers as well as provisions that provided for potential changes to the settlement amounts dependent upon the characteristics of the holder of the warrant, precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815 and are not eligible for an exception from derivative accounting, the Warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Balance Sheet. Upon consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company used a Monte Carlo simulation model to value the Public Warrants and a modified Black-Scholes model to value the Private Placement Warrants. The Company allocated the proceeds received from (i) the sale of Units (which is inclusive of one share of Class A common stock and one-half of one Public Warrant), (ii) the sale of Private Warrants, and (iii) the issuance of shares of Class B common stock, first to the warrants based on their fair values as determined at initial measurement, with the remaining proceeds allocated to shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption (temporary equity) and Class B common stock (permanent equity) based on their relative fair values at the initial measurement date. The Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants were classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy at the measurement dates due to the use of unobservable inputs.
As of December 31, 2021, the Public Warrants were valued using the publicly available price for the Warrant and are classified as Level 1 on the Fair Value Hierarchy. As of December 31, 2021, the Company used a modified Black-Scholes model to value the Private Placement Warrants. The Company relied upon the implied volatility of the Public Warrants and the implied volatilities of comparable companies and the closing price as of December 31, 2021 per Public Warrant to estimate the volatility for the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021, the Private Placement Warrants were classified within Level 3 of the Fair Value Hierarchy at the measurement dates due to the use of unobservable inputs.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid to transfer of a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. US GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
•
Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical instruments in active markets;
•
Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
•
Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
Net income per share
Net income per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company applies the two-class
method in calculating earnings per share. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The calculation of diluted income per share of common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Public Offering and (ii) Private Placement, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the two-class
method. As a result, diluted earnings per share of common stock is the same as basic earnings per common stock for the periods presented. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 23,500,000 shares of Class A common stock in the aggregate.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.