ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our financial statements and related following Item 16 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary of The Information Contained in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
●
Company Overview. Discussion of our business and overall analysis of financial and other highlights affecting us, to provide context for the remainder of MD&A.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our consolidated balance sheets and cash flows and discussion of our financial condition.
● Results of Operations. An analysis of our financial results from inception (June 17, 2021), through December 31, 2021.
Company Overview
We are a newly organized blank check company incorporated in June 2021 as a Delaware corporation whose business purpose is to effect a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to as our initial business combination.
While we may pursue an initial business combination opportunity in any business, industry, sector or geographical location, we intend to focus on industries that complement our management team’s background, and to capitalize on the ability of our management team to identify and acquire a business and it is our current intention to pursue prospective targets that are focused in the pharmaceutical and medical devices sectors. We anticipate focusing our investment effort broadly across the pharmaceutical and medical devices sectors. We believe that our investment and operating expertise across multiple industry verticals will give us a large, addressable universe of potential targets. The diversity of the target universe and the number of largely uncorrelated subsectors maximizes that likelihood that our management team will be able to identify and execute an attractive transaction.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,075,602 and working capital of $1,303,449.
The Company’s liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 were satisfied through the proceeds of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares, a loan of $190,101 under an unsecured and noninterest bearing promissory note obtained from our sponsor, which was repaid following our IPO, and from the net proceeds from the consummation of the IPO and private placement held outside of the trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States at JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash in the Trust Account of $107,102,449. The Company intends to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions) to complete its initial business combination. The Company may withdraw interest to pay taxes.
Until the consummation of its initial business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination. We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. The Company’s sponsor, officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs (“Working Capital Loans”). To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using the funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable and accrued liabilities, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination. The Company does not believe it will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating the business. However, if the Company’s estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate the business prior to the initial business combination. Moreover, the Company may need to obtain additional financing either to complete the initial business combination or to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the initial business combination, in which case the Company may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination.
We cannot provide any assurance that such new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
If the Company anticipates that it may not be able to consummate an initial business combination within 12 months, the Company may, by resolution of the Company’s board if requested by the sponsor, extend the period of time to consummate an initial business combination up to two times, each by an additional three months (for a total of up to 18 months to complete an initial business combination), subject to the sponsor depositing additional funds into the Trust Account. In order to extend the time available for the Company to consummate its initial business combination, the sponsor or its affiliates or designees, upon five days advance notice prior to the applicable deadline, must deposit into the Trust Account for each three-month extension, $1,050,000 ($0.10 per share) on or prior to the date of the applicable deadline, up to an aggregate of $2,100,000, or approximately $0.20 per share. Any such payments would be made in the form of a loan. Any such loans will be non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation of the Company’s initial business combination. If the Company completes an initial business combination, it would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to it. If the Company does not complete an initial business combination, we will not repay such loans. Furthermore, a letter agreement entered into with the Company’s initial stockholders contains a provision pursuant to which the sponsor has agreed to waive its right to be repaid for such loans out of the funds held in the Trust Account in the event that the Company does not complete an initial business combination. In the event that the Company receives notice from the sponsor five days prior to the applicable deadline of its wish for the Company to effect an extension, the Company intends to issue a press release announcing such intention at least three days prior to the applicable deadline. In addition, the Company intends to issue a press release the day after the applicable deadline announcing whether or not the funds had been timely deposited. The sponsor and its affiliates or designees are not obligated to fund the Trust Account to extend the time for the Company to complete its initial business combination. The public stockholders will not be afforded an opportunity to vote on the extension of time to consummate an initial business combination from 12 months to 18 months described above or redeem their shares in connection with such extensions.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception to our IPO was in preparation for our IPO, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from June 17, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $504,519 from formation, offering and operating costs.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares), are entitled to certain registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggy-back” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.10 per Unit, or $1,050,000 in the aggregate (reflecting the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option), paid at the closing of the IPO. A total of an aggregate of $3,150,000 (reflecting the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option), will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions upon completion of the initial business combination. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we plan to rely on rules which allow us to, among other things, delay the required (i) provision of an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provision of all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) compliance with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) regarding mandatory audit rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclosure certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 10,500,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial public offering and the concurrent private placement to purchase an aggregate of 5,411,000 warrants to purchase shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per common share is the same as basic earnings per common share for the period.
Net loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating loss per share.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no outstanding off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For more information on recently issued accounting standards, see “Note 2- Significant Accounting Policies”, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein following Item 16 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.