Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our “Selected Consolidated Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC RESPONSE
The Company has been impacted by the outbreak of the novel coronavirus, known as COVID-19, which has spread throughout the world. Our top priority during the COVID-19 pandemic is protecting the health and safety of our employees and their families, along with our customers and community. We introduced policies and procedures to increase workplace flexibility, such as working remotely where possible to reduce the number of people who are on campus each day. As a global supplier of Critical Infrastructure Sectors, as defined by the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, we have supported and continue to support customers during the pandemic. In the interest of public health, all onsite operations generally use the minimum number of people to safely execute tasks and follow enhanced safety and health protocols including screenings, social distancing and use of personal protective equipment.
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on customers and customers’ customers, the Company experienced a drop in customer orders and revenues during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 and in the last quarter of fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. In response, the Company implemented cost reduction initiatives to mitigate operating losses, including mandatory vacation days, shutdown days and executive staff pay reductions. The Company eliminated all cost reduction initiatives in the last quarter of the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021.
The Company will continue to monitor the situation. As of the date of this report, the Company cannot predict with certainty the potential effects the COVID-19 pandemic may have on the Company’s business and its operating results. While the overall environment remains uncertain, the Company continues to invest in priority areas with the objective of driving profitable growth over the long term.
OVERVIEW
We were founded in 1977 to develop and manufacture burn-in and test equipment for the semiconductor industry. Since our inception, we have installed over 2,500 systems at semiconductor manufacturers, semiconductor contract assemblers and burn-in and test service companies worldwide. Our principal products currently are the FOX-XP, FOX-NP, and FOX-CP wafer contact and singulated die/module parallel test and burn-in systems, WaferPak Aligner, WaferPak contactors, DiePak Loader, DiePak carriers and test fixtures.
Our net sales consist primarily of sales of systems, WaferPak Aligners and DiePak Loaders, WaferPak contactors, DiePak carriers, test fixtures, upgrades and spare parts, revenues from service contracts, and engineering development charges. Our selling arrangements may include contractual customer acceptance provisions, which are mostly deemed perfunctory or inconsequential, and installation of the product occurs after shipment and transfer of title.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to customer programs and incentives, product returns, bad debts, inventories, investments, income taxes, financing operations, warranty obligations, and long-term service contracts, among others. Our estimates are derived from historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Those results form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
REVENUE RECOGNITION
The Company recognizes revenue when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services by following a five-step process: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price, and (5) recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation, as further described below.
Performance obligations include sales of systems, contactors, spare parts, and services, as well as installation and training services included in customer contracts.
A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation. In determining the transaction price, the Company evaluates whether the price is subject to refund or adjustment to determine the net consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled. The Company generally does not grant return privileges, except for defective products during the warranty period.
For contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the transaction price to the performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. Standalone selling prices are based on multiple factors including, but not limited to, historical discounting trends for products and services and pricing practices in different geographies.
Revenue for systems and spares are recognized at a point in time, which is generally upon shipment or delivery. Revenue from services is recognized over time as services are completed or ratably over the contractual period of generally one year or less.
The Company has elected the practical expedient to not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component as the Company’s standard payment terms are less than one year.
We sell our products primarily through a direct sales force. In certain international markets, we sell our products through independent distributors.
Transfer of control is evidenced upon passage of title and risk of loss to the customer unless we are required to provide additional services.
ALLOWANCE FOR DOUBTFUL ACCOUNTS
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts to reserve for potentially uncollectible trade receivables. We also review our trade receivables by aging category to identify specific customers with known disputes or collection issues. We exercise judgment when determining the adequacy of these reserves as we evaluate historical bad debt trends, general economic conditions in the United States and internationally and changes in customer financial conditions. Uncollectible receivables are recorded as bad debt expense when all efforts to collect have been exhausted and recoveries are recognized when they are received.
WARRANTY OBLIGATIONS
We provide and record the estimated cost of product warranties at the time revenues are recognized on products shipped. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, our warranty obligation is affected by product failure rates, material usage and service delivery costs incurred in correcting a product failure. Our estimate of warranty reserve is based on management’s assessment of future warranty obligations and on historical warranty obligations. Should actual product failure rates, material usage or service delivery costs differ from our estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required.
INVENTORY OBSOLESCENCE
In each of the last three fiscal years, we wrote down our inventory for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventory by an amount equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions, see Note 6, “Balance Sheet Detail.” If future market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required.
INCOME TAXES
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset-and-liability method as required by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period corresponding to the enactment date. Under ASC 740, a valuation allowance is required when it is more likely than not all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized through generating sufficient future taxable income.
FASB ASC Subtopic 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty of Income Taxes, (“ASC 740-10”) defines the criterion an individual tax position must meet for any part of the benefit of the tax position to be recognized in financial statements prepared in conformity with GAAP. The Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not such tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based solely on the technical merits of the respective tax position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a tax position should be measured based on the largest benefit having a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority. In accordance with the disclosure requirements of ASC 740-10, the Company’s policy on income statement classification of interest and penalties related to income tax obligations is to include such items as part of income taxes.
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION EXPENSE
Stock-based compensation expense consists of expenses for stock options, restricted stock units, or RSUs, and employee stock purchase plan, or ESPP, purchase rights. Stock-based compensation cost for stock options and ESPP purchase rights is measured at each grant date, based on the fair value of the award using the Black-Scholes option valuation model, and is recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period. This model was developed for use in estimating the value of publicly traded options that have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. Our employee stock options have characteristics significantly different from those of publicly traded options. For RSUs, stock-based compensation cost is based on the fair value of our common stock at the grant date, and is recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period. All of our stock-based compensation is accounted for as an equity instrument.
The fair value of each option grant and the right to purchase shares under our ESPP are estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model with assumptions concerning expected term, stock price volatility, expected dividend yield, risk-free interest rate and the expected life of the award. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements for detailed information relating to stock-based compensation and the stock option plan and the ESPP.
RESTRUCTURING
We record a charge for restructuring when management commits to a restructuring plan, the restructuring plan identifies all significant actions, the period of time to complete the restructuring plan indicates that significant changes to the plan are not likely, and individuals who are impacted have been notified of the pending involuntary termination.
Restructuring charges include severance payments, legal fees, and write-off of assets. For employees that are not required to render services beyond a minimum retention period, the severance expense is recognized at the communication date based upon its fair value. For employees who are required to render service until they are terminated in order to receive the severance, the severance costs are measured initially at the communication date based upon its fair value, and recognized ratably over the future service period.
There were no restructuring charges during fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 and 2021. In the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, we recognized $220,000 in restructuring charges related to the dissolution of Aehr Test Systems Japan K.K (“ATS-Japan”), a majority owned subsidiary. The restructuring charges included severance payments for individuals impacted in this reduction, legal fees associated with the dissolution process, and write-off of assets.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth statements of operations data as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated.
FISCAL YEAR ENDED MAY 31, 2022 COMPARED TO FISCAL YEAR ENDED MAY 31, 2021
NET SALES. Net sales increased to $50.8 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 from $16.6 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, an increase of 206.2%. The increase in net sales for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 was primarily due to the increases in net sales of our wafer-level products. Net sales of our wafer-level products for fiscal 2022 were $48.9 million, and increased approximately $33.9 million from fiscal 2021 due to stronger demand related to silicon carbide applications.
GROSS PROFIT. Gross profit increased to $23.7 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 from $6.0 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, an increase of 292.3%. Gross profit margin increased to 46.6% for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 from 36.3% for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021. The increase in gross profit margin was primarily the result of manufacturing efficiencies due to an increase in net sales.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE. SG&A expenses were $10.0 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022, compared with $6.6 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, an increase of 53.1%. The increase in SG&A expenses was primarily the result of increased bonuses, stock compensation, and commission expense due to an increase in net sales and profitability, and an increase in headcount.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. R&D expenses were $5.8 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022, compared with $3.7 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, an increase of 59.3%. The increase in R&D expenses was primarily due to increases in employment-related expenses of $1.7 million, outside services of $316,000, and project expenses of $155,000. The increase in employment-related expenses was primarily the result of increased bonuses and stock compensation due to an increase in net sales and profitability, and an increase in headcount.
INTEREST INCOME (EXPENSE), NET. Interest income, net was $13,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022, compared with interest expense of $46,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021. The interest expense for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 was from the Paycheck Protection Program Loan (the “PPP Loan”) that we obtained on April 23, 2020.
NET GAIN FROM DISSOLUTION OF AEHR TEST SYSTEMS JAPAN. Net gain from dissolution of Aehr Test Systems Japan was $2.2 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, due to the release of the cumulative translation adjustment in connection with the complete liquidation of Aehr Test Systems Japan subsidiary in July 2020.
GAIN FROM FORGIVENESS OF PPP LOAN. On June 12, 2021, we received confirmation from the SVB that on June 4, 2021, the Small Business Administration approved our PPP Loan forgiveness application for the entire PPP Loan balance of $1,679,000 and interest totaling $19,000, and we recognized a gain of $1,698,000.
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NET. Other income, net was $30,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022, compared with other expense, net of $162,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021. The change in other income (expense), net was primarily due to gains or losses realized in connection with the fluctuation in the value of the dollar compared to foreign currencies during the referenced periods.
INCOME TAX (EXPENSE) BENEFIT. Income tax expense for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 was $91,000 compared with income tax benefit of $177,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021. During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, the currency translation adjustment balance was released and the residual income tax effect of $215,000 was recorded pursuant to the inter-period allocation rules in connection with the complete liquidation of Aehr Test Systems Japan subsidiary in July 2020.
FISCAL YEAR ENDED MAY 31, 2021 COMPARED TO FISCAL YEAR ENDED MAY 31, 2020
NET SALES. Net sales decreased to $16.6 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 from $22.3 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, a decrease of 25.5%. The decrease in net sales for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 was impacted by the continued challenging global business environment created by the COVID-19 pandemic which resulted in the decrease in net sales of both our wafer-level products and Test During Burn-in (TDBI) products. Net sales of our wafer-level products for fiscal 2021 were $15.0 million, and decreased approximately $4.8 million from fiscal 2020. Net sales of our TDBI products for fiscal 2021 were $1.6 million, and decreased approximately $928,000 from fiscal 2020.
GROSS PROFIT. Gross profit decreased to $6.0 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 from $8.4 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, a decrease of 27.9%. Gross profit margin decreased to 36.3% for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 from 37.6% for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. The decrease in gross profit margin was primarily due to manufacturing inefficiencies due to a lower level of net sales and increased warranty provision related to a voluntary replacement of a component to improve long term reliability of our systems, partially offset by a lower level of inventory reserves recorded.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE. SG&A expenses were $6.6 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, compared with $7.5 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, a decrease of 12.9%. The decrease in SG&A expenses was primarily due to decreases in employment related expenses as a result of cost reduction initiatives implemented in fiscal 2021.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. R&D expenses were $3.7 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, compared with $3.4 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, an increase of 7.9%. The increase in R&D expenses was primarily due to increases in project expenses of $169,000 and employment related expenses of $104,000.
RESTRUCTURING. There were no restructuring charges for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021. Restructuring charges for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 were related to the dissolution of Aehr Test Systems Japan K.K (ATS-Japan), a majority owned subsidiary. In connection with the dissolution plan, the Company recognized approximately $220,000 related to severance payments for individuals impacted in this reduction and legal fees associated with the dissolution process in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020.
INTEREST INCOME (EXPENSE), NET. Interest expense, net was $46,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 compared with interest income, net which was $10,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. The interest expense for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 was from the PPP Loan that we obtained on April 23, 2020.
NET GAIN FROM DISSOLUTION OF AEHR TEST SYSTEMS JAPAN. Net gain from dissolution of Aehr Test Systems Japan was $2.2 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, due to the release of the cumulative translation adjustment in connection with the complete liquidation of Aehr Test Systems Japan subsidiary in July 2020.
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NET. Other expense, net was $162,000 and $11,000 for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in other expense, net was primarily due to losses realized in connection with the fluctuation in the value of the dollar compared to foreign currencies during the referenced periods.
INCOME TAX (EXPENSE) BENEFIT. Income tax benefit for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 was $177,000 compared with income tax expense of $36,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, the currency translation adjustment balance was released and the residual income tax effect of $215,000 was recorded pursuant to the inter-period allocation rules in connection with the complete liquidation of Aehr Test Systems Japan subsidiary in July 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We consider cash and cash equivalents as liquid and available for use. As of May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, we had $31.5 million and $4.6 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1.5 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022, compared with net cash used by operating activities of $2.7 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021. For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022, net cash provided by operating activities was primarily the result of net income of $9.5 million, as adjusted to exclude the effect of forgiveness of PPP loan of $1.7 million, and a non-cash charge of stock-based compensation expense of $3.0 million and depreciation and amortization of $307,000. Other changes in cash from operations primarily resulted from increases in accounts receivable and inventories of $7.8 million and $6.7 million, respectively, partially offset by increases in customer deposits and deferred revenue, accrued expenses, and accounts payable of $2.2 million, $1.5 million and $1.4 million, respectively. The increase in accounts receivable was primarily due to the increase in and timing of revenue generated toward the end of the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022. The increase in inventory was to support expected future shipments for customer orders. The increase in customer deposits and deferred revenue was primarily due to the receipt of additional down payments from certain customers. The increase in accrued expenses was primarily due to an increase in accrued employment related expenses including profit sharing, commissions, bonuses, and vacations. The increase in accounts payable was primarily due to inventory purchases to support future shipments. For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of the net loss of $2.0 million, as adjusted to exclude the effect of net gain from dissolution of Aehr Test Systems Japan of $2.4 million, including an income tax benefit of $215,000, a non-cash charge for stock-based compensation expense of $1.1 million and depreciation and amortization of $310,000. Net cash used in operations was also impacted by increases in accounts receivable and inventories of $1.4 million and $972,000, respectively, partially offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1.9 million and $732,000, respectively. The increase in accounts receivable was primarily due to higher shipment activities toward the end of fiscal year ended May 31, 2021. The increase in inventory was to support expected future shipments for customer orders. The increase in accounts payable was primarily due to inventory purchases to support future shipments. The increase in accrued expenses was primarily due to increases in warranty provision and accrued employment related expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities was $416,000 and $227,000 for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, was due to the purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities provided cash of $25.8 million and $2.0 million for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 was primarily due to the net proceeds from issuance of common stock from public offering of $24.0 million, and the proceeds from the issuance of common stock under employee benefit plans of $3.1 million, partially offset by the net payment of the line of credit of $1.4 million. Net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 was due to $1.4 million borrowing from our line of credit and $560,000 in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under employee plans.
The effect of fluctuation in exchange rates increased cash by $49,000 and $117,000 for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The changes were due to the fluctuation in the value of the dollar compared to foreign currencies.
As of May 31, 2022 and 2021, we had working capital of $49.0 million and $10.1 million, respectively.
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of the net loss of $2.8 million, as adjusted to exclude the effect of non-cash charges of stock-based compensation expense of $910,000 and depreciation and amortization of $384,000. Net cash used in operations was also impacted by decreases in customer deposits and deferred revenue of $1.5 million and in accounts payable of $1.0 million, partially offset by decreases in inventories and accounts receivable of $1.2 million each. The decrease in customer deposits and deferred revenue was primarily due to the decrease in backlog of customer orders with down payments. The decrease in accounts payable was primarily due to a reduction in inventory purchases. The decrease in inventories was primarily due to the increase in inventory reserves related to older products. The decrease in accounts receivable was primarily due to lower shipment activities toward the end of the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $163,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 was due to the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 was due to the proceeds of $1.7 million from the PPP Loan, and the net proceeds from issuance of common stock under employee plans of $493,000.
The effect of fluctuation in exchange rates increased cash by $20,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 due to the fluctuation in the value of the dollar compared to foreign currencies.
We lease our manufacturing and office space under operating leases. We entered into a non-cancelable operating lease agreement for our United States manufacturing and office facilities, which was renewed in February 2018 and expires in July 2023. Under that lease agreement, we are responsible for payments of utilities, taxes and insurance.
From time to time, we evaluate potential acquisitions of businesses, products or technologies that complement our business. If consummated, any such transactions may use a portion of our working capital or require the issuance of equity. We have no present understandings, commitments or agreements with respect to any material acquisitions.
We anticipate that the existing cash balance together with future income from operations, collections of existing accounts receivable, revenue from our existing backlog of products as of this filing date, the sale of inventory on hand, deposits and down payments against significant orders will be adequate to meet our working capital and capital equipment requirement needs over the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of our spending to support research and development activities, the timing and cost of establishing additional sales and marketing capabilities, the timing and cost to introduce new and enhanced products and the timing and cost to implement new manufacturing technologies. While we successfully raised $25 million in the ATM public offering in October 2021 as a portion of a $75 million shelf registration, in the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. Any additional debt financing obtained by us in the future could also involve restrictive covenants relating to our capital-raising activities and other financial and operational matters, which may make it more difficult for us to obtain additional capital and to pursue business opportunities, including potential acquisitions. Additionally, if we raise additional funds through further issuances of equity, convertible debt securities or other securities convertible into equity, our existing stockholders could suffer significant dilution in their percentage ownership of the Company, and any new equity securities we issue could have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing or financing on terms satisfactory to us when we require it, our ability to continue to grow or support our business and to respond to business challenges could be significantly limited.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET FINANCING
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements and have not established any special purpose or variable interest entities.
OVERVIEW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table provides a summary of such arrangements, or contractual obligations.
(1) Shown above are our binding purchase obligations. The large majority of our purchase orders are cancelable by either party, which if canceled may result in a negotiation with the vendor to determine if there shall be any restocking or cancellation fees payable to the vendor.
In the normal course of business to facilitate sales of our products, we indemnify other parties, including customers, with respect to certain matters. We have agreed to hold the other party harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations or covenants, or from intellectual property infringement or other claims. These agreements may limit the time period within which an indemnification claim can be made and the amount of the claim. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our officers and directors, and our bylaws contain similar indemnification obligations to our agents.
It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount under these indemnification agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. To date, our payments under these agreements have not had a material impact on our operating results, financial position or cash flows.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 1, “Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.