Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management's discussion and analysis reviews our consolidated financial position at December 31, 2021 compared with December 31, 2020, and our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and where appropriate, factors that may affect future financial performance. This analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements, notes thereto and selected consolidated financial data appearing elsewhere in this report.
For information and analysis relating to our financial condition and consolidated results of operations as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, see Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information
All statements, trend analysis and other information contained in this report and elsewhere (such as in filings by us with the SEC, press releases, presentations by us or management or oral statements) may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Forward-looking statements may relate to markets for our products, trends in our operations or financial results, strategic alternatives, future operations, strategies, plans, partnerships, investments, share buybacks and other financial developments, and are subject to assumptions, risks and uncertainties. Statements such as [“guidance”, “expect”, “anticipate”, “strong”, “believe”, “intend”, “goal”, “objective”, “target”, “position”, “potential”, “will”, “may”, “would”, “should”, “can”, “deliver”, “accelerate”, “enable”, “estimate”, “projects”, “outlook”, “opportunity”] or similar words, as well as specific projections of future events or results qualify as forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements, by their nature, are subject to a variety of inherent risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results projected. Many of these risks and uncertainties cannot be controlled by the Company. Factors that may cause our actual decisions or results to differ materially from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements include, among other things:
•results differing from assumptions, estimates, and models.
•interest rate condition changes.
•investments losses or failures to grow as quickly as expected due to market, credit, liquidity, concentration, default, and other risks.
•option costs increases.
•counterparty credit risks.
•third parties service-provider failures to perform or to comply with legal or regulatory requirements.
•poor attraction and retention of customers or distributors due to competitors’ greater resources, broader array of products, and higher ratings.
•information technology and communication systems failures or security breaches.
•credit or financial strength downgrades.
•inability to raise additional capital to support our business and sustain our growth on favorable terms.
•U.S. and global capital market and economic deterioration due to major public health issues, including the COVID-19 pandemic, political or social developments, or otherwise.
•failure to authorize and pay dividends on our preferred stock.
•subsidiaries’ inability to pay dividends or make other payments to us.
•failure at reinsurance, investment management, or third-party capital arrangements.
•failure to prevent excessive risk-taking.
•failure of policies and procedures to protect from operational risks.
•increased litigation, regulatory examinations, and tax audits.
•changes to laws, regulations, accounting, and benchmarking standards.
•takeover or combination delays or deterrence by laws, corporate governance documents, or change-in-control agreements.
•effects of climate changes, or responses to it.
•failure of efforts to meet environmental, social, and governance standards and to enhance sustainability.
For a detailed discussion of these and other factors that might affect our performance, see Item 1A of this report.
Executive Summary
As previously noted, we began to implement an updated strategy, referred to as AEL 2.0, after having undertaken a thorough review of our business in 2020. During 2021, we made significant progress in the execution of the AEL 2.0 strategy in all four key pillars: Go-to-Market, Investment Management, Capital Structure and Foundational Capabilities. See Item 1. Business - Strategy for more information on the AEL 2.0 strategy and progress made during 2021.
Excellent customer service teamed with our ability to offer innovative insurance products that provide principal protection and lifetime income continued to result in significant sales of our annuity products. In 2021, our sales were $6.0 billion which increased cash and investments to a balance in excess of $64.0 billion at December 31, 2021. Our sales for the last five years have ranged from $3.7 billion to $6.0 billion.
The economic and personal investing environments continued to be conducive to the sale of fixed index and fixed rate annuity products as retirees and others looked to put their money in instruments that will protect their principal and provide them with consistent cash flow sources in their retirement years and a paycheck for life. Sales of both fixed index and fixed rate annuity products increased during 2021.
Total sales increased to $6.0 billion in 2021 compared to $3.7 billion in 2020. The increase in fixed rate annuity products was driven by the introduction of competitive three and five-year single premium deferred annuity products at both American Equity Life and Eagle Life. The increase in fixed index annuity products was driven by product refreshes at both American Equity Life and Eagle Life, including the addition of two new proprietary indices to our refreshed AssetShield product and the introduction of two new products at American Equity Life. Sales levels in 2021 also benefited from an improving sales environment compared to 2020. We lowered crediting rates on our single premium deferred annuity products during the fourth quarter of 2021 in order to focus on sales of fixed index annuity products as we believe such products align with the transformation of the Company from a spread based return on equity insurer to more of a fee-based return on asset insurer.
We continue to be in the midst of an unprecedented period of low interest rates and low yields for investments with the credit quality we prefer. In response, we have been reducing policyholder crediting rates for new annuities and existing annuities. Active management of policyholder crediting rates resulted in a lower aggregate cost of money during 2021. We continue to have flexibility to reduce our crediting rates if necessary and could decrease our cost of money by approximately 62 basis points if we reduce current rates to guaranteed minimums. We now have 7 sleeves of private asset sectors in which we have conviction, specifically as a landlord in both single family rental homes and multi-family apartments, residential whole loans for individuals and professional investors, infrastructure debt, infrastructure equity, with a priority around sub-sectors like energy transition, middle market loans to private companies, and annual recurring revenue based lending to companies in the software and technology sector. During 2021, we deployed $3.4 billion in private assets with expected returns in the 5.1% to 5.2% range. In aggregate, we successfully repositioned the portfolio in 2021 with close to $10 billion of new assets purchases resulting in an estimated portfolio yield 3.85% at the end of 2021. We are on track to achieve close to or above 4% aggregate portfolio yield in 2022 as we further ramp our allocation in private assets from approximately 15% at year-end 2021 to 30-40% over time.
On October 18, 2020, we announced an agreement with Brookfield under which Brookfield will acquire up to a 19.9% ownership interest of common stock in the Company. The equity investment by Brookfield will take place in two stages: an initial purchase of a 9.9% equity interest at $37.00 per share which closed on November 30, 2020 with Brookfield purchasing 9,106,042 shares, and a second purchase of up to an incremental 10.0% equity interest, at the greater value of $37.00 per share or adjusted book value per share (excluding AOCI and the net impact of fair value accounting for derivatives and embedded derivatives). The second equity investment was subject to finalization of a reinsurance transaction that closed on October 8, 2021, receipt of applicable regulatory approvals and other closing conditions. Regulatory approval related to the second equity investment was received on December 29, 2021 and an additional 6,775,000 shares were issued to Brookfield at $37.33 per share in January of 2022. Brookfield also received one seat on the Company’s Board of Directors following the initial equity investment.
On October 18, 2020, the Company's Board of Directors approved a $500 million share repurchase program. The purpose of the share repurchase program is to both offset dilution from the issuance of shares to Brookfield and to institute a regular cash return program for shareholders. On November 19, 2021, the Company's Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional $500 million of Company common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we have repurchased approximately 9.1 million shares of our common stock at an average price of $29.04 per common share. Through February 25, 2022, we have repurchased approximately 11.6 million shares of our common shares at an average price of $31.78 per common share and have approximately $630 million remaining under our share repurchase program.
We specialize in the sale of individual annuities (primarily fixed and fixed index deferred annuities) through IMOs, agents, banks and broker-dealers. Fixed and fixed index annuities are an important product for Americans looking to fund their retirement needs as annuities have the ability to provide retirees a paycheck for life.
Under U.S. GAAP, premium collections for deferred annuities are reported as deposit liabilities instead of as revenues. Similarly, cash payments to policyholders are reported as decreases in the liabilities for policyholder account balances and not as expenses. Sources of revenues for products accounted for as deposit liabilities are net investment income, surrender charges assessed against policy withdrawals and fees deducted from policyholder account balances for lifetime income benefit riders, net realized gains (losses) on investments and changes in fair value of derivatives. Components of expenses for products accounted for as deposit liabilities are interest sensitive and index product benefits (primarily interest credited to account balances and changes in the liability for lifetime income benefit riders), changes in fair value of embedded derivatives, amortization of deferred sales inducements and deferred policy acquisition costs, other operating costs and expenses and income taxes.
Our profitability depends in large part upon:
•the amount of assets under our management,
•investment spreads we earn on our policyholder account balances,
•our ability to manage our investment portfolio to maximize returns and minimize risks such as interest rate changes and defaults or credit losses,
•our ability to appropriately price for lifetime income benefit riders offered on certain of our fixed rate and fixed index annuity policies,
•our ability to manage interest rates credited to policyholders and costs of the options purchased to fund the annual index credits on our fixed index annuities,
•our ability to manage the costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions paid to agents and distribution partners and bonuses credited to policyholders),
•our ability to manage our operating expenses, and
•income taxes.
Life insurance companies are subject to NAIC RBC requirements and rating agencies utilize a form of RBC to partially determine capital strength of insurance companies. Our RBC ratio at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was 400% and 372%, respectively.
We intend to manage our capitalization in normal economic conditions at a level that is consistent with rating agency capital at or above the A-level. It may drift downwards, at times, for reasons including, but not limited to, realized credit losses or temporary increases in required risk capital for ratings migrations. This level is intended to reflect a level that is consistent with the rating agencies expectations for capital adequacy ratios at different points in an economic cycle. This implies operating with a peak to trough swing whereby capital is absorbing risk at the low point of the economic cycle.
On August 21, 2020 S&P affirmed its "A-" financial strength rating on American Equity Life and its "BBB-" long-term issuer credit rating on American Equity Investment Life Holding Company, and revised its outlook to "stable" from "negative" primarily due to capital management actions taken during 2020.
On July 29, 2021, A.M. Best affirmed its "A-" financial strength rating on American Equity Investment Life Insurance Company and its subsidiaries, American Equity Investment Life Insurance Company of New York and Eagle Life Insurance Company, its "bbb-" long-term issuer credit rating of American Equity Investment Life Holding Company, its "bbb-" senior unsecured debt ratings, and its "bb" perpetual, non-cumulative preferred stock ratings. The outlook for these credit ratings of "stable" was also affirmed by A.M. Best on July 29, 2021.
On April 14, 2021, Fitch affirmed its "A-" financial strength rating on American Equity Investment Life Insurance Company and its life insurance subsidiaries, its "BBB" issuer default rating on American Equity Investment Life Holding Company and its "BBB-" senior unsecured debt ratings, and revised its outlook to "stable" from "negative" on its financial strength, issuer default and senior unsecured debt ratings.
Earnings from products accounted for as deposit liabilities are primarily generated from the excess of net investment income earned over the interest credited or the cost of providing index credits to the policyholder, or the "investment spread." Our investment spread is summarized as follows:
The cost of money for fixed index annuities and average crediting rates for fixed rate annuities are computed based upon policyholder account balances and do not include the impact of amortization of deferred sales inducements. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs and Deferred Sales Inducements. With respect to our fixed index annuities, the cost of money includes the average crediting rate on amounts allocated to the fixed rate strategy and expenses we incur to fund the annual index credits. Proceeds received upon expiration of call options purchased to fund annual index credits are recorded as part of the change in fair value of derivatives, and are largely offset by an expense for interest credited to annuity policyholder account balances. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Policy Liabilities for Fixed Index Annuities and Financial Condition - Derivative Instruments.
Average yield on invested assets decreased primarily as a result of a higher level of cash and cash equivalent holdings during 2021 compared to 2020. The higher level of cash and cash equivalent holdings was a result of our decision to execute a series of trades in the fourth quarter of 2020 designed to raise liquidity to fund block reinsurance transactions and de-risk the investment portfolio. See Net investment income. Active management of policyholder crediting rates has continued to lower the aggregate cost of money. We expect to have flexibility to reduce our crediting rates if necessary and could decrease our cost of money by approximately 62 basis points if we reduce current rates to guaranteed minimums.
Results of Operations for the Three Years Ended December 31, 2021
Annuity deposits by product type collected during 2021, 2020 and 2019, were as follows:
Annuity deposits before coinsurance ceded increased 62% during 2021 compared to 2020. Annuity deposits after coinsurance ceded increased 52% during 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in sales in 2021 compared to 2020 was driven by the sales of multi-year fixed rate annuity products introduced in late 2020 at both American Equity Life and Eagle Life and increased sales of fixed index annuities at both American Equity Life and Eagle Life. This growth is due to fixed index annuity product refreshes at both American Equity Life and Eagle Life, the introduction of two new products at American Equity Life and strong sales of single premium deferred annuity products at both Eagle Life and American Equity Life during the first three quarters of 2021. Sales levels in 2021 also benefited from an improving sales environment compared to 2020.
Prior to January 1, 2021, we had been ceding 80% of the annuity deposits received from certain multi-year rate guaranteed annuities and 20% of certain fixed index annuities sold by Eagle Life through broker/dealers and banks to an unaffiliated reinsurer. Beginning January 1, 2021, no new business is being ceded to the unaffiliated reinsurer. Effective July 1, 2021, we ceded 100% of an in-force block of fixed index annuities and began ceding 75% of certain fixed index annuities issued after July 1, 2021 to North End Re which caused the increase in coinsurance ceded premiums for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020.
Net income available to common stockholders decreased 33% to $430.3 million in 2021 and increased 159% to $637.9 million in 2020 from $246.1 million in 2019. The decrease in net income available to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily a result of the impact of assumption updates made during 2021 compared to the impact of assumption updates made during 2020.
Net income available to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negatively impacted by a decrease in the aggregate investment spread as previously noted. Net income, in general, is impacted by the volume of business in force and the investment spread earned on this business. The average amount of annuity account balances outstanding (net of annuity liabilities ceded under coinsurance agreements) increased 1% to $53.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $53.3 billion in 2020 and increased 2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $52.3 billion in 2019. Our investment spread measured in dollars was $1.2 billion, $1.3 billion, and $1.3 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our investment spread has been negatively impacted by the extended low interest rate environment and by holding higher levels of cash and cash equivalents (see Net investment income). The higher levels of cash and cash equivalent holdings decreased in the fourth quarter of 2021 with the execution of the reinsurance treaty with North End Re. We expect to invest most of the cash balances above our target cash levels into traditional fixed income securities and privately sourced assets during early 2022. The impact of the extended low interest rate environment and higher cash and cash equivalent holdings has been partially offset by a lower aggregate cost of money due to our continued active management of new business and renewal rates. Net income available to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negatively impacted by an increase in other operating costs and expenses (see Other operating costs and expenses). We expect the level of other operating costs and expenses to settle into the $60 million per quarter range for the foreseeable future as we continue to execute on the AEL 2.0 strategy.
Net income is impacted by the change in fair value of derivatives and embedded derivatives which fluctuates from year to year based upon changes in fair values of call options purchased to fund the annual index credits for fixed index annuities and changes in interest rates used to discount the embedded derivative liability. See Change in fair value of derivatives, Change in fair value of embedded derivatives, Amortization of deferred sales inducements and Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs.
We periodically update the key assumptions used in the calculation of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements retrospectively through an unlocking process when estimates of current or future gross profits/margins (including the impact of realized investment gains and losses) to be realized from a group of products are revised. In addition, we periodically update the assumptions used in determining the liability for lifetime income benefit riders and the embedded derivative component of our fixed index annuity policy benefit reserves as experience develops that is different from our assumptions.
Net income available to common stockholders for 2021, 2020 and 2019 includes effects from updates to assumptions as follows:
We review these assumptions quarterly and as a result of these reviews, we made updates to assumptions during each year. In addition, we implemented an enhanced actuarial valuation system during 2019, and as a result, our 2019 assumption updates include model refinements resulting from the implementation.
The most significant assumption updates made in 2021 were to investment spread assumptions, including the net investment earned rate and crediting rate on policies, lifetime income benefit rider utilization assumptions, mortality assumptions, and lapse rate assumptions as discussed below. In addition, we made assumption updates to change the reinsurance expense assumption associated with the refinancing of statutory redundant reserves effective October 1, 2021.
Due to the continued low interest rate environment, we updated our assumption for investment spread for American Equity Life to 2.25% in the near term and increasing to 2.50% over an eight-year reversion period and our assumption for crediting/discount rate to 1.55% increasing to 2.10% over an eight-year reversion period. Prior to these assumption updates, our long-term assumption for aggregate investment spread was at 2.60% at the end of an eight-year reversion period, with a near term crediting/discount rate of 1.90% increasing to 2.10% over an eight-year reversion period. The assumption change to decrease aggregate investment spread resulted in lower expected future gross profits as compared to previous estimates and a decrease in the balances of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements.
We updated lapse rate and mortality assumptions based on historical experience. For certain annuity products without a lifetime income benefit rider, the lapse rate assumption was increased in more recent cohorts to reflect higher lapses on polices with a market value adjustment ("MVA") feature. For other annuity products with a lifetime income benefit rider, the population was bifurcated based on whether policies had utilized the rider. For those policies which had utilized the rider, the lapse rate assumption was decreased in later durations. The overall mortality assumption was lowered to reflect historical experience. The net impact of the updates to the lapse rate and mortality assumptions resulted in higher expected future gross profits as compared to previous estimates and an increase in the balances of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements. The net impact of the updates to lapse rate and mortality assumptions resulted in an increase in the liability for lifetime income benefit riders due to a greater amount of expected benefit payments in excess of account values.
We updated the lifetime income benefit rider utilization assumption based on historical experience. The ultimate utilization assumption was lowered for policies with a fee rider and certain policies with a no-fee rider. In addition, the utilization assumption was changed to reflect seasonality with higher utilization rates during the first quarter of each year. The net impact of the updates to the utilization assumption resulted in a decrease in the liability for lifetime income benefit riders due to a lower amount of expected benefits payments due to lower expected utilization. The net impact of the updates to the utilization assumption resulted in higher expected future gross profits as compared to previous estimates and an increase in the balances of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements.
The most significant assumption update to the calculation of the fair value of the embedded derivative component of our fixed index annuity policy benefit reserve in 2021 was the change in lapse rate assumptions discussed above. The net impact of the updates to the lapse rate assumption resulted in a decrease in the embedded derivative component of our fixed index annuity policy benefit reserves as less funds ultimately qualify for excess benefits.
The most significant assumption updates from the 2020 review were to investment spread assumptions, including the net investment earned rate and crediting rates on policies, as well as updates to lapse rate and partial withdrawal assumptions.
Due to the economic and low interest rate environments, we updated our assumption for aggregate investment spread to 2.40% in the near-term increasing to 2.60% over an eight-year reversion period and our assumption for crediting/discount rate to 1.60% increasing to 2.10% over an eight-year reversion period. Prior to these assumption updates, our long-term assumption for aggregate investment spread was steady at 2.60%, with a near term crediting/discount rate of 1.90% increasing to 2.90% over a 20-year reversion period. The assumption update to decrease aggregate investment spread resulted in lower expected future gross profits as compared to previous estimates and a decrease in the balances of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements. The decrease in the crediting rate, which is used as the discount rate in the calculation of the liability for lifetime income benefit riders, resulted in an increase in the liability for lifetime income benefit riders.
We updated lapse rate and partial withdrawal assumptions based on actual historical experience. For certain annuity products without a lifetime income benefit rider, lapse rate and partial withdrawal assumptions were increased while for certain annuity products with a lifetime income benefit rider, lapse rate and partial withdrawal assumptions were decreased. The net impact of the updates to lapse rate and partial withdrawal assumptions resulted in lower expected future gross profits as compared to previous estimates and a decrease in the balances of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements. The net impact of the updates to lapse rate and partial withdrawal assumptions resulted in an increase in the liability for lifetime income benefit riders due to a greater amount of expected benefit payments in excess of account values.
The most significant assumption update to the calculation of the fair value of the embedded derivative component of our fixed index annuity policy benefit reserves during 2020 was a decrease in the crediting rate/option budget to 2.10% from 2.90% as a result of a revised estimate of the cost of options. This assumption change resulted in a decrease in the fair value of the embedded derivative component of our fixed index annuity policy benefit reserves due to a reduction in the projected policy contract values over the expected lives of the contracts. The net impact of the the updates to lapse and partial withdrawal assumptions noted above resulted in an increase in the embedded derivative component of our fixed index annuity policy benefit reserves as more funds ultimately qualify for excess benefits. In addition, during 2020, we refined the derivation of the discount rate used in calculating the fair value of embedded derivatives which increased the discount rate and resulted in a decrease in the change in fair value of embedded derivatives offset by increases in amortization of deferred sales inducements and deferred policy acquisition costs.
Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders, a non-GAAP financial measure increased 320% to $290.5 million in 2021 and decreased 87% to $69.1 million in 2020 from $548.2 million in 2019. The increase in non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily a result of the impact of assumption updates made during 2021 compared to the impact of assumption updates made during 2020. Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders and Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders per common share - assuming dilution, excluding the impact of notable items, for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $368.5 million and $3.90 per share, respectively. Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders and Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders per common share - assuming dilution, excluding the impact of notable items, for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $379.2 million and $4.11 per share, respectively. Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was negatively impacted by a decrease in the aggregate investment spread as previously noted. In addition, Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negatively impacted by an increase in other operating costs and expenses (see Other operating costs and expenses).
In addition to net income available to common stockholders, we have consistently utilized non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders, a non-GAAP financial measure commonly used in the life insurance industry, as an economic measure to evaluate our financial performance. Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders equals net income available to common stockholders adjusted to eliminate the impact of items that fluctuate from year to year in a manner unrelated to core operations, and we believe measures excluding their impact are useful in analyzing operating trends. The most significant adjustments to arrive at non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders eliminate the impact of fair value accounting for our fixed index annuity business and are not economic in nature but rather impact the timing of reported results. We believe the combined presentation and evaluation of non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders together with net income available to common stockholders provides information that may enhance an investor's understanding of our underlying results and profitability.
Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders is not a substitute for net income available to common stockholders determined in accordance with GAAP. The adjustments made to derive non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders are important to understand our overall results from operations and, if evaluated without proper context, non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders possesses material limitations. As an example, we could produce a low level of net income available to common stockholders or a net loss available to common stockholders in a given period, despite strong operating performance, if in that period we experience significant net realized losses from our investment portfolio. We could also produce a high level of net income available to common stockholders in a given period, despite poor operating performance, if in that period we generate significant net realized gains from our investment portfolio. As an example of another limitation of non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders, it does not include the decrease in cash flows expected to be collected as a result of credit losses on financial assets. Therefore, our management reviews net realized investment gains (losses) and analyses of our net investment income, including impacts related to credit losses, in connection with their review of our investment portfolio. In addition, our management examines net income available to common stockholders as part of their review of our overall financial results.
The adjustments made to net income available to common stockholders to arrive at non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders and non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders, excluding notable items for 2021, 2020 and 2019 are set forth in the table that follows:
The amounts disclosed in the reconciliation above are presented net of related adjustments to amortization of deferred sales inducements and deferred policy acquisition costs and accretion of lifetime income benefit rider reserves where applicable. Notable items reflect the after-tax impact to non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders for certain items that do not reflect the company's expected ongoing operations. Notable items primarily include the impact from actuarial assumption updates. The presentation of notable items is intended to help investors better understand our results and to evaluate and forecast those results.
Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders for 2021, 2020 and 2019 includes effects from updates to assumptions as follows:
The impact to net income available to common stockholders and non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders from assumption updates varies due to the impact of fair value accounting for our fixed index annuity business as non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders eliminates the impact of fair value accounting for our fixed index annuity business. While the assumption updates made during 2021, 2020 and 2019 were consistently applied, the impact to net income available to common stockholders and non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders varies due to different amortization rates being applied to gross profit adjustments included in the valuation.
Annuity product charges (surrender charges assessed against policy withdrawals and fees deducted from policyholder account balances for lifetime income benefit riders) decreased 3% to $242.6 million in 2021 and increased 5% to $251.2 million in 2020 from $240.0 million in 2019. The components of annuity product charges are set forth in the table that follows:
The decrease in annuity product charges during 2021 was attributable to lower average surrender charges collected on withdrawals subject to surrender charges primarily due to an increase in market value adjustments on such surrenders and a decrease in fees assessed for lifetime income benefit riders due to a smaller volume of business in force subject to the fee slightly offset by an increase in the average fees being charged as compared to prior periods. See Interest sensitive and index product benefits below for corresponding expense recognized on lifetime income benefit riders.
Net investment income decreased 7% to $2.0 billion in 2021 and 5% to $2.2 billion in 2020 from $2.3 billion in 2019. The decrease for 2021 compared to 2020 was attributable to a decrease in the average yield earned on invested assets during 2021 compared to 2020. Average invested assets excluding derivative instruments (on an amortized cost basis) increased 3% to $54.8 billion in 2021 and 4% to $53.1 billion in 2020 compared to $51.1 billion in 2019.
The average yield earned on average invested assets was 3.73%, 4.12% and 4.52% for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in yield earned on average invested assets in 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in our level of cash and cash equivalent holdings as previously described and a decline in yields on our floating rate investment portfolio due to decreases in the average benchmark rates associated with these investments offset by an increase in mark to market gains on investment partnerships due to changes in market valuations.
The expected return on investments purchased during 2021 was 3.92%, net of third-party investment management expenses. Purchases for 2021 included $6.4 billion of fixed maturity securities with an expected return of 3.25% and $3.4 billion of privately sourced assets with an expected return of 5.19%. The privately sourced assets include investments in investment real estate, middle market loans, infrastructure debt, mortgage loans and strategic investments in limited partnerships. The expected return on investments purchased during 2020 and 2019 was 3.84% and 3.88%, respectively.
Change in fair value of derivatives consists of call options purchased to fund annual index credits on fixed index annuities, and an interest rate swap and interest rate caps that hedged our floating rate subordinated debentures. The interest rate swap and interest rate caps were terminated during 2019 and 2020 in conjunction with the redemption of our floating rate subordinated debentures. The components of change in fair value of derivatives are as follows:
The differences between the change in fair value of derivatives between years for call options are primarily due to the performance of the indices upon which our call options are based which impacts the level of gains on call option expirations, the fair values of those call options and changes in the fair values of those call options between years. The changes in gain (loss) on option expiration and in unrealized gains/losses on call options for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 are due to equity market performance in 2021 compared to 2020. A substantial portion of our call options are based upon the S&P 500 Index with the remainder based upon other equity and bond market indices. The range of index appreciation (after applicable caps, participation rates and asset fees) for options expiring during these years is as follows:
The change in fair value of derivatives is also influenced by the aggregate costs of options purchased. During 2021, the aggregate cost of options were lower than in 2020 as option costs generally decreased during 2020 and 2021. The aggregate cost of options is also influenced by the amount of policyholder funds allocated to the various indices and market volatility which affects option pricing. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Policy Liabilities for Fixed Index Annuities.
Net realized gains (losses) on investments include gains and losses on the sale of securities and other investments and changes in allowances for credit losses on our securities and mortgage loans on real estate. Net realized gains (losses) on investments fluctuate from year to year primarily due to changes in the interest rate and economic environment and the timing of the sale of investments. See Note 4 - Investments and Note 5 - Mortgage Loans on Real Estate to our audited consolidated financial statements and Financial Condition - Credit Losses for a detailed presentation of the types of investments that generated the gains (losses) as well as discussion of credit losses on our securities recognized during the periods presented and Financial Condition - Investments and Note 5 - Mortgage Loans on Real Estate to our audited consolidated financial statements for discussion of credit losses recognized on mortgage loans on real estate.
Securities sold at losses are generally due to our long-term fundamental concern with the issuers' ability to meet their future financial obligations or to improve our risk or duration profiles as they pertain to our asset liability management.
Other revenue was $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and primarily consists of $5.5 million related to asset liability management fees and $10.2 million of amortization related to the deferred gain associated with the cost of reinsurance. Both of these items are associated with the North End Re reinsurance treaty which was effective July 1, 2021. See Note 9 - Reinsurance and Policy Provisions to our audited consolidated financial statements for more information.
Interest sensitive and index product benefits increased 74% to $2.7 billion in 2021 and 20% to $1.5 billion in 2020 from $1.3 billion in 2019. The components of interest sensitive and index product benefits are summarized as follows:
The changes in index credits were attributable to changes in the level of appreciation of the underlying indices (see discussion above under Change in fair value of derivatives) and the amount of funds allocated by policyholders to the respective index options. Total proceeds received upon expiration of the call options purchased to fund the annual index credits were $2.0 billion, $0.8 billion and $0.6 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in interest credited in 2021 was due to increases in sales of single premium deferred annuity products that receive a fixed rate of interest partially offset by a reduction in interest credited to funds allocated to the fixed option within our fixed index annuities due to a decrease in the average balance allocated to the fixed option. The decrease in benefits recognized for lifetime income benefit riders for 2021 compared to 2020 was due to the impact of assumption updates made during 2021 compared to the impact of assumption updates made during 2020 and the increased level of index credits on index policies during 2021 compared to 2020. In addition, fund value of policies with lifetime income benefit riders decreased as a result of the North End Re reinsurance treaty executed during 2021. See Net income available to common stockholders above for discussion of the changes in the assumptions used in determining reserves for lifetime income benefit riders for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Amortization of deferred sales inducements before gross profit adjustments decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the impact of assumption updates made during 2021 compared to the impact of assumption updates made during 2020. Amortization of deferred sales inducements is based on historical, current and future expected gross profits. The changes in amortization from period to period are the result of differences in actual gross profits compared to expected or modeled gross profits and changes to the underlying business. In addition, amortization of deferred sales inducements for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased as index credits on index policies for the year ended December 31, 2021 were in excess of expected index credits and index credits on index policies for the same period of 2020. Bonus products represented 65%, 75% and 76% of our net annuity account values at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amount of amortization is affected by amortization associated with fair value accounting for derivatives and embedded derivatives utilized in our fixed index annuity business and amortization associated with net realized gains (losses) on investments. Fair value accounting for derivatives and embedded derivatives utilized in our fixed index annuity business creates differences in the recognition of revenues and expenses from derivative instruments including the embedded derivative liabilities in our fixed index annuity contracts. The change in fair value of the embedded derivatives will not correspond to the change in fair value of the derivatives (purchased call options), because the purchased call options are one-year options while the options valued in the fair value of embedded derivatives cover the expected lives of the contracts which typically exceed ten years. Amortization of deferred sales inducements is summarized as follows:
See Net income available to common stockholders and Non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders, a non-GAAP financial measure above for discussion of the impact of assumption updates on amortization of deferred sales inducements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs and Deferred Sales Inducements.
Change in fair value of embedded derivatives includes changes in the fair value of our fixed index annuity embedded derivatives (see Note 7 - Derivative Instruments to our audited consolidated financial statements). The components of change in fair value of embedded derivatives are as follows:
The change in fair value of the fixed index annuity embedded derivatives resulted from (i) changes in the expected index credits on the next policy anniversary dates, which are related to the change in fair value of the call options acquired to fund those index credits discussed above in Change in fair value of derivatives; (ii) changes in the expected annual cost of options we will purchase in the future to fund index credits beyond the next policy anniversary; (iii) changes in the discount rates used in estimating our embedded derivative liabilities; and (iv) the growth in the host component of the policy liability. The amounts presented as "Other changes in difference between policy benefit reserves computed using derivative accounting vs. long-duration contracts accounting" represents the total change in the difference between policy benefit reserves for fixed index annuities computed under the derivative accounting standard and the long-duration contracts accounting standard at each balance sheet date, less the change in fair value of our fixed index annuities embedded derivative. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates- Policy Liabilities for Fixed Index Annuities.
The primary reason for the increase in the change in fair value of the fixed index annuity embedded derivatives during 2021 compared to 2020 was the impact of assumption updates made during 2021 compared to the impact of assumption updates made during 2020. See Net Income available to common stockholders above for a discussion of the impact of assumption updates on the fair value of the fixed index annuity embedded derivative for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The increase in change in fair value of the fixed index annuity embedded derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2021 was also due to an increase in the net discount rate during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a decrease in the net discount rate during the same period of 2020 offset by a larger increase in expected index credits on the next policy anniversary dates resulting from a larger increase in the fair value of the call options acquired to fund these index credits during year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The discount rates used in estimating our embedded derivative liabilities fluctuate based on the changes in the general level of risk free interest rates and our own credit spread.
The reinsurance agreement executed in 2021 with Brookfield to cede certain fixed index annuity product liabilities on a modified coinsurance basis contains an embedded derivative. See Note 7 - Derivative Instruments for discussion on this embedded derivative.
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs before gross profit adjustments decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the impact of assumption updates made during 2021 compared to the impact of assumption updates made during 2020. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs is based on historical, current and future expected gross profits. The changes in amortization from period to period are the result of differences in actual gross profits compared to expected or modeled gross profits and changes to the underlying business. In addition, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs for year ended December 31, 2021 decreased as index credits on index policies for the year ended December 31, 2021 were in excess of expected index credits and index credits on index policies for the same periods of 2020. The amount of amortization is affected by amortization associated with fair value accounting for derivatives and embedded derivatives utilized in our fixed index annuity business and amortization associated with net realized gains (losses) on investments. As discussed above, fair value accounting for derivatives and embedded derivatives utilized in our fixed index annuity business creates differences in the recognition of revenues and expenses from derivative instruments including the embedded derivative liabilities in our fixed index annuity contracts. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs is summarized as follows:
See Net income available to common stockholders and non-GAAP operating income available to common stockholders, a non-GAAP financial measure, above for discussion of the impact of assumption updates on amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs and Deferred Sales Inducements.
Other operating costs and expenses increased 33% to $243.7 million in 2021 and increased 19% to $183.6 million in 2020 from $154.2 million in 2019 and are summarized as follows:
Salary and benefits expense increased in 2021 as a result of an increase in salary and benefits of $22.2 million and an increase of $22.2 million related to expense recognized under our equity and cash incentive compensation programs ("incentive compensation programs"). The increases in salary and benefits were due to an increased number of employees related to our continued growth and implementation of AEL 2.0. The increase in expense for our incentive compensation programs was primarily due to an increase in the expected payouts due to a larger number of employees participating in the programs and higher payouts for certain employees participating in the programs partially due to progress made in the execution of the AEL 2.0 strategy during 2021. The increases in salary and benefits for 2021 includes $6.1 million of expenses associated with talent transition as we implement the AEL 2.0 strategy.
The decrease in risk charges during 2021 compared to 2020 was due to the recapture of an existing reinsurance agreement which was replaced with a new agreement with a lower risk charge. We expect the risk charge to be approximately $9 million lower per quarter than the previous agreement.
Other expenses increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily as a result of increases in legal and consulting fees related to the implementation of AEL 2.0, increases in depreciation and maintenance expenses primarily related to software and hardware assets, and increases in agent conference related expenses as conferences resumed as we emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect the level of other operating costs and expenses to settle into the $60 million per quarter range for the foreseeable future as we continue to execute on the AEL 2.0 strategy.
Income tax expense decreased in 2021 primarily due to an decrease in income before income taxes. The effective income tax rates were 21.4% and 17.7% for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Income tax expense and the resulting effective tax rate are based upon two components of income before income taxes ("pretax income") that are taxed at different tax rates. Life insurance income is generally taxed at a statutory rate of approximately 21.5% reflecting the absence of state income taxes for substantially all of the states that the life insurance subsidiaries do business in. The income for the parent company and other non-life insurance subsidiaries (the "non-life insurance group") is generally taxed at a statutory tax rate of 28.7% reflecting the combined federal and state income tax rates. The effective income tax rates resulting from the combination of the income tax provisions for the life and non-life sources of income vary from year to year based primarily on the relative size of pretax income from the two sources.
The effective income tax rate for 2021 was not significantly impacted by discrete tax items. The effective tax rate for 2020 was impacted by a discrete tax item related to the provision of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act that allowed net operating losses for 2018 through 2020 to be carried back to previous tax years in which a 35% statutory tax rate was in effect. The effective income tax rate excluding the impact of the discrete items was 21.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financial Condition
Investments
Our investment strategy is to maximize current income and total investment return through active management while maintaining a responsible asset allocation strategy containing high credit quality investments and providing adequate liquidity to meet our cash obligations to policyholders and others. Our investment strategy is also reflective of insurance statutes, which regulate the type of investments that our life subsidiaries are permitted to make and which limit the amount of funds that may be used for any one type of investment.
As previously noted, as part of our AEL 2.0 investment pillar, we intend to ramp up our allocation to private assets in part by partnering with proven asset managers in our focus expansion sectors of commercial real estate, residential real estate including mortgages and single family rental homes, infrastructure debt and equity, middle market lending and lending to revenue, technology and software sector companies.
The composition of our investment portfolio is summarized as follows:
Fixed Maturity Securities
Our fixed maturity security portfolio is managed to minimize risks such as interest rate changes and defaults or credit losses while earning a sufficient and stable return on our investments. The largest portion of our fixed maturity securities are in investment grade (typically NAIC designation 1 or 2) publicly traded or privately placed corporate securities.
A summary of our fixed maturity securities by NRSRO ratings is as follows:
The NAIC's Securities Valuation Office ("SVO") is responsible for the day-to-day credit quality assessment of securities owned by state regulated insurance companies. The purpose of such assessment and valuation is for determining regulatory capital requirements and regulatory reporting. Insurance companies report ownership to the SVO when such securities are eligible for regulatory filings. The SVO conducts credit analysis on these securities for the purpose of assigning a NAIC designation and/or unit price. Typically, if a security has been rated by an NRSRO, the SVO utilizes that rating and assigns a NAIC designation based upon the following system:
As of December 31, 2020, the NAIC had introduced 20 NAIC designation modifiers that will be applied to each NAIC designation to determine a security's NAIC designation category. The NAIC has approved new unique risk-based capital charges for each of the 20 designated categories for reporting effective December 31, 2021.
For most of the bonds held in our portfolio the NAIC designation matches the NRSRO equivalent rating. However, for certain loan-backed and structured securities, as defined by the NAIC, the NAIC rating is not always equivalent to the NRSRO rating presented in the previous table. The NAIC has adopted revised rating methodologies for certain loan-backed and structured securities comprised of non-agency residential mortgage backed securities ("RMBS") and commercial mortgage backed securities ("CMBS"). The NAIC’s objective with the revised rating methodologies for these structured securities is to increase the accuracy in assessing expected losses and use the improved assessment to determine a more appropriate capital requirement for such structured securities. The revised methodologies reduce regulatory reliance on rating agencies and allow for greater regulatory input into the assumptions used to estimate expected losses from structured securities.
The use of this process by the SVO may result in certain non-agency RMBS and CMBS being assigned an NAIC designation that is different than the equivalent NRSRO rating. The NAIC designations for non-agency RMBS and CMBS are based on security level expected losses as modeled by an independent third party (engaged by the NAIC) and the statutory carrying value of the security, including any purchase discounts or impairment charges previously recognized. Evaluation of non-agency RMBS and CMBS held by insurers using the NAIC rating methodologies is performed on an annual basis.
Our fixed maturity security portfolio is managed to minimize risks such as defaults or impairments while earning a sufficient and stable return on our investments. Our strategy with respect to our fixed maturity securities portfolio has been to invest primarily in investment grade securities. Investment grade is NAIC 1 and 2 securities and Baa3/BBB- and better securities on the NRSRO scale. This strategy meets the objective of minimizing risk while also managing asset capital charges on a regulatory capital basis.
A summary of our fixed maturity securities by NAIC designation is as follows:
The amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2021, by contractual maturity are presented in Note 4 - Investments to our audited consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference in this Item 7.
Unrealized Losses
The amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity securities that were in an unrealized loss position were as follows:
The unrealized losses at December 31, 2021 are principally related to the timing of the purchases of certain securities, which carry less yield than those available at December 31, 2021, and the continued impact the COVID-19 pandemic had on credit markets. Approximately 85% and 75% of the unrealized losses on fixed maturity securities shown in the above table for December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, are on securities that are rated investment grade, defined as being the highest two NAIC designations.
The decrease in unrealized losses from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was primarily related to pricing improvements due to improved credit quality for certain fixed maturity securities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and strategies to reposition the fixed maturity security portfolio that resulted in the sales of certain securities that were in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2020. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in treasury yields during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. The 10-year U.S. Treasury yields at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were 1.52% and 0.93%, respectively. The 30-year U.S. Treasury yields at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were 1.90% and 1.65%, respectively.
The following table sets forth the composition by credit quality (NAIC designation) of fixed maturity securities with gross unrealized losses:
(1)Gross unrealized losses have been adjusted to reflect the allowance for credit loss of $2.8 million and $64.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our investments' gross unrealized losses and fair value, aggregated by investment category and length of time that individual securities (consisting of 1,427 and 843 securities, respectively) have been in a continuous unrealized loss position at December 31, 2021 and 2020, along with a description of the factors causing the unrealized losses is presented in Note 4 - Investments to our audited consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference in this Item 7.
The amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity securities in an unrealized loss position and the number of months in a continuous unrealized loss position (fixed maturity securities that carry an NRSRO rating of BBB/Baa or higher are considered investment grade) were as follows:
(1)Amortized cost and gross unrealized losses have been adjusted to reflect the allowance for credit loss of $2.8 million and $64.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity securities (excluding United States Government and United States Government sponsored agency securities) segregated by investment grade (NRSRO rating of BBB/Baa or higher) and below investment grade that had unrealized losses greater than 20% and the number of months in a continuous unrealized loss position were as follows:
(1)Amortized cost and gross unrealized losses have been adjusted to reflect the allowance for credit loss of $2.8 million and $64.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity securities, by contractual maturity, that were in an unrealized loss position are shown below. Actual maturities will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties. All of our mortgage and other asset backed securities provide for periodic payments throughout their lives, and are shown below as a separate line.
International Exposure
We hold fixed maturity securities with international exposure. As of December 31, 2021, 11.8% of the carrying value of our fixed maturity securities was comprised of corporate debt securities of issuers based outside of the United States and debt securities of foreign governments. Our fixed maturity securities with international exposure are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. Our investment professionals analyze each holding for credit risk by economic and other factors of each country and industry. The following table presents our international exposure in our fixed maturity portfolio by country or region:
All of the securities presented in the table above are investment grade (NAIC designation of either 1 or 2), except for the following:
Watch List
At each balance sheet date, we identify invested assets which have characteristics (i.e., significant unrealized losses compared to amortized cost and industry trends) creating uncertainty as to our future assessment of credit losses. As part of this assessment, we review not only a change in current price relative to its amortized cost but the issuer's current credit rating and the probability of full recovery of principal based upon the issuer's financial strength. For corporate issuers, we evaluate the financial stability and quality of asset coverage for the securities relative to the term to maturity for the issues we own. For asset-backed securities, we evaluate changes in factors such as collateral performance, default rates, loss severities and expected cash flows. At December 31, 2021, the amortized cost and fair value of securities on the watch list (all fixed maturity securities) are as follows:
We expect to recover the unrealized losses, net of allowances, as we did not have the intent to sell and it was not more likely than not that we would be required to sell these securities prior to recovery of the amortized cost basis, net of allowances. Our analysis of these securities and their credit performance at December 31, 2021 is as follows:
Corporate securities: The corporate securities included on the watch list primarily have exposure to the offshore drilling industry. The decline in value of these securities is due to the low level of oil prices over a long period of time. While oil prices have drifted up in recent periods, credit metrics remain under pressure. In addition, the corporate securities included on the watch list include a security in the utilities industry that is under financial stress due to the impact of power outages. While we continue to monitor the status of these securities, we do not currently expect credit losses on these securities.
Structured securities: The structured securities included on the watch list have generally experienced higher levels of stress due to the impact COVID-19 is having on the economy. While there is a heightened level of credit risk for the structured securities on the watch list, we expect minimal credit losses on these securities based on our current analyses.
United States municipalities, states and territories: The decline in value of these securities, which are related to senior living facilities in the Southeastern region of the United States, is primarily due to the financial strain COVID-19 is having on this industry.
Credit Losses
We have a policy and process to identify securities in our investment portfolio for which we recognize credit loss. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Evaluation of Allowance for Credit Losses on Available for Sale Fixed Maturity Securities and Mortgage Loan Portfolios and Note 4 - Investments to our audited consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference in this Item 7.
During 2021, we recognized credit losses of $6.2 million related to our fixed maturity securities which consisted of $6.9 million of credit losses on commercial mortgage backed securities due to our intent to sell the securities, partially offset by net recoveries on corporate securities, municipal securities and residential mortgage backed securities.
During 2020, we recognized credit losses of $60.4 million on corporate securities, $1.7 million on residential mortgage backed securities, $29.2 million on commercial mortgage backed securities, $0.5 million on other asset backed securities and $2.8 million on municipal securities.
Mortgage Loans on Real Estate
Our financing receivables consist of three mortgage loan portfolio segments: commercial mortgage loans, agricultural mortgage loans and residential mortgage loans. Our commercial mortgage loan portfolio consists of loans with an outstanding principal balance of $3.6 billion and $3.6 billion as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. This portfolio consists of mortgage loans collateralized by the related properties and diversified as to property type, location and loan size. Our mortgage lending policies establish limits on the amount that can be loaned to one borrower and other criteria to attempt to reduce the risk of default. Our agricultural mortgage loan portfolio consists of loans with an outstanding principal balance of $408.1 million and $245.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. These loans are collateralized by agricultural land and are diversified as to location within the United States. Our residential mortgage loan portfolio consists of loans with an outstanding principal balance of $1.7 billion and $366.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. These loans are collateralized by the related properties and diversified as to location within the United States. Mortgage loans on real estate are generally reported at cost adjusted for amortization of premiums and accrual of discounts, computed using the interest method and net of valuation allowances.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the largest principal amount outstanding for any single commercial or agricultural mortgage loan was $81.5 million and $34.7 million, respectively, and the average loan size was $5.3 million and $4.8 million, respectively. In addition, the average loan-to-value ratio for commercial and agricultural mortgage loans combined was 52.3% and 53.6% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, based upon the underwriting and appraisal at the time the loan was made. This loan-to-value ratio is indicative of our conservative underwriting policies and practices for originating mortgage loans and may not be indicative of collateral values at the current reporting date. Our current practice is to only obtain market value appraisals of the underlying collateral at the inception of the loan unless we identify indicators of impairment in our ongoing analysis of the portfolio, in which case, we either calculate a value of the collateral using a capitalization method or obtain a third party appraisal of the underlying collateral. The commercial mortgage loan portfolio is summarized by geographic region and property type in Note 5 - Mortgage Loans on Real Estate of our audited consolidated financial statements of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference in this Item 7.
In the normal course of business, we commit to fund mortgage loans up to 90 days in advance. At December 31, 2021, we had commitments to fund commercial mortgage loans totaling $59.0 million, with interest rates ranging from 3.6% to 5.1%. During 2021 and 2020, due to historically low interest rates, the commercial mortgage loan industry has been very competitive. This competition has resulted in a number of borrowers refinancing with other lenders. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $350.6 million in cash for loans being paid in full compared to $199.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Some of the loans being paid off have either reached their maturity or are nearing maturity; however, some borrowers are paying the prepayment fee and refinancing at a lower rate. As December 31, 2021, we had commitments to fund agricultural mortgage loans totaling $69.0 million with interest rates ranging from 3.5% to 8.0%, and had commitments to fund residential mortgage loans totaling $242.4 million with interest rates ranging from 6.75% to 24.0%.
See Note 5 - Mortgage Loans on Real Estate to our audited consolidated financial statements, incorporated by reference, for a presentation of our valuation allowance, foreclosure activity and troubled debt restructure analysis. We have a process by which we evaluate the credit quality of each of our mortgage loans. This process utilizes each loan's loan-to-value and debt service coverage ratios as primary metrics. See Note 5 - Mortgage Loans on Real Estate to our audited consolidated financial statements, incorporated by reference, for a summary of our portfolio by loan-to-value and debt service coverage ratios.
We closely monitor loan performance for our commercial, agricultural and residential mortgage loan portfolios. Commercial, agricultural and residential loans are considered nonperforming when they are 90 days or more past due. Aging of financing receivables is summarized in the following table:
Derivative Instruments
Our derivative instruments primarily consist of call options purchased to provide the income needed to fund the annual index credits on our fixed index annuity products. The fair value of the call options is based upon the amount of cash that would be required to settle the call options obtained from the counterparties adjusted for the nonperformance risk of the counterparty. The nonperformance risk for each counterparty is based upon its credit default swap rate. We have no performance obligations related to the call options.
None of our derivatives qualify for hedge accounting, thus, any change in the fair value of the derivatives is recognized immediately in the consolidated statements of operations. A presentation of our derivative instruments along with a discussion of the business strategy involved with our derivatives is included in Note 7 - Derivative Instruments to our audited consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference in this Item 7.
Liabilities
Our liability for policy benefit reserves increased to $65.5 billion at December 31, 2021 compared to $62.4 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in policy benefit reserves is due to net cash flows from annuity deposits and funds returned to policyholders and interest and index credits credited to policyholders during 2021. Substantially all of our annuity products have a surrender charge feature designed to reduce the risk of early withdrawal or surrender of the policies and to compensate us for our costs if policies are withdrawn early. Our lifetime income benefit rider also reduces the risk of early withdrawal or surrender of the policies as it provides an additional liquidity option to policyholders as the policyholder can elect to receive guaranteed payments for life from their contract without requiring them to annuitize their contract value and the rider is not transferable to other contracts. Notwithstanding these policy features, the withdrawal rates of policyholder funds may be affected by changes in interest rates and other factors.
See Note 11 - Notes Payable and Amounts Due Under Repurchase Agreements to our audited consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference in this Item 7 for discussion of our notes payable and borrowings under repurchase agreements.
See Note 12 - Subordinated Debentures to our audited consolidated financial statements for additional information concerning our subordinated debentures payable to, and the preferred securities issued by, our subsidiary trusts.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity for Insurance Operations
Our insurance subsidiaries' primary sources of cash flow are annuity deposits, investment income, and proceeds from the sale, maturity and calls of investments. The primary uses of funds are investment purchases, payments to policyholders in connection with surrenders and withdrawals, policy acquisition costs and other operating expenses.
Liquidity requirements are met primarily by funds provided from operations. Our life subsidiaries generally receive adequate cash flow from annuity deposits and investment income to meet their obligations. Annuity liabilities are generally long-term in nature. However, a primary liquidity concern is the risk of an extraordinary level of early policyholder withdrawals. We include provisions within our annuity policies, such as surrender charges and bonus vesting, which help limit and discourage early withdrawals. Our lifetime income benefit rider also limits the risk of early withdrawals as it provides an additional liquidity option to policyholders as the policyholder can elect to receive guaranteed payments for life from their contract without requiring them to annuitize their contract value and the rider is not transferable to other contracts. At December 31, 2021, approximately 92% or $48.7 billion of our annuity liabilities were subject to penalty upon surrender, with a weighted average remaining surrender charge period of 5.5 years and a weighted average surrender charge percentage of 9.1%.
Our insurance subsidiaries generally have adequate cash flows from annuity deposits and investment income to meet their policyholder and other obligations. Net cash flows from annuity deposits and funds returned to policyholders as surrenders, withdrawals and death claims were $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $39.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 with the increase attributable to a $1.9 billion increase in net annuity deposits after coinsurance and a $587.2 million (after coinsurance) increase in funds returned to policyholders. In addition, we have a highly liquid investment portfolio that can be used to meet policyholder and other obligations as needed. Scheduled principal repayments, calls and tenders of available for sale fixed maturity securities and net investment income were $3.7 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity of Parent Company
We, as the parent company, are a legal entity separate and distinct from our subsidiaries, and have no business operations. We need liquidity primarily to service our debt (senior notes and subordinated debentures issued to a subsidiary trust), pay operating expenses and pay dividends to common and preferred stockholders. Our assets consist primarily of the capital stock and surplus notes of our subsidiaries. Accordingly, our future cash flows depend upon the availability of dividends, surplus note interest payments and other statutorily permissible payments from our subsidiaries, such as payments under our investment advisory agreements and tax allocation agreement with our subsidiaries. These sources provide adequate cash flow for us to meet our current and reasonably foreseeable future obligations and we expect they will be adequate to fund our parent company cash flow requirements in 2022.
The ability of our life insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends or distributions, including surplus note payments, will be limited by applicable laws and regulations of the states in which our life insurance subsidiaries are domiciled, which subject our life insurance subsidiaries to significant regulatory restrictions. These laws and regulations require, among other things, our insurance subsidiaries to maintain minimum solvency requirements and limit the amount of dividends these subsidiaries can pay.
Currently, American Equity Life may pay dividends or make other distributions without the prior approval of the Iowa Insurance Commissioner, unless such payments, together with all other such payments within the preceding twelve months, exceed the greater of (1) American Equity Life's net gain from operations for the preceding calendar year, or (2) 10% of American Equity Life's statutory capital and surplus at the preceding December 31. For 2022, up to $407.9 million can be distributed as dividends by American Equity Life without prior approval of the Iowa Insurance Commissioner. In addition, dividends and surplus note payments may be made only out of statutory earned surplus, and all surplus note payments are subject to prior approval by regulatory authorities in the life subsidiary's state of domicile. American Equity Life had $2.4 billion of statutory earned surplus at December 31, 2021.
The maximum distribution permitted by law or contract is not necessarily indicative of an insurer's actual ability to pay such distributions, which may be constrained by business and regulatory considerations, such as the impact of such distributions on surplus, which could affect the insurer's ratings or competitive position, the amount of premiums that can be written and the ability to pay future dividends or make other distributions. Further, state insurance laws and regulations require that the statutory surplus of our life subsidiaries following any dividend or distribution must be reasonable in relation to their outstanding liabilities and adequate for their financial needs. Along with solvency regulations, the primary driver in determining the amount of capital used for dividends is the level of capital needed to maintain desired financial strength ratings from rating agencies. Both regulators and rating agencies could become more conservative in their methodology and criteria, including increasing capital requirements for our insurance subsidiaries which, in turn, could negatively affect the cash available to us from insurance subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2021, we estimate American Equity Life has sufficient statutory capital and surplus, combined with capital available to the holding company, to maintain its insurer financial strength rating objective. However, this capital may not be sufficient if significant future losses are incurred or a rating agency modifies its rating criteria and access to additional capital could be limited.
On November 21, 2019 we issued 16,000 shares of 5.95% fixed-rate reset non-cumulative preferred stock, Series A, with a $1.00 par value per share and a liquidation preference of $25,000 per share, for aggregate net proceeds of $388.9 million. We used a portion of the proceeds to redeem $165 million of our floating rate subordinated debentures in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020 and contributed $200 million to American Equity Life during May of 2020.
On June 10, 2020, we issued 12,000 shares of 6.625% fixed-rate reset non-cumulative preferred stock, Series B with a $1.00 par value per share and a liquidation preference of $25,000 per share, for aggregate net proceeds of $290.3 million.
On November 30, 2020 we issued 9,106,042 common shares to Brookfield at a value of $37.00 per share for net proceeds of $333.6 million. On January 7, 2022, we issued an additional 6,775,000 shares to Brookfield at a value of $37.33 per share for net proceeds of $252.9 million.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we repurchased 1.9 million shares of our common stock for $50 million in the open market under our share repurchase program. During 2021, we repurchased an additional 3.1 million share of our common stock for $99.4 million in the open market under our share repurchase program. In addition, on November 30, 2020 we entered into an accelerated share repurchase (ASR) agreement with Citibank, N.A. to repurchase an aggregate of $115 million of our common stock. Under the ASR agreement, we received an initial share delivery of approximately 3.5 million shares. The final settlement of 0.5 million shares, which was based on the volume-weighted average price of our common stock during the term of the transaction, less a discount and subject to customary adjustments, was delivered on February 25, 2021. The average price paid for shares repurchased under the ASR was $28.45 per common share. During 2022, we repurchased an additional 2.5 million shares of our common stock through February 25, 2022 for $105.7 million in the open market under our share repurchase program. Through February 25, 2022, we have repurchased approximately 11.6 million shares of our common shares at an average price of $31.78 per common share and have approximately $630 million remaining under our share repurchase program.
Cash and cash equivalents of the parent holding company at December 31, 2021, were $362.2 million. We also have the ability to issue equity, debt or other types of securities through one or more methods of distribution. The terms of any offering would be established at the time of the offering, subject to market conditions. On February 15, 2022, we established a new five-year credit agreement for $300 million in unsecured delayed draw term loan commitments. This agreement is part of our plans for access to liquidity for general corporate purposes as we continue to implement our strategic transformation to an at-scale origination, spread and capital light fee-based business, and to manage capital to grow as well as produce returns for shareholders. There have been no loans drawn on this agreement to date.
In January 2022, we became a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines ("FHLB"). There have been no advances executed under this membership to date.
Statutory accounting practices prescribed or permitted for our life subsidiaries differ in many respects from those governing the preparation of financial statements under GAAP. Accordingly, statutory operating results and statutory capital and surplus may differ substantially from amounts reported in the GAAP basis financial statements for comparable items. Information as to statutory capital and surplus and statutory net income for our life subsidiaries as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 is included in Note 14 - Statutory Financial Information and Dividend Restrictions to our audited consolidated financial statements.
In the normal course of business, we enter into financing transactions, lease agreements, or other commitments. These commitments may obligate us to certain cash flows during future periods. The following table summarizes such obligations as of December 31, 2021.
(1)Amounts shown in this table are projected payments through the year 2072 which we are contractually obligated to pay to our annuity policyholders. The payments are derived from actuarial models which assume a level interest rate scenario and incorporate assumptions regarding mortality and persistency, when applicable. These assumptions are based on our historical experience.
(2)Period that principal amounts are due is determined by the earliest of the call/put date or the maturity date of each note payable.
(3)Amount shown is net of equity investments in the capital trusts due to the contractual right of offset upon repayment of the notes.
Critical Accounting Policies & Estimates
The increasing complexity of the business environment and applicable authoritative accounting guidance require us to closely monitor our accounting policies. We have identified six critical accounting policies and estimates that are complex and require significant judgment. The following summary of our critical accounting policies and estimates is intended to enhance your ability to assess our financial condition and results of operations and the potential volatility due to changes in estimates.
Valuation of Investments
Our fixed maturity securities classified as available for sale are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses, if any, on these securities are included directly in stockholders' equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of income taxes and certain adjustments for assumed changes in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, deferred sales inducements and policy benefit reserves. Unrealized gains and losses represent the difference between the amortized cost or cost basis and the fair value of these investments. We use significant judgment within the process used to determine fair value of these investments.
GAAP defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability (exit price) in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We categorize our financial instruments into three levels of fair value hierarchy based on the priority of inputs used in determining fair value. The hierarchy defines the highest priority inputs (Level 1) as quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. The lowest priority inputs (Level 3) are our own assumptions about what a market participant would use in determining fair value such as estimated future cash flows. In certain cases, the inputs used to measure fair value may fall into different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In such cases, a financial instrument's level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Our assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement in its entirety requires judgment and considers factors specific to the financial instrument.
We categorize financial instruments recorded at fair value in the consolidated balance sheets as follows:
Level 1 -Quoted prices are available in active markets for identical financial instruments as of the reporting date. We do not adjust the quoted price for these financial instruments, even in situations where we hold a large position and a sale could reasonably impact the quoted price.
Level 2 -Quoted prices in active markets for similar financial instruments, quoted prices for identical or similar financial instruments in markets that are not active; and models and other valuation methodologies using inputs other than quoted prices that are observable.
Level 3 -Models and other valuation methodologies using significant inputs that are unobservable for financial instruments and include situations where there is little, if any, market activity for the financial instrument. The inputs into the determination of fair value require significant management judgment or estimation. Financial instruments that are included in Level 3 are securities for which no market activity or data exists and for which we used discounted expected future cash flows with our own assumptions about what a market participant would use in determining fair value.
The following table presents the fair value of fixed maturity securities, available for sale, by pricing source and hierarchy level as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
Management's assessment of all available data when determining fair value of our investments is necessary to appropriately apply fair value accounting.
We utilize independent pricing services in estimating the fair values of investment securities. The independent pricing services incorporate a variety of observable market data in their valuation techniques, including:
•reported trading prices,
•benchmark yields,
•broker-dealer quotes,
•benchmark securities,
•bids and offers,
•credit ratings,
•relative credit information, and
•other reference data.
The independent pricing services also take into account perceived market movements and sector news, as well as a security's terms and conditions, including any features specific to that issue that may influence risk and marketability. Depending on the security, the priority of the use of observable market inputs may change as some observable market inputs may not be relevant or additional inputs may be necessary.
The independent pricing services provide quoted market prices when available. Quoted prices are not always available due to market inactivity. When quoted market prices are not available, the third parties use yield data and other factors relating to instruments or securities with similar characteristics to determine fair value for securities that are not actively traded. We generally obtain one value from our primary external pricing service. In situations where a price is not available from this service, we may obtain quotes or prices from additional parties as needed. Market indices of similar rated asset class spreads are considered for valuations and broker indications of similar securities are compared. Inputs used by the broker include market information, such as yield data and other factors relating to instruments or securities with similar characteristics. Valuations and quotes obtained from third party commercial pricing services are non-binding and do not represent quotes on which one may execute the disposition of the assets.
We validate external valuations at least quarterly through a combination of procedures that include the evaluation of methodologies used by the pricing services, comparison of the prices to a secondary pricing source, analytical reviews and performance analysis of the prices against trends, and maintenance of a securities watch list. Additionally, as needed we utilize discounted cash flow models or perform independent valuations on a case-by-case basis using inputs and assumptions similar to those used by the pricing services. Although we do identify differences from time to time as a result of these validation procedures, we did not make any significant adjustments as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Evaluation of Allowance for Credit Losses on Available for Sale Fixed Maturity Securities and Mortgage Loan Portfolios
The process to identify available for sale fixed maturity securities that could potentially require an allowance for credit loss involves significant judgment and estimates by management. We review and analyze all fixed maturity securities on an ongoing basis for changes in market interest rates and credit deterioration. This review process includes analyzing our ability to recover the amortized cost or cost basis of each fixed maturity security that has a fair value that is materially lower than its amortized cost and requires a high degree of management judgment and involves uncertainty. The evaluation of fixed maturity securities for credit loss is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties.
We have a policy and process to identify fixed maturity securities that could potentially have a credit loss. This process involves monitoring market events and other items that could impact issuers. The evaluation includes but is not limited to such factors as:
•the extent to which fair value is less than amortized cost or cost;
•whether the issuer is current on all payments and all contractual payments have been made as agreed;
•the remaining payment terms and the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer;
•the lack of ability to refinance due to liquidity problems in the credit market;
•the fair value of any underlying collateral;
•the existence of any credit protection available;
•our intent to sell and whether it is more likely than not we would be required to sell prior to recovery for debt securities;
•consideration of rating agency actions; and
•changes in estimated cash flows of mortgage and asset backed securities.
We determine whether an allowance for credit loss should be established for fixed maturity securities by assessing all facts and circumstances surrounding each security. Where the decline in fair value of fixed maturity securities is attributable to changes in market interest rates or to factors such as market volatility, liquidity and spread widening, and we anticipate recovery of all contractual or expected cash flows, we do not consider these securities to have credit loss because we do not intend to sell these securities and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell these securities before a recovery of amortized cost, which may be maturity.
If we intend to sell a fixed maturity security or if it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell a security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, credit loss has occurred and the difference between amortized cost and fair value will be recognized as a loss in operations.
If we do not intend to sell and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell the fixed maturity security but also do not expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security, a credit loss would be recognized in operations in the amount of the expected credit loss. We determine the amount of expected credit loss by calculating the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected discounted at each security's acquisition yield based on our consideration of whether the security was of high credit quality at the time of acquisition. The difference between the present value of expected future cash flows and the amortized cost basis of the security is the amount of credit loss recognized in operations. The recognized credit loss is limited to the unrealized loss on the security.
The determination of the credit loss component of a mortgage backed security is based on a number of factors. The primary consideration in this evaluation process is the issuer's ability to meet current and future interest and principal payments as contractually stated at time of purchase. Our review of these securities includes an analysis of the cash flow modeling under various default scenarios considering independent third party benchmarks, the seniority of the specific tranche within the structure of the security, the composition of the collateral and the actual default, loss severity and prepayment experience exhibited. With the input of third party assumptions for default projections, loss severity and prepayment expectations, we evaluate the cash flow projections to determine whether the security is performing in accordance with its contractual obligation.
We utilize the models from a leading structured product software specialist serving institutional investors. These models incorporate each security's seniority and cash flow structure. In circumstances where the analysis implies a potential for principal loss at some point in the future, we use our "best estimate" cash flow projection discounted at the security's effective yield at acquisition to determine the amount of our potential credit loss associated with this security. The discounted expected future cash flows equates to our expected recovery value. Any shortfall of the expected recovery when compared to the amortized cost of the security will be recorded as credit loss.
The cash flow modeling is performed on a security-by-security basis and incorporates actual cash flows on the residential mortgage backed securities through the current period, as well as the projection of remaining cash flows using a number of assumptions including default rates, prepayment rates and loss severity rates. The default curves we use are tailored to the Prime or Alt-A residential mortgage backed securities that we own, which assume lower default rates and loss severity for Prime securities versus Alt-A securities. These default curves are scaled higher or lower depending on factors such as current underlying mortgage loan performance, rating agency loss projections, loan to value ratios, geographic diversity, as well as other appropriate considerations.
The determination of the credit loss component of a corporate bond is based on the underlying financial performance of the issuer and their ability to meet their contractual obligations. Considerations in our evaluation include, but are not limited to, credit rating changes, financial statement and ratio analysis, changes in management, significant changes in credit spreads, breaches of financial covenants and a review of the economic outlook for the industry and markets in which they trade. In circumstances where an issuer appears unlikely to meet its future obligation, an estimate of credit loss is determined. Credit loss is calculated using default probabilities as derived from the credit default swaps markets in conjunction with recovery rates derived from independent third party analysis or a best estimate of credit loss. This credit
loss rate is then incorporated into a present value calculation based on an expected principal loss in the future discounted at the yield at the date of purchase and compared to amortized cost to determine the amount of credit loss associated with the security.
For fixed maturity securities which we do not intend to sell and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell, but our intent changes due to changes or events that could not have been reasonably anticipated, a credit loss may be recognized in operations. Unrealized losses may be recognized in future periods in operations should we later conclude that the decline in fair value below amortized cost represents a credit loss pursuant to our accounting policy described above. The use of different methodologies and assumptions to determine the fair value of investments and the timing and amount of impairments may have a material effect on the amounts presented in our consolidated financial statements.
We establish a valuation allowance to provide for the risk of credit losses inherent in our mortgage loan portfolios. The valuation allowance is maintained at a level believed adequate by management to absorb estimated expected credit losses.
The valuation allowance for commercial mortgage loans is calculated by pooling our loans based on risk rating and property collateral type and applying an estimated loss ratio against each risk pool. Risk ratings are based on an analysis of the current state of the borrower's credit quality, which considers factors such as loan-to-value ("LTV") and debt service coverage ("DSC") ratios, loan performance and economic outlook, among others. The loss ratios are generally based upon historical loss experience for each risk pool and are adjusted for current and forecasted economic factors management believes to be relevant and supportable. Economic factors are forecasted for two years with immediate reversion to historical experience.
A commercial loan is individually evaluated for impairment if it does not continue to share similar risk characteristics of a pool. A commercial mortgage loan that is individually evaluated is impaired when it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. If we determine that the value of any specific mortgage loan is impaired, the carrying amount of the mortgage loan will be reduced to its fair value, based upon the present value of expected future cash flows from the loan discounted at the loan's effective interest rate, or the fair value of the underlying collateral less estimated costs to sell.
The valuation allowance for agricultural and residential mortgage loans are estimated by deriving probability of default and recovery rate assumptions based on the characteristics of the loans in our portfolio, historical economic data and loss information, and current and forecasted economics conditions. Key loan characteristics impacting the estimate include delinquency status, time to maturity, original credit scores and loan-to-value ratios.
Policy Liabilities for Fixed Index Annuities
We offer a variety of fixed index annuities with crediting strategies linked to the S&P 500 Index and other equity and bond market indices. We purchase call options on the applicable indices as an investment to provide the income needed to fund the annual index credits on the index products. See Financial Condition-Derivative Instruments. Certain derivative instruments embedded in the fixed index annuity contracts are recognized in the consolidated balance sheets at their fair values and changes in fair value are recognized immediately in our consolidated statements of operations in accordance with accounting standards for derivative instruments and hedging activities.
Accounting for derivatives prescribes that the contractual obligations for future annual index credits are treated as a "series of embedded derivatives" over the expected life of the applicable contracts. Policy liabilities for fixed index annuities are equal to the sum of the "host" (or guaranteed) component and the embedded derivative component for each fixed index annuity policy. The host value is established at inception of the contract and accreted over the policy's life at a constant rate of interest. We estimate the fair value of the embedded derivative component at each valuation date by (i) projecting policy contract values and minimum guaranteed contract values over the expected lives of the contracts and (ii) discounting the excess of the projected contract value amounts at the applicable risk-free interest rates adjusted for our nonperformance risk related to those liabilities. The projections of policy contract values are based on our best estimate assumptions for future policy growth and future policy decrements including lapse, partial withdrawal and mortality rates. Our best estimate assumptions for future policy growth include assumptions for the expected index credits on the next policy anniversary date which are derived from the fair values of the underlying call options purchased to fund such index credits and the expected costs of annual call options we will purchase in the future to fund index credits beyond the next policy anniversary. The projections of minimum guaranteed contract values include the same best estimate assumptions for policy decrements as were used to project policy contract values. The amounts reported in the consolidated statements of operations as "Interest sensitive and index product benefits" represent amounts credited to policy liabilities pursuant to accounting by insurance companies for certain long-duration contracts which include index credits through the most recent policy anniversary. The amounts reported in the consolidated statements of operations as "Change in fair value of embedded derivatives" equal the change in the difference between policy benefit reserves for fixed index annuities computed under the derivative accounting standard and the long-duration contracts accounting standard at each balance sheet date.
In general, the change in the fair value of the embedded derivatives will not correspond to the change in fair value of the purchased call options because the purchased call options are generally one year options while the options valued in the embedded derivatives represent the rights of the contract holder to receive index credits over the entire period the fixed index annuities are expected to be in force, which typically exceeds 10 years.
The most sensitive assumptions in determining policy liabilities for fixed index annuities are 1) the rates used to discount the excess projected contract values, 2) the expected cost of annual call options we will purchase in the future to fund index credits beyond the next policy anniversary date and 3) our best estimate for future policy decrements specific to lapse rates.
As indicated above, the discount rates used to discount excess projected contract value are based on applicable risk-free interest rates adjusted for our nonperformance risk related to those liabilities. If the discount rates used to discount the excess projected contract values at December 31, 2021 were to increase by 100 basis points, our reserves for fixed index annuities would decrease by $546.8 million. A decrease by 100 basis points in the discount rates used to discount the excess projected contract values would increase our reserves for fixed index annuities by $627.3 million.
As of December 31, 2021, we utilized an estimate of 2.10% for the expected cost of annual call options, which is based on estimated long-term account value growth and a historical review of our actual options costs. If the expected cost of annual call options we purchase in the future to fund index credits beyond the next policy anniversary date were to increase by 25 basis points, our reserves for fixed index annuities would increase by $537.8 million. A decrease of 25 basis points in the expected cost of annual call options would decrease our reserves for fixed index annuities by $509.6 million.
Our lapse rate assumptions are based on actual experience and our outlook as to future expectations for lapse rates. If lapse rates were to increase 10%, our reserves for fixed index annuities would decrease by $26.1 million. A decrease in lapse rates of 10% would increase our reserves for fixed index annuities by $27.2 million.
Liability for Lifetime Income Benefit Riders
The liability for lifetime income benefit riders is based on the actual and present value of expected benefit payments to be paid in excess of projected policy values recognizing the excess over the expected lives of the underlying policies based on the actual and present value of expected assessments including investment spreads, product charges and fees. The inputs used in the calculation of the liability for lifetime income benefit riders include actual policy values, actual income account values, actual payout factors, actual roll-up rates and our best estimate assumptions for future policy growth, expected utilization of lifetime income benefit riders, which includes the ages at which policyholders are expected to elect to begin to receive lifetime income benefit payments and the percentage of policyholders who elect to receive lifetime income benefit payments, the type of income benefit payments selected upon election and future assumptions for lapse, partial withdrawal and mortality rates. The assumptions are reviewed quarterly and updates to the assumptions are made based on historical results and our best estimates of future experience. The liability for lifetime income benefit riders is included in policy benefit reserves in the consolidated balance sheets and the change in the liability is included in interest sensitive and index product benefits in the consolidated statements of operations. See Results of Operations for the Three Years Ended December 31, 2021 in this Item 7 for a discussion and presentation of the effects of assumption revisions.
The most sensitive assumptions in the calculation of the liability for lifetime income benefit riders are 1) the expected cost of annual call options we will purchase in the future, 2) the percentage of policyholders who elect to receive lifetime income benefit payments, 3) our best estimate for future policy decrements specific to lapse rates and 4) the net investment earned rate.
We utilize the expected cost of annual call options we will purchase in the future to project policy values and to discount future cash flows. In addition, it is a key component in the calculation of expected assessments in the projection period. As of December 31, 2021, we utilized an estimate of 2.10% for the long-term expected cost of annual call options, which is based on estimated long-term account value growth and a historical review of the cost of our actual call options. If the expected cost of annual call options and fixed crediting rates were to increase by 25 basis points, our liability for lifetime income benefit riders would decrease by $141.1 million. A decrease of 25 basis points in the expected cost of annual call options and fixed crediting rates would decrease our liability for lifetime income benefit riders by $73.9 million.
Our assumptions related to the percentage of policyholders who elect to receive lifetime income benefit payments is based on actual experience and our outlook as to future expectations for utilization rates. If the ultimate floor assumption on the percentage of policyholders who elect to receive lifetime income benefit payments was increased by 10% at December 31, 2021, our liability for lifetime income benefit riders would increase by $152.0 million. A decrease by 10% in the ultimate floor assumption on the percentage of policyholders who elect to receive lifetime income benefit payments would decrease our liability for lifetime income benefit riders by $113.0 million.
Our lapse rate assumptions are based on actual experience and our outlook as to future expectations for lapse rates. If lapse rates were to increase 10%, our liability for lifetime income benefit riders would decrease by $24 million. A decrease in lapse rates of 10% would increase our liability for lifetime income benefit riders by $23.4 million.
The net investment earned rate is a key component in the calculation of expected assessments in the projection period. The net investment earned rate is based on current yields being earned in our invested assets portfolio, future expectations for earned yields and the expected mean reversion period. If the net investment earned rate were to increase 10 basis points, our liability for lifetime income benefit riders would decrease by $27.8 million. A decrease in the net investment earned rate of 10 basis points would increase our liability for lifetime income benefit riders by $28.6 million.
Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs and Deferred Sales Inducements
Costs relating to the successful production of new business are not expensed when incurred but instead are capitalized as deferred policy acquisition costs or deferred sales inducements. Only costs which are expected to be recovered from future policy revenues and gross profits may be deferred.
Deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements are subject to loss recognition testing on a quarterly basis or when an event occurs that may warrant loss recognition. Deferred policy acquisition costs consist principally of commissions and certain costs of policy issuance. Deferred sales inducements consist of premium and interest bonuses credited to policyholder account balances.
For annuity products, these costs are being amortized in proportion to actual and expected gross profits. Actual and expected gross profits include the the excess of net investment income earned over the interest credited or the cost of providing index credits to the policyholders, or the "investment spread"; and to a lesser extent, product charges and fees net of expected excess payments for lifetime income benefit riders and certain policy expenses. Actual and expected gross profits for fixed index annuities also include the impact of amounts recorded for the change in fair value of derivatives and the change in fair value of embedded derivatives. Current period amortization is adjusted retrospectively through an unlocking process when estimates of actual and expected gross profits (including the impact of net realized gains (losses) on investments and credit losses recognized in operations) to be realized from a group of products are updated. Our estimates of future gross profits are based on actuarial assumptions related to the underlying policies terms, lives of the policies, yield on investments supporting the liabilities and level of expenses necessary to maintain the polices over their entire lives. Revisions are made based on historical results and our best estimates of future experience. See Results of Operations for the Three Years Ended December 31, 2021 in this Item 7 for a discussion and presentation of the effects of assumption revisions.
The most sensitive assumptions used to calculate amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements are 1) the net investment earned rate, 2) our best estimate for future policy decrements specific to lapse rates and 3) the expected cost of annual call options we will purchase in the future.
The net investment earned rate is a key component in the calculation of estimated gross profits. The net investment earned rate is based on current yields being earned in our invested assets portfolio, future expectations for earned yields and the expected mean reversion period. If the net investment earned rate were to increase 10 basis points, our combined balance for deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements at December 31, 2021 would increase by $101.5 million. A decrease in the net investment earned rate of 10 basis points would decrease our combined balance for deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements at December 31, 2021 by $104.7 million.
Our lapse rate assumptions are based on actual experience and our outlook as to future expectations for lapse rates. If lapse rates were to increase 10%, our combined balance of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements would decrease by $83.9 million. A decrease in lapse rates of 10% would increase our combined balance of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements by $87.4 million.
We utilize the expected cost of annual call options we will purchase in the future to project policy values and to discount future cash flows. In addition, it is a key component in the calculation of expected gross profits in the projection period. As of December 31, 2021, we utilized an estimate of 2.10% for the expected long-term cost of annual call options, which is based on estimated long-term account value growth and a historical review of the cost of our actual call options. If the expected cost of annual call options and fixed crediting rates were to increase by 25 basis points, our combined balance of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements would decrease by $60.4 million. A decrease of 25 basis points in the expected cost of annual call options and fixed crediting rates would decrease our combined balance of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred sales inducements by $45.1 million.
Deferred Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method. This method provides for the tax effects of transactions reported in the audited consolidated financial statements for both taxes currently due and deferred. Deferred income taxes reflect the impact of temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities recognized for financial reporting purposes and such amounts recognized for tax purposes. A temporary difference is a transaction, or amount of a transaction, that is recognized currently for financial reporting purposes but will not be recognized for tax purposes until a future tax period, or is recognized currently for tax purposes but will not be recognized for financial reporting purposes until a future reporting period. Deferred income taxes are measured by applying enacted tax rates for the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled to the amount of each temporary difference.
The realization of deferred income tax assets is primarily based upon management's estimates of future taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when management estimates, based on available information, that it is more likely than not that deferred income tax assets will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in determining whether valuation allowances should be established, as well as the amount of such allowances. When making such determination, consideration is given to, among other things, the following:
•future taxable income of the necessary character exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards;
•future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences;
•taxable capital income in prior carryback years; and
•tax planning strategies.
Actual realization of deferred income tax assets and liabilities may materially differ from these estimates as a result of changes in tax laws as well as unanticipated future transactions impacting related income tax balances.
The realization of deferred income tax assets related to unrealized losses on our available for sale fixed maturity securities is also based upon our intent to hold these securities for a period of time sufficient to allow for a recovery in fair value and not realize the unrealized loss.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies to our audited consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K beginning on page, which is incorporated by reference in this Item 7, for new accounting pronouncement disclosures.