Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to help the reader understand the Company, our operations and our present business environment. MD&A is provided as a supplement to - and should be read in conjunction with - our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying Notes thereto contained in Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data -" of this report.
This MD&A generally discusses Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 and provides year-to-year comparisons between Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020. Discussions of Fiscal 2019 and year-to-year comparisons between Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II. Item 7 of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021.
Introduction
This MD&A is organized as follows:
Executive Overview
We are a leading global specialty retailer offering high-quality, on-trend clothing, accessories and personal care products at affordable prices under our American Eagle® and Aerie® brands.
In the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, we revised our reportable segment structure and have two reportable segments, American Eagle and Aerie. Our Chief Operating Decision Maker (defined as our CEO) analyzes segment results and allocates resources based on adjusted operating income (loss), which is a non-GAAP financial measure. See "Non-GAAP Information" within Part II. Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and Note 16. “Segment Reporting,” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein for additional information.
Key Performance Indicators
Our management evaluates the following items, which are considered key performance indicators, in assessing our performance:
Comparable Sales - Comparable sales and comparable sales changes provide a measure of sales growth for stores and channels open at least one year over the comparable prior year period. In light of store closures and related disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, we have not disclosed comparable sales for Fiscal 2021 or Fiscal 2020, as they are not comparable with prior periods.
Omni-Channel Sales Performance - Our management utilizes the following quality of sales metrics in evaluating our omni-channel sales performance: comparable sales, average unit retail price, total transactions, units per transaction, and consolidated comparable traffic. We include these metrics within this MD&A when we believe they enhance the understanding of the matter being discussed. Investors may find them useful as such. Each of these metrics is defined as follows (except comparable sales, which is defined separately above):
•Average unit retail price represents the selling price of our goods. It is the cumulative net sales divided by the net units sold for a period of time.
•Total transactions represents the count of customer transactions over a period of time (inclusive of Company-owned stores and AEO Direct, unless specified otherwise).
•Units per transaction represents the number of units sold divided by total transactions over a period of time (inclusive of Company-owned stores and AEO Direct, unless specified otherwise).
•Consolidated comparable traffic represents visits to our Company-owned stores, limited to those stores that qualify to be included in comparable sales as defined above, including AEO Direct, over a period of time.
Gross Profit - Gross profit measures whether we are optimizing the profitability of our sales. Gross profit is the difference between total net revenue and cost of sales. Cost of sales consists of merchandise costs, including design, sourcing, importing, and inbound freight costs, as well as markdowns, shrinkage and certain promotional costs (collectively “merchandise costs”) and buying, occupancy and warehousing costs. Design costs consist of compensation, rent, depreciation, travel, supplies, and samples.
Buying, occupancy and warehousing costs consist of: compensation, employee benefit expenses and travel for our buyers and certain senior merchandising executives; rent and utilities related to our stores, corporate headquarters, distribution centers and other office space; freight from our distribution centers to the stores; compensation and supplies for our distribution centers, including purchasing, receiving and inspection costs; and shipping and handling costs related to our e-commerce operations.
The inability to obtain acceptable levels of sales, initial markups or any significant increase in our use of markdowns could have an adverse effect on our gross profit and results of operations.
Operating Income - Our management views operating income as a key indicator of our performance. The key drivers of operating income are net revenue, gross profit, our ability to control selling, general, and administrative expenses, and our level of capital expenditures for a reasonable period of time. In light of store closures and disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, our operating income may not be comparable for Fiscal 2021 versus Fiscal 2020.
Cash Flow and Liquidity - Our management evaluates cash flow from operations, investing and financing activities in determining the sufficiency of our cash position and capital allocation strategies. Cash flow has historically been sufficient to cover our uses of cash. Our management believes that cash flow will be sufficient to fund anticipated capital expenditures, dividends, and working capital requirements for the next twelve months and beyond.
Current Trends and Outlook
COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic remains highly volatile and continues to evolve on a daily basis, and we continue to see disruptions and volatility in our business caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of January 29, 2022, all our stores have reopened and remain open as of the date of this Annual Report. Our stores are operating with restrictive and precautionary measures in place, such as reduced operating hours, physical distancing, enhanced cleaning and sanitation, and limited occupancy levels.
The unpredictability of the trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly diminished visibility into the future operating environment, and we believe that the Company may continue to experience degrees of volatility and business disruptions and remain at risk for periods of closure of our stores, distribution centers, and corporate facilities. While trends improved during Fiscal 2021, we cannot reasonably estimate the extent to which our business will continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and to what extent the recent improved trends will continue. Past and future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic also have the ability to disrupt the operations of our partners, suppliers, and vendors, which could lead to supply chain disruption, shipping delays, and freight cost increases. We are monitoring the ongoing developments as COVID-19 vaccines are being distributed and administered, and we will take further actions that are in the best interests of our associates and customers, as needed. For further information about the risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
Quiet Logistics Acquisition and Supply Chain Platform
On December 29, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of Quiet Logistics. With this acquisition, the Company expects to be able to execute on operational efficiencies to create a supply chain platform with significant long-term growth potential.
Omni-Channel and Digital Capabilities
We sell merchandise through our digital channels, www.ae.com, www.aerie.com, www.toddsnyder.com, www.unsubscribed.com, and our AEO apps, both domestically and internationally in 81 countries. We also sell merchandise on various international online marketplaces. The digital channels reinforce each particular brand platform and are designed to complement the in-store experience.
Over the past several years, we have invested in building our technologies and digital capabilities. We focused our investments in three key areas: making significant advances in mobile technology, investing in digital marketing and improving the digital customer experience.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), which require us to make estimates and assumptions that may affect the reported consolidated financial condition and results of operations should actual results differ from these estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates and assumptions on the best available information and believe them to be reasonable for the circumstances. We believe that of our significant accounting policies, the following involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity. Refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a complete discussion of our significant accounting policies. Management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board.
Revenue Recognition. In accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, we record revenue for store sales upon the purchase of merchandise by customers. The Company’s e-commerce operation records revenue upon the estimated customer receipt date of the merchandise. Shipping and handling revenues are included in total net revenue. Sales tax collected from customers is excluded from revenue and is included as part of accrued income and other taxes on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Revenue is recorded net of estimated and actual sales returns and deductions for coupon redemptions and other promotions. The Company records the impact of adjustments to its sales return reserve quarterly within total net revenue and cost of sales. The sales return reserve reflects an estimate of sales returns based on projected merchandise returns determined using historical average return percentages.
Revenue is not recorded on the issuance of gift cards. A current liability is recorded upon issuance, and revenue is recognized when the gift card is redeemed for merchandise. Additionally, the Company recognizes revenue on unredeemed gift cards based on an estimate of the amounts that will not be redeemed (“gift card breakage”), determined through historical redemption trends. Gift card breakage revenue is recognized in proportion to actual gift card redemptions as a component of total net revenue.
The Company recognizes royalty revenue generated from its license or franchise agreements based upon a percentage of merchandise sales by the licensee/franchisee. This revenue is recorded as a component of total net revenue when earned.
Merchandise Inventory. Merchandise inventory is valued at the lower of average cost or net realizable value, utilizing the retail method. Average cost includes merchandise design and sourcing costs and related expenses. The Company records merchandise receipts when control of the merchandise has transferred to the Company.
We review our inventory in order to identify slow-moving merchandise and generally use markdowns to clear merchandise. Additionally, we estimate a markdown reserve for future planned markdowns related to current inventory. If inventory exceeds customer demand for reasons of style, seasonal adaptation, changes in customer preference, lack of consumer acceptance of fashion items, competition, or if it is determined that the inventory in stock will not sell at its currently ticketed price, additional markdowns may be necessary. These markdowns may have a material adverse impact on earnings, depending on the extent and amount of inventory affected.
We estimate an inventory shrinkage reserve for anticipated losses for the period between the last physical count and the balance sheet date. The estimate for the shrinkage reserve is calculated based on historical percentages and can be affected by changes in merchandise mix and changes in actual shrinkage trends. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to calculate our inventory shrinkage reserve. However, if actual physical inventory losses differ significantly from our estimate, our operating results could be adversely affected.
During Fiscal 2021, the Company focused on inventory optimization, which remains an ongoing priority.
Impairment of long-lived assets. In accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment (“ASC 360”), we evaluate the value of leasehold improvements, store fixtures, and operating lease right-of-use ("ROU") assets associated with retail stores. We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment at the individual retail store level, which is the lowest level at which individual cash flows can be identified. Impairment losses are recorded on long-lived assets used in operations when events and circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired and the projected undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amounts. When events such as these occur, the impaired assets are adjusted to their estimated fair value and an impairment loss is recorded separately as a component of operating (loss) income.
Our impairment loss calculations require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate future cash flows and asset fair values. The significant assumption used in our projected undiscounted cash flows analyses is revenue growth rates. Additionally, significant assumptions utilized in our fair value analyses include the aforementioned assumption, as well as market participant real estate assumptions and discount rate. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions we use to calculate long-lived asset impairment losses. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions, our consolidated operating results could be adversely affected.
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets. Definite-lived intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value, with amortization computed utilizing the straight-line method over the assets’ estimated useful lives. The Company’s definite-lived intangible assets, which consist primarily of trademark assets, are generally amortized over 10 to 15 years. The Company evaluates definite-lived intangible assets for impairment in accordance with ASC 360 when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. Such an evaluation includes the estimation of undiscounted future cash flows to be generated by those assets. If the sum of the estimated future undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying amounts of the assets, then the assets are impaired and are adjusted to their estimated fair value. No definite-lived intangible asset impairment charges were recorded for all periods presented.
In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, the Company evaluates goodwill for possible impairment at least annually as of the last day of the fiscal year and upon occurrence of certain triggering events or substantive changes in circumstances that indicate that the fair value of a reporting unit may be below it's carrying value. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value, an impairment charge is recorded in the period of the evaluation based on that difference.
Share-Based Payments. We account for share-based payments in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. To determine the fair value of our stock option awards, we use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires management to apply judgment and make assumptions to determine the fair value of our awards. These
assumptions include estimating the length of time employees will retain their vested stock options before exercising them (the “expected term”) and the estimated volatility of the price of our common stock over the expected term.
We calculate a weighted-average expected term based on historical experience. Expected stock price volatility is based on historical volatility of our common stock. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the estimate of the fair value of our share-based payments and the related amount recognized in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Taxes. We calculate income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, which requires the use of the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the difference between the Consolidated Financial Statements carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases as computed pursuant to ASC 740. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the tax rates, based on certain judgments regarding enacted tax laws and published guidance, in effect in the years when those temporary differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is established against the deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred taxes may not be realized. Changes in our level and composition of earnings, tax laws or the deferred tax valuation allowance, as well as the results of tax audits, may materially impact the effective income tax rate.
We evaluate our income tax positions in accordance with ASC 740, which prescribes a comprehensive model for recognizing, measuring, presenting, and disclosing in the financial statements tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return, including a decision whether to file or not to file in a particular jurisdiction. Under ASC 740, a tax benefit from an uncertain position may be recognized only if it is more likely than not that the position is sustainable based on its technical merits.
The calculation of the deferred tax assets and liabilities, as well as the decision to recognize a tax benefit from an uncertain position and to establish a valuation allowance require management to make estimates and assumptions. We believe that our assumptions and estimates are reasonable, although actual results may have a positive or negative material impact on the balances of deferred tax assets and liabilities, valuation allowances or net income (loss).
Results of Operations
Overview
Fiscal 2021 represented a year of strong execution across our "Real Power. Real Growth." value creation plan, surpassing our Fiscal 2023 operating income and margin goals two years ahead of schedule. The work on our value creation plan drove meaningful improvements to our profitability through real estate and inventory optimization, omni-channel and customer focus, and our supply chain initiatives. Total net revenue for the year increased 33% to $5.011 billion, compared to $3.759 billion last year, and we exceeded $600 million in adjusted operating income.
For Fiscal 2020, our consolidated results of operations were materially impacted by the effects of COVID-19. Commencing in March 2020, we experienced a significant reduction in customer traffic and demand resulting from the continued spread of COVID-19 and government actions to combat it. In response, we closed our stores to the public after the close of business on March 17, 2020; however, we continued to operate our digital business. Subsequent to May 1, 2020, we began to reopen our stores, and as of January 30, 2021, nearly all of our stores had reopened; however, we continued to experience reduced customer traffic in reopened store locations. Accordingly, our results for Fiscal 2020 were significantly impacted.
Absent the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, our business is affected by the pattern of seasonality common to most retail apparel businesses. The results for the current and prior periods are not necessarily indicative of future financial results.
Net income (loss) was $2.03 per diluted share this year, compared to a loss of ($1.26) per diluted share last year. On an adjusted basis, net income (loss) per diluted share this year was $2.19, compared to last year at ($0.00). Adjusted net income per diluted share this year excludes $0.07 of amortization of the non-cash discount on our convertible notes, $0.04 of asset impairment charges, and $0.04 of reorganization charges related to our European Union ("EU") license operations. Adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share last year excludes $1.20 of impairment, restructuring, and COVID-19 related charges and $0.06 of amortization of the non-cash discount on our convertible notes. Adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share is a non-GAAP financial measure. Please see “Non-GAAP Information” below.
The following table shows, for the periods indicated, the percentage relationship to total net revenue of the listed items included in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Business Acquisitions
On December 29, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Quiet Logistics, and certain other strategic investments (the "Transaction") pursuant to a Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of November 1, 2021.
At the closing of the Transaction, the Company acquired from the sellers all of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of Quiet Logistics and certain equity interests in two related strategic investments.
The aggregate cash purchase price paid at the Closing, after giving effect to estimated adjustments in respect of working capital and other customary matters, was approximately $360.6 million. Refer to Note 3, "Acquisitions," to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
On May 3, 2021, we completed the acquisition of AirTerra pursuant to a Stock Purchase Agreement, dated August 26, 2021, for an aggregate purchase price of $3.0 million.
Non-GAAP Information
This Results of Operations section contains net income per diluted share presented on a non-GAAP basis, which is a non-GAAP financial measure (“non-GAAP” or “adjusted”). This financial measure is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP and is not necessarily comparable to similar measures presented by other companies. Non-GAAP information is provided as a supplement to, not as a substitute for, or as superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe that this non-GAAP information is useful as an additional means for investors to evaluate our operating performance, when reviewed in conjunction with our GAAP consolidated financial statements and provides a higher degree of transparency. These amounts are not determined in accordance with GAAP and, therefore, should not be used exclusively in evaluating our business and operations. The table below reconciles the GAAP financial measure to the non-GAAP financial measure discussed above.
Comparison of Fiscal 2021 to Fiscal 2020
Total Net Revenue
Total net revenue for Fiscal 2021 increased 33% to $5.011 billion compared to $3.759 billion for Fiscal 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic and the associated closures of our retail stores beginning March 17, 2020 negatively affected our consolidated financial results for Fiscal 2020.
American Eagle
Total net revenue for Fiscal 2021 for the American Eagle brand was $3.556 billion compared to $2.734 billion for Fiscal 2020 with average unit retail price increasing in the high teens.
Aerie
Total net revenue for Fiscal 2021 for the Aerie brand was $1.376 billion compared to $990.0 million for Fiscal 2020 with average unit retail price increasing in the low twenties.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased 73% to $1.992 billion for Fiscal 2021 from $1.148 billion for Fiscal 2020. As a percentage of total net revenue, gross margin increased to 39.7%, compared to 30.5% last year. The increase in gross margin as a percent of total net revenue reflected higher merchandise margins, primarily due to higher full-priced sales and lower promotions, partially offset by higher freight costs related to supply chain disruptions, as well as improved rent and delivery expense.
There was $16.0 million of share-based payment expense, consisting of both time and performance-based awards, included in gross profit this year. This is compared to $15.9 million of share-based payment expense included in gross profit last year.
Our gross profit may not be comparable to that of other retailers, as some retailers include all costs related to their distribution network, as well as design costs, in cost of sales, and others may exclude a portion of these costs from cost of sales, including them in a line item such as selling, general, and administrative expenses. Refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our accounting policy regarding cost of sales, including certain buying, occupancy and warehousing expenses.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased 25% to $1.222 billion for Fiscal 2021, compared to $977.3 million for Fiscal 2020. As a percentage of total net revenue, selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased 160 basis points to 24.4%, compared to 26.0% for Fiscal 2020. The increase in expenses for Fiscal 2021 was primarily related to the reopening of our stores, including increased store payroll and variable selling expenses, as well as increased advertising, services and compensation costs.
There was $22.2 million of share-based payment expense, consisting of time and performance-based awards, included in selling, general, and administrative expenses for Fiscal 2021 compared to $16.8 million for Fiscal 2020.
Impairment, Restructuring and COVID-19 Related Charges
In Fiscal 2021, the Company recorded asset impairment charges of $11.9 million, primarily related to retail store property and equipment, and operating lease right-of-use ("ROU") assets.
During Fiscal 2020, total impairment, restructuring and COVID-19 related charges were $279.8 million. We recorded asset impairment charges of $249.2 million. Included in this amount are retail store impairment charges of $203.2 million, of which $154.8 million related to operating lease ROU assets and $48.4 million related to store property and equipment (fixtures and equipment and leasehold improvements). We also recorded $28.0 million of impairment charges related to certain corporate property and equipment as well as $18.0 million of impairment charges of certain cost and equity method investments. Additionally, we recorded $26.9 million for incremental COVID-19 related expenses consisting of PPE and supplies for our associates and customers and $3.7 million of severance and related employee costs.
Based on the uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to accurately predict the ultimate impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our consolidated operations going forward, including, among other things, the length of time that such disruptions will continue and the impact of governmental regulations that may be imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, we may be required to record further impairment and/or restructuring charges in future periods.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expense increased 3% to $166.8 million for Fiscal 2021 from $162.4 million for Fiscal 2020, driven by increased capital spending in Fiscal 2021. As a percentage of total net revenue, depreciation and amortization expense was 3.3% compared to 4.3% in Fiscal 2020.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net increased $10.0 million to $34.6 million for Fiscal 2021, compared to $24.6 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase in expense was primarily attributable to increased non-cash interest expense related to our convertible notes and lower interest income this year, partially offset by no interest expense incurred for borrowings on our revolving credit facilities in Fiscal 2021.
Other Income, Net
Other income was $2.5 million for Fiscal 2021, compared to $3.7 million for Fiscal 2020. The decrease was attributable to an $11.9 million reorganization charge related to our EU license operations, partially offset by other changes in non-operating income/expense.
Income Taxes
The effective income tax rate is 24.9% for Fiscal 2021 compared to an effective income tax benefit rate of 28.4% for Fiscal 2020. The effective income tax rate this year is primarily impacted by nondeductible executive compensation, partially offset by excess tax benefits from share-based payments. Our effective income tax rate is also dependent upon the overall mix of earnings in jurisdictions with different tax rates.
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” and Note 15, “Income Taxes,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein for additional information regarding our accounting for income taxes.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income increased $628.9 million to $419.6 million for Fiscal 2021, as compared to a net loss of $209.3 million for Fiscal 2020. The change in net income (loss) was attributable to the factors described above. As a percentage of total net revenue, net income (loss) was 8.4% and (5.6%) for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
Net income (loss) per diluted share for Fiscal 2021 was $2.03, which included $18.5 million ($0.07 per diluted share) of pre-tax non-cash interest related to our convertible notes, $11.9 million ($0.04 per diluted share) of pre-tax asset impairment charges, and $11.9 million ($0.04 per diluted share) of reorganization charges related to our EU license operations.
Net income (loss) per diluted share for Fiscal 2020 was ($1.26), which included $279.8 million ($1.20 per diluted share) of pre-tax impairment, restructuring, and COVID-19 related charges and $12.3 million ($0.06 per diluted share) of pre-tax non-cash interest related to our convertible notes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our uses of cash have historically been for working capital, the construction of new stores and remodeling of existing stores, information technology and e-commerce upgrades and investments, distribution center improvements and expansion, and the return of value to shareholders through the repurchase of common stock and the payment of dividends. Additionally, our uses of cash have included the development of the Aerie brand, investments in technology and omni-channel capabilities, and our international expansion efforts.
Historically, our uses of cash have been funded with cash flow from operations and existing cash on hand. We also maintain an asset-based revolving credit facility that allows us to borrow up to $400 million, which will expire in January 2024. In April 2020, the Company issued $415 million aggregate principal amount of convertible notes due in 2025 in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers. Interest is payable semi-annually.
In Fiscal 2021, we acquired our Supply Chain Platform, comprised of Quiet Logistics and AirTerra, for an aggregate amount of approximately $364 million. Refer to Note 3, "Acquisitions," to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein for information regarding these acquisitions.
As of January 29, 2022, we had approximately $434.8 million in cash and cash equivalents. We expect to be able to fund our future cash requirements through current cash holdings and available liquidity.
The following sets forth certain measures of our liquidity:
Working capital as of January 29, 2022 decreased $110.1 million compared to January 30, 2021. The largest decrease came from lower cash and cash equivalents of $415.7 million, primarily related to the acquisition of our Supply Chain Platform totaling $358.1 million (net of $3.9 million cash acquired). This was partially offset by a $148.0 million increase in merchandise inventory and a $140.6 million increase in accounts receivable.
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $303.7 million during Fiscal 2021, compared to $202.5 million during Fiscal 2020. For both periods, our major source of cash from operations was merchandise sales and our primary outflow of cash from operations was for the payment of operational costs.
Cash Flows Used for Investing Activities
Investing activities for Fiscal 2021 included $358.1 million for the acquisition of businesses related to our Supply Chain Platform (net of $3.9 million cash acquired), as well as $233.8 million in capital expenditures for property and equipment. Investing activities for Fiscal 2020 included $128.0 million in capital expenditures for property and equipment partially offset by $55.0 million of net short-term investment sales. For further information on capital expenditures, refer to the Capital Expenditures for Property and Equipment caption below.
Cash Flows (Used for) Provided by Financing Activities
During Fiscal 2021, cash used for financing activities consisted primarily of $113.9 million for cash dividends paid at quarterly rates of $0.1375 for the 13 weeks ended May 2, 2021 and $0.18 for the 13 weeks ended July 31, 2021, October 30, 2021, and January 29, 2022 and $24.0 million for the repurchase of common stock from employees for the payment of taxes in connection with vesting of share-based payments, partially offset by $13.1 million of proceeds from stock option exercises.
During Fiscal 2020, cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of $406.1 million of net proceeds from our revolving line of credit and the issuance of convertible notes. This was partially offset by $22.9 million for the payment of dividends, $20.0 million used for purchases of 1.7 million shares of common stock under publicly-announced programs in early March 2020, and $5.4 million for the repurchase of common stock from employees for the payment of taxes in connection with the vesting of share-based payments.
Early in Fiscal 2020, we borrowed on our revolving line of credit and issued convertible notes to strengthen our cash position and provide us with additional financial flexibility during the remainder of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. By August 2020, we had repaid the $330.0 million in revolving line of credit borrowings.
Cash returned to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases was $113.9 million and $42.9 million in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
Capital Expenditures for Property and Equipment
Fiscal 2021 capital expenditures were $233.8 million, compared to $128.0 million in Fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2021 expenditures included $120.0 million related to investments in our stores, including 103 new AEO stores (23 American Eagle stores, 74 Aerie stand-alone stores (including 16 OFFLINE stores), three Unsubscribed stores and three Todd Snyder stores, 22 remodeled and refurbished stores, and fixtures and visual investments. Additionally, we continued to support our infrastructure growth by investing in information technology initiatives ($83.5 million), e-commerce ($19.4 million) and other home office projects ($10.9 million).
For Fiscal 2022, we expect capital expenditures to be in the range of $315 million to $335 million related to the continued support of our expansion efforts, stores, information technology upgrades to support growth and investments in e-commerce, as well as to support and enhance our supply chain. We expect to be able to fund our capital expenditures through current cash holdings and cash generated from operations.
Credit Facilities
In January 2019, we entered into a credit agreement (“Credit Agreement”) for five-year, syndicated, asset-based revolving credit facilities (the “Credit Facilities”). The Credit Agreement provides senior secured revolving credit for loans and letters of credit up to $400 million, subject to customary borrowing base limitations. The Credit Facilities provide increased financial flexibility and take advantage of a favorable credit environment.
All obligations under the Credit Facilities are unconditionally guaranteed by certain subsidiaries. The obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by a first-priority security interest in certain working capital assets of the borrowers and guarantors, consisting primarily of cash, receivables, inventory, and certain other assets and have been further secured by first-priority mortgages on certain real property.
As of January 29, 2022, we were in compliance with the terms of the Credit Agreement and had $7.9 million outstanding in stand-by letters of credit.
Stock Repurchases
During Fiscal 2019, our Board of Directors (our "Board") authorized the repurchase of 30.0 million shares under a new share repurchase program, which expires on February 3, 2024. During Fiscal 2021, we did not repurchase any shares under our publicly-announced share repurchase program. As of January 29, 2022, our total remaining share repurchase authorization was 30.0 million shares.
In early March 2020, as part of our publicly-announced share repurchase program, we repurchased 1.7 million shares for $20.0 million, at a weighted average price of $11.63 per share. The remaining shares that may yet be repurchased under this authorization expired on January 30, 2021.
During both Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, we repurchased approximately 0.8 million and 0.4 million shares, respectively from certain employees at market prices totaling $24.0 million and $5.4 million, respectively. These shares were repurchased for the payment of taxes in connection with the vesting of share-based payments, as permitted under our equity incentive plans.
The aforementioned share repurchases have been recorded as treasury stock.
Dividends
Dividends are disclosed in Part II. Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters, and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements are disclosed in Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value Measurements
ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement Disclosures (“ASC 820”) defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in accordance with GAAP, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. Fair value is defined under ASC 820 as the exit price associated with the sale of an asset or transfer of a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date:
Financial Instruments
Valuation techniques used to measure fair value under ASC 820 must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. In addition, ASC 820 establishes this three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. These tiers include:
•Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets.
•Level 2 - Inputs other than Level 1 that are observable, either directly or indirectly.
•Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
As of January 29, 2022, we held certain assets that are required to be measured at fair value on a recurring basis. These include cash and cash equivalents.
In accordance with ASC 820, the following table represents the fair value hierarchy of our financial assets (cash equivalents) measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of January 29, 2022:
Long-Term Debt
In April 2020, the Company issued $415 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2025 (the “Notes”). The fair value of the Notes is not required to be measured at fair value on a recurring basis. Upon issuance, the fair value of the Notes was measured using two approaches that consider market related conditions, including market benchmark rates and a secondary market quoted price, and is therefore within Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy.