Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the historical consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations and estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
AeroClean Technologies is an interior space air purification technology company. Our immediate objective is to initiate full-scale commercialization of our high-performance interior air sterilization and disinfection products for the eradication of harmful airborne pathogens, including COVID-19. We were established to develop unmatched, technology-driven medical-grade air purification solutions for hospitals and other healthcare settings. The onset of the COVID-19 global pandemic underscores the urgency of bringing to market air purification solutions to protect front-line healthcare workers, patients and the general population.
We incorporate our proprietary, patented UV-C LED technology in equipment and devices to protect the occupants of interior spaces. These spaces include hospital and non-hospital healthcare facilities (such as outpatient chemotherapy and other infusion facilities and senior living centers and nursing homes), schools and universities, commercial properties and other indoor spaces.
Our products are being designed and engineered to exceed the rigorous standards set by the FDA for interior air sterilization and disinfection products. Our units can be currently marketed for use pursuant to the FDA Enforcement Policy for Sterilizers, Disinfectant Devices, and Air Purifiers during the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Public Health Emergency, referred to as the “Policy” elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We are currently seeking FDA 510(k) clearance for the use of our products in healthcare and other markets for which product performance is required to be validated by certified independent labs. Regulatory clearances and independent certifications serve as important product imprimaturs that also influence decision-making by non-healthcare market equipment purchasers. We expect to receive FDA 510(k) clearance for Pūrgo in the second half of 2022.
We initiated the full-scale launch of our first product, Pūrgo, in the year ended December 31, 2021. Pūrgo is our proprietary, continuous air sanitization product for indoor spaces. Pūrgo’s launch also marks the debut of our go-to-market strategy for SteriDuct, the Company’s patented air purification technology. We intend to incorporate SteriDuct into a broad line of autonomous air treatment devices. For example, we debuted a prototype of Pūrgo Lift, our air purification solution for elevators and other wall-mount applications, in February 2022.
In July 2021, we completed the development stage of our first device, the Pūrgo room air purification unit, including design and independent testing and certification, as well as the scale-up of manufacturing, and began commercial production and sales. Pūrgo has been well-received by our customers. Our success depends to a large extent on our ability to increase sales of our Pūrgo device during 2022 and beyond.
To support the transition to commercial operations, in July 2021, we also completed the build out of our corporate headquarters in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, which includes our warehouse and distribution facility, as well as the site for our future service operations.
As part of our business strategy we continually evaluate a wide array of strategic opportunities, including the acquisition, disposition or licensing of intellectual property, mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures and other strategic transactions. In connection with these activities we may enter into non-binding letters of intent as we assess the commercial appeal of potential strategic transactions. We may seek to acquire technologies, product lines and companies which operate in businesses similar to our own or which are ancillary, complementary or adjacent to our own or in which we do not currently operate. Such businesses could operate in the air purification space or more generally in the health and wellness space or in other industries. We could also seek to merge with or into another company or sell all or substantially all of our assets to another company. Any transactions that we enter into could be material to our business, financial condition and operating results. Please see related risks described under the captions “We may acquire other companies or technologies, which could divert our management’s attention, result in additional dilution to stockholders and otherwise disrupt our operations, and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations” and “Our executive officers, directors and principal stockholders have the ability to control all matters submitted to stockholders for approval” in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to monitor the outbreak of COVID-19 and its variants, including the most recent Omicron variant, which continue to spread throughout the world and adversely impact global commercial activity and contribute to significant declines and volatility in financial markets. Our on-going research and development activities, including development of product prototypes and manufacturing activities, are all conducted in the United States, and as a result, we have been able to mitigate the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our global supply chain. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we have not experienced any significant adverse impact on our operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, across many industries, including our own, COVID-19 - among other factors - has negatively impacted personnel and operations at third-party manufacturing and component part supplier facilities in the United States and around the word. These disruptions have adversely impacted the availability and cost of raw materials and component parts. For example, various electronic components and semi-conductor chips have become increasingly difficult to source, and when available, may be subject to substantially longer lead times and higher costs than historically applicable. While we have achieved improvements in manufacturing output since the commercial launch of Pūrgo in late Q3 2021, the ongoing global logistics and supply chain bottlenecks and shortages have increased lead times for electronics, semi-conductors, chips, and even recently-in-stock and short lead time items. The team has taken action to minimize the impact of these supply chain and logistics disruptions to ongoing production, and we expect these challenges will resolve towards the end of the first half of 2022.
We continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that impact operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine is in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers and stockholders. As of the date of this Annual Report, the pandemic presents uncertainty and risk as we cannot reasonably determine or predict the nature, duration or scope of the overall impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue and Cost of Sales
The Company began the production and sale of its first commercial product, Pūrgo, in July 2021, generating $616,511 in product revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 (of which amount $80,000 was generated from sales to certain of the Company’s directors and shareholders). The Company did not have any revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of sales increased in conjunction with the increase in revenues.
Operating Expenses
Selling General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs related to our employees, independent contractors and consultants. Other significant selling, general and administrative expenses include accounting and legal services and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents as well as marketing and advertising services and expenses associated with establishing our brand and developing our website, marketing materials and call center.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $4,327,998 and $1,131,385, respectively, of selling, general and administrative expenses. We attribute the increase of $3,196,613 primarily to a greater level of business activities being conducted in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, including costs related to the hiring of additional personnel (an increase of approximately $800,000), increased fees for outside consultants (an increase of approximately $1,000,000), stock-based compensation of approximately $260,000, rent expense (an increase of approximately $400,000) and professional fees and insurance (an increase of approximately $400,000).
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception, we have focused our resources on our research and development activities. We expense research and development costs as they are incurred. Our research and development expenses primarily consist of outsourced engineering, product development and manufacturing design costs.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $4,193,362 and $2,191,696, respectively, in research and development costs. We attribute the increase of $2,001,666 primarily to additional costs in the year ended December 31, 2021 as incremental outsourced engineering, testing, and regulatory costs associated with our 510(k) submission were incurred to launch Pūrgo in July 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 where significant spending on research and development costs did not commence until approximately May 2020.
Net Losses
Our net losses were $7,923,607 and $3,323,081 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Losses increased in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 for the reasons set forth above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $19,629,649 compared to cash of $2,333,117 as of December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our predecessor, AeroClean Technologies, LLC, raised approximately $5,100,000 in gross proceeds from the sale of our Class A units and issued approximately $900,000 of our Class A units to our independent contractors and members of our board of directors for services rendered. On September 30, 2021, we borrowed $500,000, and on November 5, 2021, we borrowed an additional $500,000 pursuant to bridge loans (collectively, the “Bridge Loans”) from the chair of our board of directors at an interest rate equal to the prime rate plus 3.0% per annum, 6.25% for the life of the Bridge Loans, with the principal and accrued interest due upon demand. On November 29, 2021, we completed our IPO of 2,514,000 shares of our common stock, which included the partial exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option, at a public offering price of $10.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $25,140,000 and net proceeds of approximately $21,640,000, after deducting underwriting fees and closing costs of approximately $3,500,000. We repaid the Bridge Loans and accrued interest on December 1, 2021 with a portion of the net proceeds from our IPO.
Prior to our IPO, AeroClean Technologies, LLC, our predecessor, funded its operations principally with approximately $15,000,000 in gross proceeds from the sale of Class A units. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1,747,860. The Company’s net cash used in operating activities was $7,795,087 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $3,069,976 used in operating activities for the prior year period.
We have incurred operating losses since our inception. While the Company began producing and selling its Pūrgo device in July 2021, these losses are expected to continue through the end of 2022 as we continue to make significant investments to develop and market our products and to establish our consumables and service business.
We believe that our cash balances as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for at least 12 months.
Future Funding Requirements and Outlook
We have incurred operating losses each year since our inception. These losses are expected to continue through at least the end of 2022 because we plan to continue to make significant investments to develop and market our products and to establish our consumables and service business. We also expect to continue to incur increased costs to comply with corporate governance, internal controls and similar requirements applicable to public companies.
On February 1, 2021, we entered into a lease with Garden Bio Science Partners, LLC, an entity controlled by the chair of our board of directors, with a term of ten years at an annual base rent of $260,000, subject to escalation of 2.5% on an annual basis. As of December 31, 2021, the future minimum lease payments under this arrangement approximated $2,675,000.
Based on our current financial resources, our expected revenues and our expected level of operating expenditures, we believe that we will be able to fund our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Over the long-term, the Company will continue to have significant capital requirements, and expects to devote substantial resources to grow its operations. Moreover, if the Company pursues an acquisition strategy, it may need to raise incremental capital in order to finance the purchase price to be paid to target stockholders. As a result of these funding requirements, we will likely need to obtain additional financing by engaging in debt and/or equity offerings or seeking additional borrowings. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of convertible debt or equity securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. The availability of debt financing or equity capital will depend upon the Company’s financial condition and results of operations as well as prevailing market conditions.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation or changes in prices will have a material effect on our business.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The preparation of the financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and related disclosures. We evaluate these estimates, judgments and methodologies on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable. Our actual results could differ from those estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We believe that the accounting policies are critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act, was enacted. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards, and, therefore, will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as public companies that are not emerging growth companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that are not emerging growth companies.
We are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we intend to rely on certain of these exemptions, including without limitation, (i) the exemption from providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) the exemption from complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of: (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the completion of the Public Offering; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.