ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Summary
In 2021, AES delivered on its strategic and financial objectives. We completed construction or the acquisition of 2.1 GW of renewables generation and signed long-term PPAs for an additional 5 GW of new renewables. Fluence completed its IPO and began trading in November 2021. See Overview of our Strategy included in Item 1.-Business of this Form 10-K for further information.
Compared with last year, diluted earnings per share from continuing operations decreased $0.68, from $0.06 to a loss of $0.62. This decrease reflects the loss on deconsolidation of Alto Maipo in the current period, higher current year impairments, and lower contributions from Brazil due to the prior year revision of the GSF liability and drier hydrology; partially offset by higher margins at our US and Utilities SBU including new renewables, Southland Energy, and Southland, lower Parent Company interest expense due to realized gains on de-designated interest rate swaps and lower interest rates, gains on Fluence capital raisings, a gain on remeasurement of our interest in sPower's development platform, and lower income tax expense.
Adjusted EPS, a non-GAAP measure, increased $0.08, from $1.44 to $1.52, mainly reflecting higher contributions from our US and Utilities SBU, including new renewables and Southland Energy, higher generation at Chivor due to the life extension project completed in the prior year and better hydrology, and lower Parent Company interest expense due to realized gains on de-designated interest rate swaps and lower interest rates; partially offset by a higher adjusted tax rate, lower contributions from Brazil due to the prior year revision of the GSF liability and drier hydrology, the prior year impacts of a gain on sale of land in the U.S., incremental capitalized interest in Chile, and recovery of previously expensed payments from customers in Chile; and the impact of the inclusion of shares underlying the purchase contract component of our March 2021 equity units issuance.
82 | 2021 Annual Report
Review of Consolidated Results of Operations
Components of Revenue, Cost of Sales and Operating Margin - Revenue includes revenue earned from the sale of energy from our utilities and the production and sale of energy from our generation plants, which are classified as regulated and non-regulated, respectively, on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Revenue also includes the gains or losses on derivatives associated with the sale of electricity.
Cost of sales includes costs incurred directly by the businesses in the ordinary course of business. Examples include electricity and fuel purchases, operations and maintenance costs, depreciation and amortization expenses, bad debt expense and recoveries, and general administrative and support costs (including employee-related costs directly associated with the operations of the business). Cost of sales also includes the gains or losses on derivatives (including embedded derivatives other than foreign currency embedded derivatives) associated with the purchase of electricity or fuel.
Operating margin is defined as revenue less cost of sales.
83 | 2021 Annual Report
Consolidated Revenue and Operating Margin
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
(in millions)
Consolidated Revenue - Revenue increased $1.5 billion, or 15%, in 2021 compared to 2020, driven by:
•$417 million in US and Utilities driven by higher sales at Southland Energy primarily due to the CCGT units operating under active PPAs during the full 2021 period; higher demand in El Salvador due to the economic recovery from the COVID-19 impact; higher fuel revenues and higher demand from favorable weather at AES Indiana; increases in capacity sales and in realized gains resulting from the commercial hedging strategy at Southland; and higher sales at AES Clean Energy due to the supply agreement with Google; partially offset by decreased capacity at DPL due to its exit from the generation business;
•$391 million in MCAC driven by higher contract sales, fuel prices, and LNG sales, driven by the Eastern Pipeline COD in 2020, in the Dominican Republic; higher pass-through fuel prices in Mexico; and higher energy prices and contract sales due to increased demand in Panama; partially offset by the impact from the sale of Itabo in April 2021;
•$382 million in South America primarily driven by the revenue recognized at Angamos for the early termination of contracts with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence; higher generation and prices (Resolution 440/2021) in Argentina; higher availability, from higher reservoir levels, in Colombia; and higher volume and generation at AES Brasil, partially due to the acquisition of the Ventus and Cubico wind complexes; partially offset by unfavorable FX impact and by the prior period recovery of previously expensed payments from customers in Chile; and
•$295 million in Eurasia mainly driven by higher energy prices and generation in Bulgaria and higher generation in Vietnam.
Operating Margin
(in millions)
84 | 2021 Annual Report
Consolidated Operating Margin - Operating margin increased $18 million, or 1%, in 2021 compared to 2020, driven by:
•$154 million in US and Utilities primarily from higher sales at Southland Energy due to the CCGT units operating under active PPAs during the full 2021 period; increases in capacity sales and in realized gains resulting from the commercial hedging strategy at Southland; and higher demand in El Salvador due to the economic recovery from the COVID-19 impact; partially offset by increased costs associated with growing and accelerating the development pipeline at AES Clean Energy and by higher maintenance expenses at AES Indiana;
•$46 million at Corporate and Other, mainly eliminated at consolidated level, driven by increases in IT costs reallocated to the operating segments and premiums earned by the AES self-insurance company; and
•$30 million in Eurasia mainly driven by higher energy prices and generation in Bulgaria and improved operational performance in Vietnam.
These favorable impacts were partially offset by a decrease of:
•$174 million in South America primarily due to unfavorable FX impact; higher energy purchases due to drier hydrology and a prior period GSF settlement at Tietê; and higher spot prices on energy prices and prior period recovery of previously expensed payments from customers in Chile; partially offset by revenue recognized at Angamos for the early termination of contracts with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence; higher generation and prices (Resolution 440/2021) in Argentina; lower fixed costs in Chile; and higher availability, from higher reservoir levels, in Colombia; and
•$38 million in MCAC mainly driven by the impact from the sale of Itabo in April 2021; decreased capacity and higher fixed costs in the Dominican Republic; decreased availability and higher fixed costs in Mexico; and higher fuel costs, drier hydrology, and the disconnection of the Estrella del Mar I power barge in the prior year in Panama; partially offset by higher LNG sales in the Dominican Republic driven by the Eastern Pipeline COD in 2020 and higher demand and positive impact from new renewables businesses in Panama.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
(in millions)
Consolidated Revenue - Revenue decreased $529 million, or 5%, in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by:
•$219 million in Eurasia driven by the sale of the Northern Ireland businesses in June 2019 and lower generation in Vietnam;
•$140 million in US and Utilities mainly driven by a decrease in energy pass-through rates and lower demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic in El Salvador, lower regulated rates as a result of the changes in AES Ohio's ESP, lower retail sales demand at AES Indiana and DPL primarily due to milder weather and COVID-19 pandemic impacts, and decreased capacity sales, at Southland due to unit retirements, and at DPL due to the sale and closure of generation facilities. These decreases were partially offset by increased capacity sales at Southland Energy due to the commencement of the PPAs;
•$116 million in MCAC mainly driven by lower generation and volume pass-through fuel revenue in Mexico, the disconnection of the Estrella del Mar I power barge from the grid in Panama, and lower market prices,
85 | 2021 Annual Report
spot sales and demand in both the Dominican Republic and at the Colon combined cycle facility in Panama. These decreases were partially offset by higher LNG sales in the Dominican Republic, driven by the Eastern Pipeline COD in 2020; and
•$49 million in South America driven by unfavorable FX impact, drier hydrology and lower generation in Colombia due to a life extension project being performed at the Chivor hydro plant, lower pass-through coal prices, spot prices, and lower generation in Chile, and lower energy and capacity prices (Resolution 31/2020) in Argentina, partially offset by revenue recognized at Angamos for the early termination of contracts with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence and recovery of previously expensed payments from customers in Chile.
Operating Margin
(in millions)
Consolidated Operating Margin - Operating margin increased $344 million, or 15%, in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by:
•$370 million in South America primarily due to the drivers discussed above, as well as a $184 million favorable revision to the GSF liability at Tietê related to the passage of a regulation providing concession extensions to hydro plants as compensation for prior period non-hydrological risk charges incorrectly assessed by the regulator; and
•$72 million in MCAC mostly due to higher availability at Changuinola due to the tunnel lining upgrade in 2019, improved hydrology in Panama, and higher LNG sales in the Dominican Republic, partially offset by prior year insurance recoveries associated with the lightning incident at the Andres facility in 2018, current year outage due to Andres steam turbine failure, and the disconnection of the Estrella del Mar I power barge from the grid in Panama.
These favorable impacts were partially offset by a decrease of $116 million in US and Utilities mostly due to lower regulated rates as a result of the changes in AES Ohio's ESP, lower retail sales demand at DPL and AES Indiana primarily due to milder weather and COVID-19 pandemic impacts, lower capacity sales due to the retirement of units at Southland, a favorable revision to the ARO at DPL, and cost recoveries from DPL's joint owners of Stuart and Killen in 2019, partially offset by increased capacity sales at Southland Energy due to the commencement of the PPAs, and lower depreciation expense at Southland due to the extension of the water board permits.
See Item 7.-Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-SBU Performance Analysis of this Form 10-K for additional discussion and analysis of operating results for each SBU.
Consolidated Results of Operations - Other
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses include expenses related to corporate staff functions and initiatives, executive management, finance, legal, human resources, and information systems, as well as global development costs.
General and administrative expenses increased $1 million, or 1%, to $166 million for 2021 compared to $165 million for 2020, with no material drivers.
86 | 2021 Annual Report
General and administrative expenses decreased $31 million, or 16%, to $165 million for 2020 compared to $196 million for 2019, primarily due to a higher reallocation of information technology costs to the SBUs and lower professional fees, partially offset by higher development costs.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $127 million, or 12%, to $911 million for 2021, compared to $1,038 million for 2020 primarily due to realized gains on de-designated interest rate swaps, lower interest rates related to refinancing at the Parent Company and lower monetary correction due to the GSF settlement in March 2021.
Interest expense decreased $12 million, or 1%, to $1,038 million for 2020, compared to $1,050 million for 2019 primarily due to incremental capitalized interest in Chile and lower interest rates due to refinancing at the Parent Company, partially offset by lower capitalized interest due to the commencement of operations at the Alamitos and Huntington Beach facilities in February 2020.
Interest income
Interest income increased $30 million, or 11%, to $298 million for 2021, compared to $268 million for 2020 primarily due to the arbitration proceeding in Chile, the commencement of a sales-type lease at the AES Energy Storage Alamitos project in January 2021, and higher CAMMESA interest rates on receivables in Argentina, partially offset by a lower loan receivable balance in Vietnam.
Interest income decreased $50 million, or 16%, to $268 million for 2020, compared to $318 million for 2019 primarily due to the decrease of the LIBOR rate on receivables in Argentina, a lower loan receivable balance at Mong Duong, and a lower average interest rate at AES Brasil.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt decreased $108 million, or 58%, to $78 million for 2021, compared to $186 million for 2020. This decrease was primarily due to prior year losses of $145 million and $34 million at the Parent Company and DPL, respectively, resulting from the redemption of senior notes and a $16 million loss resulting from the Panama refinancing. These decreases were partially offset in 2021 by a loss of $27 million due to the prepayment at AES Brasil, losses at Argentina and AES Andes of $17 million and $14 million, respectively, due to repayments, and a refinancing resulting in a loss at Andres of $14 million.
Loss on extinguishment of debt increased $17 million, or 10% to $186 million for 2020, compared to $169 million for 2019. This increase was primarily due to the increases mentioned above partially offset by losses of $45 million at DPL, $31 million at Mong Duong, $29 million at AES Andes, $28 million at Colon, and $24 million at Cochrane in 2019 resulting from the redemption or refinancing of senior notes.
See Note 11-Debt included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Other income
Other income increased $335 million to $410 million for 2021, compared to $75 million for 2020 primarily due to the current year gain on remeasurement of our equity interest in the sPower development platform to its acquisition-date fair value, recognized as part of the merger to form AES Clean Energy Development, legal arbitration at Alto Maipo, and the gain on remeasurement of contingent consideration of the Great Cove Solar acquisition at Clean Energy, partially offset by the prior year gain on sale of Redondo Beach land at Southland.
Other income decreased $70 million, or 48% to $75 million for 2020, compared to $145 million for 2019 primarily due to 2019 gains on insurance recoveries associated with property damage at the Andres facility and upgrading the tunnel lining at Changuinola, partially offset by the 2020 gain on sale of Redondo Beach land at Southland.
Other expense
Other expense increased $7 million, or 13%, to $60 million for 2021, compared to $53 million for 2020 primarily due to a current year loss recognized at commencement of a sales-type lease at AES Renewable Holdings and an increase in loss on sale and disposal of assets, partially offset by lower losses on sales of Stabilization Fund receivables in Chile and compliance with an arbitration decision in 2020.
87 | 2021 Annual Report
Other expense decreased $27 million, or 34% to $53 million for 2020, compared to $80 million for 2019 primarily due to 2019 losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases at AES Renewable Holdings, the 2019 loss on disposal of assets at Changuinola associated with upgrading the tunnel lining, and lower defined benefit plan costs at AES Indiana in 2020, partially offset by a loss on sale of Stabilization Fund receivables in Chile and compliance with an arbitration decision in 2020.
See Note 21-Other Income and Expense included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Gain (loss) on disposal and sale of business interests
Loss on disposal and sale of business interests increased $1,588 million to $1,683 million for 2021, compared to $95 million for 2020, primarily due to the $2,074 million loss on the deconsolidation of Alto Maipo, partially offset by the issuance of new shares by Fluence, our equity method investment, to new investors, which AES has accounted for as a gain on the partial disposition of its investment in Fluence, and the gain on the sale of Guacolda.
Loss on disposal and sale of business interests was $95 million for 2020, primarily due to the loss on sale of Uruguaiana and the loss on the settlement of the arbitration related to the sale of Kazakhstan HPPs, partially offset by the gain on sale of OPGC; as compared to a gain of $28 million for 2019, primarily due to the gain on sale of a portion of our interest in sPower's operating assets, the gain on the merger of Simple Energy to form Uplight, and the gain on transfer of Stuart and Killen, partially offset by the loss on sale of Kilroot and Ballylumford.
See Note 24-Held-for-Sale and Dispositions and Note 8-Investments in and Advances to Affiliates included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Asset impairment expense
Asset impairment expense increased $711 million to $1,575 million for 2021, compared to $864 million for 2020. This increase was primarily due to impairments of $649 million and $155 million related to AES Andes’ commitment to accelerate the retirement of the Ventanas 3 & 4 and Angamos coal-fired plants, respectively, a $475 million impairment at Puerto Rico associated with the economic costs and reputational risks of disposal of coal combustion residuals off island, impairments of $29 million, $73 million, and $91 million at Buffalo Gap I, II, and III wind generation facilities, respectively, due to an expired PPA and volatile spot prices in the ERCOT market, and a $67 million impairment at the Mountain View I & II wind facilities related to a repowering project that will result in decommissioning the majority of the existing wind turbines in advance of their depreciable lives. The increase was partially offset by the $564 million and $213 million impairments related to the Angamos and Ventanas 1 & 2 coal-fired plants in Chile in the prior year and the $38 million impairment of the generation facility in Hawaii during 2020.
Asset impairment expense increased $679 million to $864 million for 2020, compared to $185 million for 2019. This increase was primarily driven by a $781 million impairment related to certain coal-fired plants at AES Andes and a $30 million impairment of the Estrella del Mar I power barge in Panama, compared to a $115 million impairment at Kilroot and Ballylumford upon meeting the held-for-sale criteria in 2019.
See Note 22-Asset Impairment Expense included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Foreign currency transaction gains (losses)
Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) in millions were as follows:
_____________________________
(1) Primarily associated with the peso-denominated energy receivable indexed to the USD through the FONINVEMEM agreement which is considered a foreign currency derivative. See Note 7-Financing Receivables included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
(2) Includes gains of $12 million and $57 million, and losses of $31 million on foreign currency derivative contracts for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
88 | 2021 Annual Report
The Company recognized net foreign currency transaction losses of $10 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by the depreciation of the Argentine peso, unrealized losses on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina, and unrealized losses at the Parent Company resulting from the depreciation of intercompany receivables denominated in Euro, partially offset by unrealized derivative gains on foreign currency derivatives due to the depreciating Colombian peso.
The Company recognized net foreign currency transaction gains of $55 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by realized and unrealized gains on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina and unrealized gains at the Parent Company resulting from the appreciation of intercompany receivables denominated in Euro.
The Company recognized net foreign currency transaction losses of $67 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by unrealized losses on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina and unrealized losses associated with the devaluation of long-term receivables denominated in the Argentine peso.
Other non-operating expense
Other non-operating expense was $202 million and $92 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to the other-than-temporary impairment of the OPGC equity method investment. In December 2019, an other-than-temporary impairment of $92 million was identified at OPGC primarily due to the estimated market value of the Company's investment and other negative developments impacting future expected cash flows at the investee. In March 2020, the Company recognized an additional $43 million other-than-temporary impairment due to the economic slowdown. In June 2020, the Company agreed to sell its entire stake in the OPGC investment, resulting in an other-than-temporary impairment of $158 million. There were no other non-operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021.
See Note 8-Investments in and Advances to Affiliates included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Income tax benefit (expense)
Income tax benefit was $133 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to income tax expense of $216 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The Company's effective tax rates were 13% and 44% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The net change in the 2021 effective tax rate was primarily due to the 2021 impacts of the deconsolidation of Alto Maipo and the asset impairment at Puerto Rico. These impacts were partially offset by the income tax benefit related to effective settlement resulting from the exam closure of the Company’s U.S. 2017 tax return. Additionally offsetting the aforementioned impacts was the benefit associated with the release of valuation allowance due to a change in expected realizability of net operating loss carryforwards at one of our Brazilian subsidiaries. The 2020 effective tax rate was impacted by the other-than-temporary impairment of the OPGC equity method investment and the loss on sale of the Company’s entire interest in AES Uruguaiana, partially offset by the recognition of a federal ITC for the Na Pua Makani wind facility in Hawaii. See Note 22-Asset Impairment Expense included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for details of the asset impairment. See Note 24-Held-for-Sale and Dispositions included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for details of the sale of the Company's entire interest of AES Uruguaiana and the deconsolidation of Alto Maipo.
Income tax expense decreased $136 million to $216 million in 2020 as compared to $352 million for 2019. The Company's effective tax rates were 44% and 35% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The net increase in the 2020 effective tax rate was primarily due to the 2020 impacts of the drivers cited above. Further, the 2019 rate was impacted by the nondeductible losses on the sale of the Company's entire 100% interest in the Kilroot coal and oil-fired plant and energy storage facility and the Ballylumford gas-fired plant in the United Kingdom and associated asset impairments. Further impacting the 2019 effective tax rate were the effects of the Argentine peso devaluation to tax expense, as well as to pretax income for nondeductible unrealized losses on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina. See Note 24-Held-for-Sale and Dispositions included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for details of the sales.
Our effective tax rate reflects the tax effect of significant operations outside the U.S., which are generally taxed at rates different than the U.S. statutory rate. Foreign earnings may be taxed at rates higher than the U.S. corporate rate of 21% and are also subject to current U.S. taxation under the GILTI rules introduced by the TCJA. A future
89 | 2021 Annual Report
proportionate change in the composition of income before income taxes from foreign and domestic tax jurisdictions could impact our periodic effective tax rate. The Company also benefits from reduced tax rates in certain countries as a result of satisfying specific commitments regarding employment and capital investment. See Note 23-Income Taxes included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding these reduced rates.
Net equity in losses of affiliates
Net equity in losses of affiliates decreased $99 million, or 80%, to $24 million in 2021, compared to $123 million in 2020. This was primarily driven by earnings at sPower in 2021 of $79 million, compared to losses in the prior year, driven by renewable projects that came online and prior year impairments of certain development projects, and $81 million of losses at AES Andes in 2020 mainly due to a long-lived asset impairment and the suspension of equity method accounting at Guacolda. This decrease in losses was partially offset by an increase in losses at Fluence of $45 million due to shipping issues, cost overruns and delays at projects under construction, and an increase in costs associated with the growing business, as well as an increase in losses at Uplight of $10 million due to higher costs associated with the growing business.
Net equity in losses of affiliates decreased $49 million, or 28%, to $123 million in 2020, compared to $172 million in 2019. This was primarily driven by a $31 million increase in earnings due to lower long-lived asset impairments at Guacolda, AES Andes' 50%-owned equity affiliate, during 2020 as compared to 2019.
See Note 8-Investments In and Advances to Affiliates included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and redeemable stock of subsidiaries
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and redeemable stock of subsidiaries decreased $648 million to a loss of $542 million in 2021, compared to income of $106 million in 2020. This decrease was primarily due to:
•Loss on deconsolidation of Alto Maipo due to loss of control after Chapter 11 filing;
•Asset impairments at Buffalo Gap;
•Increased costs associated with growing and accelerating the U.S. renewables development pipeline;
•Lower earnings in Brazil due to the prior year favorable revision of the GSF liability; and
•Lower earnings in the Dominican Republic due to the sale of Itabo in the second quarter.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•Allocation of earnings at Southland Energy to noncontrolling interests;
•Higher earnings in Panama primarily due to the prior year asset impairment and loss on extinguishment of debt; and
•Higher earnings in Colombia due to the life extension project at the Chivor hydroelectric plant completed in the prior year and better hydrology.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and redeemable stock of subsidiaries decreased $69 million, or 39%, to $106 million in 2020, compared to $175 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to:
•Lower earnings in Chile due to long-lived asset impairments at AES Andes, partially offset by net gains from early contract terminations at Angamos and lower interest expense due to incremental capitalized interest;
•Lower earnings in Colombia due to drier hydrology and a life extension project at the Chivor hydroelectric plant;
•Prior year insurance recoveries net of outages at Andres; and
•HLBV allocation of losses to noncontrolling interests at AES Renewable Holdings.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•Higher earnings in Brazil due to the favorable revision of the GSF liability; and
•Prior year losses on extinguishment of debt at Mong Duong and Colon.
90 | 2021 Annual Report
Net income attributable to The AES Corporation
Net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $455 million to a loss of $409 million in 2021, compared to income of $46 million in 2020. This decrease was primarily due to:
•Loss on deconsolidation of Alto Maipo due to loss of control after Chapter 11 filing;
•Higher asset impairments in the current year; and
•Lower margins at our South America SBU primarily due to the prior year revision of the GSF liability at Brazil.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•Gain due to the initial public offering of Fluence;
•Gain on remeasurement of our equity interest in the sPower development platform to acquisition-date fair value;
•Prior year other-than-temporary impairment of OPGC;
•Lower Parent interest expense due to realized gains on de-designated interest rate swaps and lower interest rates;
•Prior year losses on extinguishment of debt at the Parent and DPL;
•Higher margins at our US and Utilities SBU primarily due to favorable price variances under the commercial hedging strategy at Southland and at Southland Energy mainly due to the CCGT units operating under active PPAs during the full 2021 period; and
•Lower income tax expense.
Net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $257 million, or 85% to $46 million in 2020, compared to $303 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to:
•Long-lived asset impairments at AES Andes and Panama;
•Net impact of current and prior year other-than-temporary impairments of OPGC;
•Higher losses on extinguishment of debt in the current year, primarily due to major refinancings at the Parent Company;
•Lower margins at our US and Utilities SBU;
•Losses on sale of Uruguaiana and the Kazakhstan HPPs as a result of the final arbitration decision; and
•Prior year net insurance recoveries at Andres.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•Prior year long-lived asset impairments at Kilroot and Ballylumford;
•Net impact of current and prior year long-lived asset impairments at Guacolda;
•Prior year unrealized losses on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina;
•Higher margins at our South America and MCAC SBUs;
•Lower income tax expense;
•Lower interest expense due to incremental capitalized interest in Chile; and
•Gain on sale of land held by AES Redondo Beach at Southland.
SBU Performance Analysis
Segments
We are organized into four market-oriented SBUs: US and Utilities (United States, Puerto Rico and El Salvador); South America (Chile, Colombia, Argentina and Brazil); MCAC (Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean); and Eurasia (Europe and Asia).
91 | 2021 Annual Report
Non-GAAP Measures
Adjusted Operating Margin, Adjusted PTC and Adjusted EPS are non-GAAP supplemental measures that are used by management and external users of our Consolidated Financial Statements such as investors, industry analysts and lenders.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company updated the definition of Adjusted EPS item (g) tax benefit or expense related to the enactment effects of 2017 U.S. tax law reform and related regulations and any subsequent period adjustments related to enactment effects to include the 2021 tax benefit on reversal of uncertain tax positions effectively settled upon the closure of the Company's 2017 U.S. tax return exam.
Effective January 1, 2021, the Company changed the definitions of Adjusted Operating Margin, Adjusted PTC, and Adjusted EPS to remove the adjustment for costs directly associated with a major restructuring program, including, but not limited to, workforce reduction efforts, relocations, and office consolidation. As this adjustment was specific to the major restructuring program announced by the Company in 2018, we believe removing this adjustment from our non-GAAP definitions provides simplification and clarity for our investors.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company changed the definitions of Adjusted Operating Margin, Adjusted PTC and Adjusted EPS to exclude net gains at Angamos, one of our businesses in the South America SBU, associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence. We believe the inclusion of the effects of this non-recurring transaction would result in a lack of comparability in our results of operations and would distort the metrics that our investors use to measure us.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company changed the definitions of Adjusted PTC and Adjusted EPS to exclude gains and losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases. We believe these transactions are economically similar to sales of business interests and excluding these gains or losses better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company.
Adjusted Operating Margin
We define Adjusted Operating Margin as Operating Margin, adjusted for the impact of NCI, excluding (a) unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions; (b) benefits and costs associated with dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, including early plant closures; and (c) net gains at Angamos, one of our businesses in the South America SBU, associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence. The allocation of HLBV earnings to noncontrolling interests is not adjusted out of Adjusted Operating Margin. See Review of Consolidated Results of Operations for definitions of Operating Margin and cost of sales.
The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted Operating Margin is Operating Margin. We believe that Adjusted Operating Margin better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company. Factors in this determination include the impact of NCI, where AES consolidates the results of a subsidiary that is not wholly owned by the Company, as well as the variability due to unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions and strategic decisions to dispose of or acquire business interests. Adjusted Operating Margin should not be construed as an alternative to Operating Margin, which is determined in accordance with GAAP.
_____________________________
(1)The allocation of HLBV earnings to noncontrolling interests is not adjusted out of Adjusted Operating Margin.
92 | 2021 Annual Report
Adjusted PTC
We define Adjusted PTC as pre-tax income from continuing operations attributable to The AES Corporation excluding gains or losses of the consolidated entity due to (a) unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions and equity securities; (b) unrealized foreign currency gains or losses; (c) gains, losses, benefits and costs associated with dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, including early plant closures, and gains and losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases; (d) losses due to impairments; (e) gains, losses and costs due to the early retirement of debt; and (f) net gains at Angamos, one of our businesses in the South America SBU, associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence. Adjusted PTC also includes net equity in earnings of affiliates on an after-tax basis adjusted for the same gains or losses excluded from consolidated entities.
Adjusted PTC reflects the impact of NCI and excludes the items specified in the definition above. In addition to the revenue and cost of sales reflected in Operating Margin, Adjusted PTC includes the other components of our Consolidated Statement of Operations, such as general and administrative expenses in the Corporate segment, as well as business development costs, interest expense and interest income, other expense and other income, realized foreign currency transaction gains and losses, and net equity in earnings of affiliates.
The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted PTC is income from continuing operations attributable to The AES Corporation. We believe that Adjusted PTC better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company and is the most relevant measure considered in the Company's internal evaluation of the financial performance of its segments. Factors in this determination include the variability due to unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions or equity securities remeasurement, unrealized foreign currency gains or losses, losses due to impairments, strategic decisions to dispose of or acquire business interests or retire debt, and the non-recurring nature of the impact of the early contract terminations at Angamos, which affect results in a given period or periods. In addition, Adjusted PTC represents the business performance of the Company before the application of statutory income tax rates and tax adjustments, including the effects of tax planning, corresponding to the various jurisdictions in which the Company operates. Given its large number of businesses and complexity, the Company concluded that Adjusted PTC is a more transparent measure that better assists investors in determining which businesses have the greatest impact on the Company's results.
Adjusted PTC should not be construed as an alternative to income from continuing operations attributable to The AES Corporation, which is determined in accordance with GAAP.
93 | 2021 Annual Report
Adjusted EPS
We define Adjusted EPS as diluted earnings per share from continuing operations excluding gains or losses of both consolidated entities and entities accounted for under the equity method due to (a) unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions and equity securities; (b) unrealized foreign currency gains or losses; (c) gains, losses, benefits and costs associated with dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, including early plant closures, the tax impact from the repatriation of sales proceeds, and gains and losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases; (d) losses due to impairments; (e) gains, losses and costs due to the early retirement of debt; (f) net gains at Angamos, one of our businesses in the South America SBU, associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence; and (g) tax benefit or expense related to the enactment effects of 2017 U.S. tax law reform and related regulations and any subsequent period adjustments related to enactment effects, including the 2021 tax benefit on reversal of uncertain tax positions effectively settled upon the closure of the Company's U.S. tax return exam.
The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted EPS is diluted earnings per share from continuing operations. We believe that Adjusted EPS better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company and is considered in the Company's internal evaluation of financial performance. Factors in this determination include the variability due to unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions or equity securities remeasurement, unrealized foreign currency gains or losses, losses due to impairments, strategic decisions to dispose of or acquire business interests or retire debt, the one-time impact of the 2017 U.S. tax law reform and subsequent period adjustments related to enactment effects, and the non-recurring nature of the impact of the early contract terminations at Angamos, which affect results in a given period or periods. Adjusted EPS should not be construed as an alternative to diluted earnings per share from continuing operations, which is determined in accordance with GAAP.
94 | 2021 Annual Report
The Company reported a loss from continuing operations of $0.62 for the year ended December 31, 2021. For purposes of measuring diluted loss per share under GAAP, common stock equivalents were excluded from weighted average shares as their inclusion would be anti-dilutive. However, for purposes of computing Adjusted EPS, the Company has included the impact of dilutive common stock equivalents. The table below reconciles the weighted average shares used in GAAP diluted loss per share to the weighted average shares used in calculating the non-GAAP measure of Adjusted EPS.
_____________________________
(1)Amount primarily relates to unrealized derivative losses in Argentina of $89 million, or $0.13 per share, mainly associated with foreign currency derivatives on government receivables.
(2)Amount primarily relates to unrealized FX losses in Argentina of $25 million, or $0.04 per share, mainly associated with the devaluation of long-term receivables denominated in Argentine pesos, and unrealized FX losses at the Parent Company of $12 million, or $0.02 per share, mainly associated with intercompany receivables denominated in Euro.
(3)Amount primarily relates to loss on deconsolidation of Alto Maipo of $1.5 billion, or $2.09 per share, loss on Uplight transaction with shareholders of $25 million, or $0.04 per share, and a day-one loss recognized at commencement of a sales-type lease at AES Renewable Holdings of $13 million, or $0.02 per share, partially offset by gain on initial public offering of Fluence of $325 million, or $0.46 per share, gain on remeasurement of our equity interest in sPower to acquisition-date fair value of $249 million, or $0.35 per share, gain on Fluence issuance of shares of $60 million, or $0.09 per share, and gain on sale of Guacolda of $22 million, or $0.03 per share.
(4)Amount primarily relates to loss on sale of Uruguaiana of $85 million, or $0.13 per share, loss on sale of the Kazakhstan HPPs of $30 million, or $0.05 per share, as a result of the final arbitration decision, and advisor fees associated with the successful acquisition of additional ownership interest in AES Brasil of $9 million, or $0.01 per share; partially offset by gain on sale of OPGC of $23 million, or $0.03 per share.
(5)Amount primarily relates to losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases at AES Renewable Holdings of $36 million, or $0.05 per share, and loss on sale of Kilroot and Ballylumford of $31 million, or $0.05 per share; partially offset by gain on sale of a portion of our interest in sPower’s operating assets of $28 million, or $0.04 per share, gain on disposal of Stuart and Killen at DPL of $20 million, or $0.03 per share, and gain on sale of ownership interest in Simple Energy as part of the Uplight merger of $12 million, or $0.02 per share.
(6)Amount primarily relates to asset impairments at AES Andes of $540 million, or $0.77 per share, at Puerto Rico of $475 million, or $0.68 per share, at Mountain View of $67 million, or $0.10 per share, at our sPower equity affiliate, impacting equity earnings by $24 million, or $0.03 per share, at Buffalo Gap of $22 million, or $0.03 per share, at Clean Energy of $14 million, or $0.02 per share, and at Laurel Mountain of $7 million, or $0.01 per share.
(7)Amount primarily relates to asset impairments at AES Andes of $527 million, or $0.79 per share, other-than-temporary impairment of OPGC of $201 million, or $0.30 per share, impairments at our Guacolda and sPower equity affiliates, impacting equity earnings by $85 million, or $0.13 per share, and $57 million, or $0.09 per share, respectively; impairment at AES Hawaii of $38 million, or $0.06 per share, and impairment at Panama of $15 million, or $0.02 per share.
(8)Amount primarily relates to asset impairments at Kilroot and Ballylumford of $115 million, or $0.17 per share, and at AES Hawaii of $60 million, or $0.09 per share; impairments at our Guacolda and sPower equity affiliates, impacting equity earnings by $105 million, or $0.16 per share, and $21 million, or $0.03 per share, respectively; and other-than-temporary impairment of OPGC of $92 million, or $0.14 per share.
(9)Amount primarily relates to losses on early retirement of debt at AES Brasil of $27 million, or $0.04 per share, at Argentina of $17 million, or $0.02 per share, at AES Andes of $15 million, or $0.02 per share, and at Andres and Los Mina of $15 million, or $0.02 per share.
(10)Amount primarily relates to losses on early retirement of debt at the Parent Company of $146 million, or $0.22 per share, DPL of $32 million, or $0.05 per share, Angamos of $17 million, or $0.02 per share, and Panama of $11 million, or $0.02 per share.
(11)Amount primarily relates to losses on early retirement of debt at DPL of $45 million, or $0.07 per share, AES Andes of $35 million, or $0.05 per share, Mong Duong of $17 million, or $0.03 per share, and Colon of $14 million, or $0.02 per share.
(12)Amounts relate to net gains at Angamos associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence of $256 million, or $0.37 per share, and $182 million, or $0.27 per share, for the periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(13)Amount relates to the tax benefit on reversal of uncertain tax positions effectively settled upon the closure of the Company's 2017 U.S. tax return exam of $176 million, or $0.25 per share.
(14)Amount represents adjustment to tax law reform remeasurement due to incremental deferred taxes related to DPL of $16 million, or $0.02 per share.
95 | 2021 Annual Report
(15)Amount primarily relates to income tax benefits associated with the loss on deconsolidation of Alto Maipo of $209 million, or $0.30 per share, income tax benefits associated with the impairments at AES Andes of $146 million, or $0.21 per share, at Puerto Rico of $20 million, or $0.03 per share, and at Mountain View of $15 million, or $0.02 per share, partially offset by income tax expense associated with the gain on initial public offering of Fluence of $73 million, or $0.10 per share, income tax expense related to net gains at Angamos associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence of $69 million, or $0.10 per share, and income tax expense associated with the gain on remeasurement of our equity interest in sPower of $55 million, or $0.08 per share.
(16)Amount primarily relates to income tax benefits associated with the impairments at AES Andes and Guacolda of $164 million, or $0.25 per share, and income tax benefits associated with losses on early retirement of debt at the Parent Company of $31 million, or $0.05 per share; partially offset by income tax expense related to net gains at Angamos associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence of $49 million, or $0.07 per share.
(17)Amount primarily relates to the income tax benefits associated with the impairments at OPGC of $23 million, or $0.03 per share, Guacolda of $13 million, or $0.02 per share, AES Hawaii of $13 million, or $0.02 per share, and Kilroot and Ballylumford of $11 million, or $0.02 per share, and income tax benefits associated with losses on early retirement of debt of $24 million, or $0.04 per share; partially offset by an adjustment to income tax expense related to 2018 gains on sales of business interests, primarily Masinloc, of $25 million, or $0.04 per share.
US and Utilities SBU
The following table summarizes Operating Margin, Adjusted Operating Margin and Adjusted PTC (in millions) for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1) A non-GAAP financial measure, adjusted for the impact of NCI. See SBU Performance Analysis-Non-GAAP Measures for definition and Item 1.-Business for the respective ownership interest for key businesses.
Fiscal year 2021 versus 2020
Operating Margin increased $154 million, or 24%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin increased $40 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI, primarily related to the sale of ownership interest in Southland Energy, and unrealized gains and losses on derivatives.
Adjusted PTC increased $155 million, primarily driven by the increase in Adjusted Operating Margin described above, an increase at our U.S. renewables businesses due to contributions from newly operational projects, lower interest expenses at Southland Energy attributable to NCI allocation in 2021, non-service pension income at AES Indiana, and lower interest expense at DPL. These increases were partially offset by a gain in 2020 on sale of land held by AES Redondo Beach at Southland.
96 | 2021 Annual Report
Fiscal year 2020 versus 2019
Operating Margin decreased $116 million, or 15%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $82 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI and excluding unrealized gains and losses on derivatives and costs associated with dispositions of business interests.
Adjusted PTC decreased $64 million, primarily driven by the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin described above and increased interest expense primarily at Southland Energy due to lower capitalized interest following completion of the CCGT units and new debt issuances, partially offset by a gain on sale of land held by AES Redondo Beach at Southland, lower pension expense at AES Indiana, and an increase in allocation of earnings from equity affiliates driven by renewable projects that came online in 2020 at sPower.
South America SBU
The following table summarizes Operating Margin, Adjusted Operating Margin and Adjusted PTC (in millions) for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1) A non-GAAP financial measure, adjusted for the impact of NCI. See SBU Performance Analysis-Non-GAAP Measures for definition and Item 1.-Business for the respective ownership interest for key businesses. AES' indirect beneficial interest in AES Brasil increased from 24.35% to 44.13% in 2020 and to 46.7% in 2021. See Item 1.-Business-South America SBU-Brazil.
Fiscal year 2021 versus 2020
Operating Margin decreased $174 million, or 14%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $118 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI and net gains on early contract terminations at Angamos.
Adjusted PTC decreased $111 million, mainly driven by the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin described above, incremental capitalized interest at Alto Maipo in the prior period, lower equity earnings at Guacolda due to the suspension of equity method accounting, and higher interest expense in Brazil. These negative variances were partially offset by a favorable award in an arbitration proceeding in Chile and higher interest income in Argentina due to increase in rates and higher sales.
97 | 2021 Annual Report
Fiscal year 2020 versus 2019
Operating Margin increased $370 million, or 42%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin increased $51 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI and the net gains on early contract terminations at Angamos.
Adjusted PTC increased $30 million, mainly driven by the increase in Adjusted Operating Margin described above, as well as lower interest expense due to incremental capitalized interest at Alto Maipo. These positive impacts were partially offset by realized FX losses and lower interest income primarily driven by lower interest rates on CAMMESA receivables in Argentina, and higher interest expense in Brazil due to higher inflation rates.
MCAC SBU
The following table summarizes Operating Margin, Adjusted Operating Margin and Adjusted PTC (in millions) for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1) A non-GAAP financial measure, adjusted for the impact of NCI. See SBU Performance Analysis-Non-GAAP Measures for definition and Item 1.-Business for the respective ownership interest for key businesses.
Fiscal year 2021 versus 2020
Operating Margin decreased $38 million, or 7%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin increased $4 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC increased $27 million, mainly driven by the increase in Adjusted Operating Margin described above, as well as a legal settlement in Panama in 2020 and a current year gain on pension plan buyout in Mexico.
98 | 2021 Annual Report
Fiscal year 2020 versus 2019
Operating Margin increased $72 million, or 15%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin increased $42 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC decreased $80 million, mainly driven by insurance recoveries associated with property damage at Andres and Changuinola in 2019, partially offset by the increase in Adjusted Operating Margin described above.
Eurasia SBU
The following table summarizes Operating Margin, Adjusted Operating Margin and Adjusted PTC (in millions) for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1) A non-GAAP financial measure, adjusted for the impact of NCI. See SBU Performance Analysis-Non-GAAP Measures for definition and Item 1.-Business for the respective ownership interest for key businesses.
Fiscal year 2021 versus 2020
Operating Margin increased $30 million, or 16%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin increased $20 million due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC increased $19 million driven by the increase in Adjusted Operating Margin described above.
Fiscal year 2020 versus 2019
Operating Margin decreased $2 million, or 1%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $6 million due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC increased $18 million, primarily driven by lower interest expense due to regular debt repayments in Bulgaria and a positive variance in OPGC equity earnings, partially offset by the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin discussed above.
99 | 2021 Annual Report
Key Trends and Uncertainties
During 2022 and beyond, we expect to face the following challenges at certain of our businesses. Management expects that improved operating performance at certain businesses, growth from new businesses, and global cost reduction initiatives may lessen or offset their impact. If these favorable effects do not occur, or if the challenges described below and elsewhere in this section impact us more significantly than we currently anticipate, or if volatile foreign currencies and commodities move more unfavorably, then these adverse factors (or other adverse factors unknown to us) may have a material impact on our operating margin, net income attributable to The AES Corporation and cash flows. We continue to monitor our operations and address challenges as they arise. For the risk factors related to our business, see Item 1.-Business and Item 1A.-Risk Factors of this Form 10-K.
Operational
COVID-19 Pandemic - The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted global economic activity, including electricity and energy consumption, and caused significant volatility in financial markets intermittently in the last two years. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic we have conducted our essential operations without significant disruption. We derive approximately 85% of our total revenues from our regulated utilities and long-term sales and supply contracts or PPAs at our generation businesses, which contributes to a relatively stable revenue and cost structure at most of our businesses. In 2021, our operational locations continued to experience the impact of, and recovery from, the COVID-19 pandemic. Across our global portfolio, our utilities businesses have generally performed in line with our expectations consistent with a recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. While we cannot predict the length and magnitude of the pandemic, including the impact of current or future variants, or how it could impact global economic conditions, a delayed recovery with respect to demand may adversely impact our financial results for 2022. Also see Item 1A.-Risk Factors of this Form 10-K.
We continue to monitor and manage our credit exposures in a prudent manner. Our credit exposures have continued in-line with historical levels and within the customary 45-60 day grace period. We have not experienced material credit-related impacts from our PPA offtakers due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our supply chain management has remained robust during this challenging time and we continue to closely manage and monitor developments. We continue to experience certain minor delays in some of our development projects, primarily in permitting processes and the implementation of interconnections, due to governments and other authorities having limited capacity to perform their functions.
Operational Sensitivity to Dry Hydrological Conditions - Our hydroelectric generation facilities are sensitive to changes in the weather, particularly the level of water inflows into generation facilities. While our operations in Panama, Colombia, Brazil, and Chile have experienced challenges arising from dry hydrology from time to time, the current dry hydrological conditions in Brazil have exceeded historical levels. If these hydrological conditions continue to persist, we may need to purchase energy at higher prices to fulfill our contractual arrangements.
Trade Restrictions and Supply Chain - In recent years, increased tensions between the U.S. and China have resulted in policies that restrict or increase costs on trade, such as tariffs and import restrictions, that have impacted the renewable energy industry. While we have been able to largely mitigate any material impacts so far, China is the largest supplier of raw materials and components used in solar panels. Imports of solar panels into the U.S. from China and Southeast Asia have been delayed or challenged in certain instances. In addition, substantial shortages in shipping services and disruptions in global supply chain, recent disruptions specific to solar panel imports including the uncertainty around the application of additional tariffs on solar panel imports from Southeast Asia, and the potential detainment of panels by U.S. Customs and Border Protection has further challenged the supply chain related to renewable energy. While we have contracted and substantially secured our expected requirements for U.S. solar panels for 2022, these disruptions may persist and impact our suppliers’ ability or willingness to meet their contractual agreements. AES will continue to monitor developments and take prudent steps towards maintaining a robust supply chain for our renewables projects.
Macroeconomic and Political
The macroeconomic and political environments in some countries where our subsidiaries conduct business have changed during 2021. This could result in significant impacts to tax laws and environmental and energy policies. Additionally, we operate in multiple countries and as such are subject to volatility in exchange rates at the
100 | 2021 Annual Report
subsidiary level. See