ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Arena Fortify Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Item 1. Business,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” and “Item 15. Financial Statements” and the accompanying notes and other data, all of which appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on January 26, 2021 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to herein as our initial business combination. We have not selected any specific business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering, the initial stockholder loans, and the private placement of the private placement warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the initial public offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
In February 2021, we issued 5,750,000 founder shares to our sponsor for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000 in cash, or approximately $0.004 per share. In March 2021, our sponsor sold 456,000 founder shares each to Cowen Investments II and Intrepid Financial Partners. On March 19, 2021, our sponsor transferred 25,000 shares to each of Marc McCarthy and James Crockard III. On October 4, 2021, we effected a share contribution back to capital resulting in our initial stockholders holding 4,312,500 shares of our Class B common stock.
On November 15, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 17,250,000 units (including 2,250,000 units issued upon exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional units), at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $172,500,000. Each unit consists of one share of Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value, and one-half
of one redeemable warrant. Each public warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per whole share.
Certain of our initial stockholders lent us an aggregate amount of $3,450,000 as of the closing date of our initial public offering at no interest. The proceeds of the initial stockholder loans were added to the trust account and will be used to fund the redemption of our public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law). The initial stockholder loans shall be repaid in cash or converted into initial stockholder loan warrants at a conversion price of $1.00 per warrant, at each initial stockholder’s sole discretion. The initial stockholder loan warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants sold in connection with our initial public offering.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, our initial stockholders purchased an aggregate of 5,450,000 private placement warrants (including 450,000 private placement warrants issued in connection with the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional units), at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant ($5,450,000 in the aggregate) in a private placement. Each private placement warrant is exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we also issued promissory notes to each initial stockholder, generating aggregate gross proceeds to the Company of $3,450,000. These notes shall be repaid in cash or converted into initial stockholder loan warrants at a purchase price of $1.00 per warrant, at each such lender’s sole direction. The initial stockholder loan warrants will be identical to the private placement warrants.
Following our initial public offering, the closing of the over-allotment option, the sale of the private placement warrants, and the receipt of proceeds from the initial stockholder loans, approximately $175.9 million was placed in a trust account located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 15 months from the closing of our initial public offering, or February 15, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the public shares, at a per-share price,
payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception through December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for our initial public offering, and since the closing of the initial public offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from inception through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $7,985,001, which was comprised of the change in the fair value of our warrants of $8,663,000 and interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $6,892, partially offset by operating costs of $684,905.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $696,759 in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $81,193. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to pay existing accounts payable, identify and evaluate prospective initial business combination candidates, perform due diligence on prospective target businesses, pay for travel expenditures, select the target business or businesses to merge with or acquire and structure, negotiate and consummate a business combination.
Prior to the completion of our initial public offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a payment from our sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from our sponsor of $300,000. On November 15, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 17,250,000 units (including 2,250,000 units issued upon exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional units) at a price of $10.00 per unit. Certain of our initial stockholders lent us an aggregate amount of $3,450,000 as of the closing date of our initial public offering at no interest. The proceeds of the initial stockholder loans were added to the trust account and will be used to fund the redemption of our public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law). The initial stockholder loans shall be repaid in cash or converted into initial stockholder loan warrants at a conversion price of $1.00 per warrant, at each initial stockholder’s sole discretion. The initial stockholder loan warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants sold in connection with our initial public offering. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 5,450,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant in a private placement to our initial stockholders. Among these private placement warrants, 4,360,000 were purchased by our sponsor and 545,000 warrants were purchased by each of Cowen Investments II and Intrepid Financial Partners.
Following our initial public offering, the closing of the over-allotment option, the receipt of proceeds from the initial stockholder loans and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $175,950,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $4,675,360 in transaction costs, including $3,450,000 of underwriting fees and $1,225,360 of other offering costs. The promissory note from our sponsor was paid in full on November 17, 2021. Subsequent to the completion of our initial public offering, the closing of the over-allotment option, the receipt of proceeds from the initial stockholder loans and the sale of the private placement warrants, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the completion of a business combination or one year from this filing. We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However there is a risk that the company’s liquidity may not be sufficient. As indicated elsewhere in this Report, we have until February 15, 2023 to consummate a business combination. If our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Furthermore, if a business combination is not consummated by this date and an extension is not requested by our sponsor there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the company. Uncertainty related to the consummation of a business combination raises substantial doubt about the company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities to reflect a required liquidation after February 15, 2023.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial public offering and the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 14,075,000 shares of our Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. The number of weighted average shares of Class B common stock for calculating basic net income (loss) per share was reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 562,500 shares of Class B common stock that were subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised in full or part by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied as of December 31, 2021, we included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in FASB ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“FASB ASC 480”) and FASB ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“FASB ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to FASB ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to FASB ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under FASB ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
The public warrants and the private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with FASB ASC 815. Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until exercised. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash
gain or loss on the statement of operations. Upon consummating the initial public offering on November 15, 2021, the company estimated the fair value of the warrant derivative liabilities using a Binomial lattice model and subsequently measured using a Monte Carlo simulation and the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model at period-end. Subsequently, derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities. The determination of fair value for the warrant liabilities represents a significant estimate made by management in the financial statements.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in FASB ASC 480. Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of common stock (including shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A shares of common stock are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s shares of Class A common stock sold in the initial public offering feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 17,250,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of the Company’s balance sheet. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Such changes are reflected in additional paid-in capital, or in the absence of additional capital, in accumulated deficit.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have any off-balance-sheet arrangements; however, we do have certain contractual arrangements that would require us to make payments if certain circumstances occur; we refer to these arrangements as contingent commitments. See Note 6, “Commitments and Contingencies,” to our financial statements included herein for further discussion of these matters.
Contractual Obligations
Promissory Note-Related Party
On February 22, 2021, the company issued an unsecured promissory note, pursuant to which the Company could borrow up to an aggregate of $300,000 to cover expenses related to our initial public offering. The promissory note was non-interest
bearing and was payable on the earlier of (i) December 31, 2021 or (ii) the completion of our initial public offering. On November 12, 2021, the company repaid the $190,555 outstanding balance under the promissory note.
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
The underwriters is entitled to a fee of $0.35 per unit, or $6,037,500 in the aggregate (the “Marketing Fee”), which will be payable to the underwriters pursuant to the Business Combination Marketing Agreement. The Marketing Fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the Business Combination Marketing Agreement.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.