Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
INDEX TO MD&A
Page Page
Objective
Results of Operations - Fourth Quarter
Overview
Segmented Statement of Earnings
Critical Accounting Policies
Property and Casualty Insurance
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Holding Company, Other and Unallocated
Ratios
Real Estate Entities Acquired from the Annuity Operations
Condensed Consolidated Cash Flows
Discontinued Annuity Operations
Parent and Subsidiary Liquidity
Condensed Parent Only Cash Flows
Results of Operations - Full Year
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Segmented Statement of Earnings
Investments
Property and Casualty Insurance
Uncertainties
Holding Company, Other and Unallocated
Managed Investment Entities
Real Estate Entities Acquired from the Annuity Operations
Results of Operations
Discontinued Annuity Operations
General
Recent Accounting Standards
OBJECTIVE
The objective of Management’s Discussion and Analysis is to provide a discussion and analysis of the financial statements and other statistical data that management believes will enhance the understanding of AFG’s financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. The tables and narrative that follow are presented in a manner that is consistent with the information that AFG’s management uses to make operational decisions and allocate capital resources. They are provided to demonstrate the nature of the transactions and events that could impact AFG’s financial results. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements beginning on page.
OVERVIEW
Financial Condition
AFG is organized as a holding company with almost all of its operations being conducted by subsidiaries. AFG, however, has continuing cash needs for administrative expenses, the payment of principal and interest on borrowings, shareholder dividends, and taxes. Therefore, certain analyses are most meaningfully presented on a parent only basis while others are best done on a total enterprise basis. In addition, because its businesses are financial in nature, AFG does not prepare its consolidated financial statements using a current-noncurrent format. Consequently, certain traditional ratios and financial analysis tests are not meaningful.
At December 31, 2021, AFG (parent) held approximately $1.87 billion in cash and securities and had $500 million available under a bank line of credit, which expires in December 2025.
Sale of the Annuity Business
On May 28, 2021, AFG sold its annuity business consisting of Great American Life Insurance Company (“GALIC”) and its two insurance subsidiaries, Annuity Investors Life Insurance Company and Manhattan National Life Insurance Company, as well as a broker-dealer affiliate, Great American Advisors, Inc., and insurance distributor, AAG Insurance Agency, Inc. to Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company (“MassMutual”). Total proceeds from the sale were $3.57 billion and AFG realized an after-tax gain on the sale of $656 million. Beginning with the first quarter of 2021, results of the annuity businesses sold are reported as discontinued operations, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), which included adjusting prior period results to reflect these operations as discontinued.
Results of Operations
Through the operations of its subsidiaries, AFG is engaged primarily in property and casualty insurance, focusing on specialized commercial products for businesses. As discussed above, AFG’s former annuity operations are reported as discontinued operations.
AFG reported net earnings from continuing operations attributable to shareholders of $355 million ($4.18 per share, diluted) for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $265 million ($3.03 per share, diluted) in the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting higher underwriting profit and higher net investment income in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020, income from the sale of real estate in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the impact of the loss on retirement of debt recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by lower net realized gains in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020.
Full year 2021 net earnings from continuing operations attributable to shareholders were $1.08 billion ($12.62 per share, diluted) compared to $325 million ($3.63 per share, diluted) in 2020 reflecting higher underwriting profit and higher net investment income in 2021 compared to 2020, net realized gains in 2021 compared to net realized losses in 2020, the impact of special A&E charges recorded in 2020 and income from the sale of real estate in the fourth quarter of 2021, partially offset by higher interest charges on borrowed money and higher holding company expenses.
Outlook
The COVID-19 pandemic began to have a significant impact on global, social and economic activity during the first quarter of 2020. AFG has taken actions under its business continuity plan to minimize risk to the Company’s employees and to prevent any significant disruption to AFG’s business, agents or policyholders.
Management believes that AFG’s strong financial position and current liquidity and capital at its subsidiaries will give AFG the flexibility to continue to effectively address and respond to the ongoing uncertainties presented by the pandemic. AFG’s insurance subsidiaries continue to have capital at or in excess of the levels required by ratings agencies in order to maintain their current ratings, and the parent company does not have any near-term debt maturities.
As a result of the contracted economy, exposures in many of AFG’s property and casualty businesses changed due to workforce reduction, fewer miles driven and reduced revenue. This has and may continue to lead to lower frequency in certain lines while there has and may continue to be COVID-19 related increases in claim frequency in other lines of business.
There is also uncertainty as to potential government decree or legislation that could alter the coverage landscape, such as the imposition of retroactive business interruption insurance. Like most of the insurance industry, AFG’s business interruption coverages require direct physical damage to covered property for business interruption coverage to apply and the vast majority of AFG’s property policies also contain virus exclusions. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Significant accounting policies are summarized in Note A - “Accounting Policies” to the financial statements. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that can have a significant effect on amounts reported in the financial statements. As more information becomes known, these estimates and assumptions change and, thus, impact amounts reported in the future. The areas related to AFG’s continuing operations where management believes the degree of judgment required to determine amounts recorded in the financial statements is most significant are as follows:
•the establishment of insurance reserves, especially asbestos and environmental-related reserves,
•the recoverability of reinsurance,
•the establishment of asbestos and environmental liabilities of former railroad and manufacturing operations, and
•the valuation of investments, including the determination of impairment allowances.
See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Uncertainties” for a discussion of insurance reserves, recoverables from reinsurers and contingencies related to American Premier’s former operations and “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Investments” for a discussion of the allowance for credit losses (impairments) on investments.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Ratios
AFG’s debt to total capital ratio on a consolidated basis is shown below (dollars in millions). Management intends to maintain the ratio of debt to capital at or below 30% and intends to maintain the capital of its significant insurance subsidiaries at or above levels currently indicated by rating agencies as appropriate for the current ratings.
The ratio of debt to total capital is a non-GAAP measure that management believes is useful for investors, analysts and ratings agencies to evaluate AFG’s financial strength and liquidity and to provide insight into how AFG finances its operations. In addition, maintaining a ratio of debt, excluding subordinated debt and debt secured by real estate (if any), to total capital of 35% or lower is a financial covenant in AFG’s bank credit facility. The ratio is calculated by dividing the principal amount of AFG’s long-term debt by its total capital, which includes long-term debt and shareholders’ equity (excluding unrealized gains (losses) related to fixed maturity investments).
The NAIC’s model law for risk-based capital (“RBC”) applies to property and casualty companies. RBC formulas determine the amount of capital that an insurance company needs so that it has an acceptable expectation of not becoming financially impaired. At December 31, 2021, the capital ratios of all AFG insurance companies exceeded the RBC requirements.
Condensed Consolidated Cash Flows
AFG’s principal sources of cash include insurance premiums, income from its investment portfolio and proceeds from the maturities, redemptions and sales of investments. Insurance premiums in excess of acquisition expenses and operating costs are invested until they are needed to meet policyholder obligations or made available to the parent company through dividends to cover debt obligations and corporate expenses, and to provide returns to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends. Cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities as detailed in AFG’s Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows are shown below (in millions):
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations typically produce positive net operating cash flows as premiums collected and investment income exceed policy acquisition costs, claims payments and operating expenses. AFG’s net cash provided by operating activities is impacted by the level and timing of property and casualty premiums, claim and expense payments and recoveries from reinsurers. Prior to the May 2021 sale, AFG’s discontinued annuity operations typically produced positive net operating cash flows as investment income exceeded acquisition costs and operating expenses. Interest credited on annuity policyholder funds is a non-cash increase in AFG’s annuity benefits accumulated liability and annuity premiums, benefits and withdrawals are considered financing activities due to the deposit-type nature of annuities. Cash flows provided by operating activities also include the activity of AFG’s managed investment entities (collateralized loan obligations (“CLO”)) other than those activities included in investing or financing activities. The changes in the assets and liabilities of the managed investment entities included in operating activities reduced cash flows from operating activities by $144 million in 2021 and increased cash flows from operating activities by $25 million in 2020 and $23 million in 2019, resulting in a $169 million decrease in cash flows from operating activities in 2021 compared to 2020 and a $2 million increase in cash flows from operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019. As discussed in Note A - “Accounting Policies - Managed Investment Entities” to the financial statements, AFG has no right to use the CLO assets and no obligation to pay the CLO liabilities and such assets and liabilities are shown separately in AFG’s Balance Sheet. Excluding the impact of the managed investment entities, net
cash provided by operating activities was $1.86 billion, $2.16 billion and $2.43 billion in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities AFG’s investing activities consist primarily of the investment of funds provided by its property and casualty businesses and, prior to the May 2021 sale, its discontinued annuity operations. In May 2021, AFG sold its annuity business to MassMutual for cash proceeds of $3.57 billion (including post-closing adjustments). This increase in cash provided by investing activities was partially offset by a decrease in cash and cash equivalents of $2.06 billion representing balances held in the annuity subsidiaries at the sale date. Excluding the impact of the May 2021 sale of the annuity business, net cash used in investing activities was $1.95 billion in 2021 compared to $1.56 billion in 2020, an increase of $383 million. As discussed below (under net cash provided by (used in) financing activities), AFG’s discontinued annuity operations had net cash flows from annuity policyholders of $477 million in 2021 through the May 31, 2021 effective date of the sale compared to $351 million in 2020. In addition to the investment of funds provided by the insurance operations, AFG Parent increased its net purchases of fixed maturities by $1.19 billion in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to proceeds received from the sale of the annuity business as well as dividends received from subsidiaries. Investing activities also include the December 2021 acquisition of Verikai for $120 million in cash and the purchase and disposal of managed investment entity investments, which are presented separately in AFG’s Balance Sheet. Net investment activity in the managed investment entities was a $43 million use of cash in 2021 compared to a $281 million use of cash in 2020, accounting for a $238 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities in 2021 compared to 2020. See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Managed Investment Entities” and Note G - “Managed Investment Entities” to the financial statements.
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.56 billion in 2020 compared to $3.07 billion in 2019, a decrease of $1.51 billion. As discussed below (under net cash provided by (used in) financing activities), AFG’s discontinued annuity operations had net cash flows from annuity policyholders of $351 million in 2020 and $1.66 billion in 2019. Settlements of equity index call options exceeded purchases by $322 million in 2020 compared to $64 million in 2019, accounting for a $258 million decrease in cash used in investing activities. On December 31, 2020, AFG completed the sale of GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that owned Neon. The assets sold included $425 million in cash and cash equivalents, resulting in an increase in cash used in investing activities in 2020. Net investment activity in the managed investment entities was an $281 million use of cash in 2020 compared to an $11 million source of cash in 2019, accounting for a $292 million increase in net cash used in investing activities in 2020 compared to 2019.
Net Cash Provided by (Used In) Financing Activities AFG’s financing activities consist primarily of issuances and retirements of long-term debt, issuances and repurchases of common stock, dividend payments and, prior to the sale of the annuity business, transactions with annuity policyholders. Net cash used in financing activities was $1.96 billion in 2021 compared to $123 million in 2020, an increase in net cash used in financing activities of $1.83 billion. Net annuity receipts exceeded annuity surrenders, benefits, withdrawals and transfers by $477 million in 2021 through the May 31, 2021 effective date of the sale compared to $351 million in 2020, resulting in a $126 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 compared to 2020. In 2020, GALIC transferred $554 million of cash as part of its reinsurance agreement with Commonwealth to cede in force traditional fixed and indexed annuities. In 2020, AFG issued $300 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due in 2030, $150 million of 5.625% Subordinated Debentures due in 2060 and $200 million of 4.50% Subordinated Debentures due in 2060. The net proceeds of these offerings contributed $634 million to net cash provided by financing activities in 2020. The November 2020 redemption of AFG’s 6% Subordinated Debentures due in 2055 was a $150 million use of cash in 2020. In addition to its regular quarterly cash dividends, AFG paid special cash dividends of $26.00 per share in 2021 and $2.00 per share in 2020, which resulted in total cash dividends of $2.37 billion in 2021 compared to $334 million in 2020. Financing activities also include issuances and retirements of managed investment entity liabilities, which are nonrecourse to AFG and presented separately in AFG’s Balance Sheet. Issuances of managed investment entity liabilities exceeded retirements by $193 million in 2021 compared to $221 million in 2020, accounting for a $28 million decrease in net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 compared to 2020. See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Managed Investment Entities” and Note G - “Managed Investment Entities” to the financial statements.
Net cash used in financing activities was $123 million in 2020 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $1.41 billion in 2019, a decrease in net cash provided by financing activities of $1.53 billion. Net annuity receipts exceeded annuity surrenders, benefits, withdrawals and transfers by $351 million in 2020 compared to $1.66 billion in 2019, resulting in a $1.31 billion decrease in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020, GALIC transferred $554 million of cash as part of its reinsurance agreement with Commonwealth to cede in force traditional fixed and indexed annuities. In 2020, AFG issued $300 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due in 2030, $150 million of 5.625% Subordinated Debentures due in 2060 and $200 million of 4.50% Subordinated Debentures due in 2060. The net proceeds of these offerings contributed $634 million to net cash provided by financing activities in 2020. The November 2020 redemption of AFG’s 6% Subordinated Debentures due in 2055 was a $150 million use of cash in 2020. In 2019, AFG issued $125 million of 5.875% Subordinated Debentures due in 2059 and $200 million of 5.125%
Subordinated Debentures due in 2059, the net proceeds of which contributed $315 million to net cash provided by financing activities in 2019. The December 2019 redemption of AFG’s 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures was a $150 million use of cash in 2019. During 2020, AFG repurchased $313 million of its Common Stock compared to no share repurchases in 2019. In addition to its regular quarterly cash dividends, AFG paid special cash dividends of $2.00 per share and $3.30 per share in 2020 and 2019, respectively, which resulted in total cash dividends of $334 million in 2020 compared to $444 million in 2019. Issuances of managed investment entity liabilities exceeded retirements by $221 million in 2020 compared to retirements of managed investment entity liabilities exceeding issuances by $11 million in 2019, accounting for a $232 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 compared to 2019.
Parent and Subsidiary Liquidity
Parent Holding Company Liquidity Management believes AFG has sufficient resources to meet its liquidity requirements. If funds generated from operations, including dividends, tax payments and borrowings from subsidiaries, are insufficient to meet fixed charges in any period, AFG would be required to utilize parent company cash and investments or to generate cash through borrowings, sales of other assets, or similar transactions.
As discussed above, AFG sold its annuity business to MassMutual for proceeds of $3.57 billion (including post-closing adjustments). AFG’s capital and liquidity was significantly enhanced as a result of the transaction. During 2021, AFG repurchased 2,777,684 shares of its Common Stock for $319 million and paid special cash dividends of $26.00 per share of AFG Common Stock ($14.00 per share in June, $2.00 per share in August, $4.00 per share in October, $4.00 per share in November and $2.00 per share in December) totaling $2.21 billion. Management will continue to evaluate opportunities for deploying AFG’s significant remaining excess capital, including returning capital to shareholders in the form of regular and special cash dividends and through opportunistic share repurchases. In addition, excess capital will be deployed into AFG’s core businesses as management identifies the potential for healthy, profitable organic growth, and opportunities to expand the Specialty property and casualty niche businesses through acquisitions and start-ups that meet target return thresholds.
In December 2021, AFG acquired Verikai, Inc., a machine learning and artificial intelligence company that utilizes a predictive risk tool for assessing insurance risk, for $120 million using cash on hand at the parent.
In 2020, AFG repurchased 4,531,394 shares of its Common Stock for $313 million and paid a special cash dividend of $2.00 per share of AFG Common Stock in December totaling $173 million.
In 2020, AFG issued $300 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due in April 2030, $150 million of 5.625% Subordinated Debentures due in June 2060 and $200 million of 4.50% Subordinated Debentures due in September 2060 to increase liquidity and provide flexibility at the parent holding company in its response to the uncertainties of the economic environment. The net proceeds from the offerings were used for general corporate purposes, which included repurchases of outstanding common shares and the November 2020 redemption of AFG’s $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6% Subordinated Debentures due in November 2055 at par value.
In 2019, AFG paid special cash dividends of $3.30 per share of AFG Common Stock ($1.50 per share in May and $1.80 per share in November) totaling $297 million.
In December 2019, AFG issued $200 million of 5.125% Subordinated Debentures due in December 2059. A portion of the net proceeds of the offering were used to redeem AFG’s $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures due in September 2054, at par value, with the remainder used for general corporate purposes.
In March 2019, AFG issued $125 million of 5.875% Subordinated Debentures due in March 2059. The net proceeds of the offering were used for general corporate purposes.
All debentures and notes issued by AFG are rated investment grade by two nationally recognized rating agencies. Under a currently effective shelf registration statement, AFG can offer additional equity or debt securities. The shelf registration provides AFG with flexibility to access the capital markets from time to time as market and other conditions permit.
AFG can borrow up to $500 million under its revolving credit facility, which expires in December 2025. Amounts borrowed under this agreement bear interest at rates ranging from 1.00% to 1.875% (currently 1.375%) over LIBOR based on AFG’s credit rating. The credit facility also includes provisions relating to the replacement of LIBOR with different floating rates in the event of the discontinuance of LIBOR. There were no borrowings under this agreement, or under any other parent company short-term borrowing arrangements, during 2021 or 2020.
Under a tax allocation agreement with AFG, all 80% (or more) owned U.S. subsidiaries generally pay taxes to (or recover taxes from) AFG based on each subsidiary’s contribution to amounts due under AFG’s consolidated tax return.
Subsidiary Liquidity The liquidity requirements of AFG’s insurance subsidiaries relate primarily to the policyholder claims and underwriting expenses and payments of dividends and taxes to AFG. Historically, cash flows from premiums and investment income have generally provided more than sufficient funds to meet these requirements. Funds received in excess of cash requirements are generally invested in marketable securities. In addition, the insurance subsidiaries generally hold a significant amount of highly liquid, short duration investments.
For statutory accounting purposes, equity securities of non-affiliates are generally carried at fair value. At December 31, 2021, AFG’s insurance companies owned publicly traded equity securities with a fair value of $956 million. Decreases in market prices could adversely affect the insurance group’s capital, potentially impacting the amount of dividends available or necessitating a capital contribution. Conversely, increases in market prices could have a favorable impact on the group’s dividend-paying capability.
Property and casualty reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses were $11.07 billion at December 31, 2021 and include case reserves and claims incurred but not reported (“IBNR”). The ultimate amount to be paid to settle reserves is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. Actual payments to settle claims cannot be determined until a settlement is reached with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from estimated amounts. See “Uncertainties - Property and Casualty Insurance Reserves” below. The timing of future payments for the next twelve months and beyond could vary materially from historical payment patterns due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements.
AFG believes its insurance subsidiaries maintain sufficient liquidity to pay claims and underwriting expenses. In addition, these subsidiaries have sufficient capital to meet commitments in the event of unforeseen events such as reserve deficiencies, inadequate premium rates or reinsurer insolvencies. Even in the current uncertain COVID-19 environment, management believes that the capital levels in AFG’s insurance subsidiaries are adequate to maintain its business and rating agency ratings. Nonetheless, changes in statutory accounting rules, significant declines in the fair value of the insurance subsidiaries’ investment portfolios or significant ratings downgrades on these investments, could create a need for additional capital.
Condensed Parent Only Cash Flows
AFG’s parent holding company only condensed cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities are shown below (in millions):
Parent Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities Parent holding company cash flows from operating activities consist primarily of dividends and tax payments received from AFG’s insurance subsidiaries, reduced by tax payments to the IRS and holding company interest and other expenses. Parent holding company net cash provided by operating activities was $833 million in 2021 compared to $483 million in 2020 and $306 million in 2019. The $350 million increase in net cash provided by operating activities in 2021 as compared to 2020 and the $177 million increase in net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 as compared to 2019 were due primarily to higher dividends received from subsidiaries.
Parent Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities Parent holding company investing activities consist of capital contributions to and returns of capital from subsidiaries and parent company investment activity. Parent holding company net cash provided by investing activities was $2.17 billion in 2021 compared to net cash used of $294 million in 2020 and $56 million in 2019. The $2.17 billion in net cash provided by investing activities in 2021 is substantially higher than the $294 million in net cash used in investing activities in 2020 due to proceeds of $3.57 billion related to the May 2021 sale of the annuity business, partially offset by the net purchase of fixed maturity investments of $1.19 billion in 2021 and the $120 million purchase of Verikai in December 2021. The $294 million in net cash used in investing activities in 2020 is higher than the $56 million in net cash used in investing activities in 2019 due primarily to higher capital contributions to AFG’s property and casualty subsidiaries in 2020.
Parent Net Cash Used in Financing Activities Parent company financing activities consist primarily of the issuance and retirement of long-term debt, repurchases of AFG Common Stock, dividends to shareholders, and, to a lesser extent, proceeds from employee stock option exercises. Significant long-term debt and common stock transactions are discussed above under “Parent Holding Company Liquidity.” Parent holding company net cash used in financing activities was $2.63 billion in 2021 compared to $140 million in 2020 and $242 million in 2019. The $2.49 billion increase in net cash used in financing activities in 2021 as compared to 2020 reflects higher dividends paid to shareholders (due primarily to special dividends of $26.00 per share in 2021 compared to special dividends of $2.00 per share in 2020) and the impact of net issuances of long-term debt in 2020. The $102 million decrease in net cash used in financing activities in 2020 as compared to 2019 reflects the higher net issuances of long-term debt in 2020 and lower dividends in 2020 (due primarily to special dividends of $2.00 per share in 2020 compared to special dividends of $3.30 per share in 2019), partially offset by $313 million in repurchases of outstanding common shares in 2020 compared to no repurchases in 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
See Note O - “Additional Information - Financial Instruments - Unfunded Commitments” to the financial statements.
Investments
AFG attempts to optimize investment income while building the value of its portfolio, placing emphasis upon total long-term performance.
AFG’s investment portfolio at December 31, 2021, contained $10.36 billion in fixed maturity securities classified as available for sale and carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other comprehensive income and $28 million in fixed maturities classified as trading with holding gains and losses included in net investment income. In addition, AFG’s investment portfolio includes $715 million in equity securities carried at fair value with holding gains and losses included in realized gains (losses) on securities and $327 million in equity securities carried at fair value with holding gains and losses included in net investment income.
As detailed in Note F - “Investments - Net Unrealized Gain on Fixed Maturity Securities” to the financial statements, unrealized gains and losses on AFG’s fixed maturity securities are included in shareholders’ equity after adjustments for deferred income taxes.
Fixed income investment funds are generally invested in securities with intermediate-term maturities with an objective of optimizing total return while allowing flexibility to react to changes in market conditions. At December 31, 2021, the average life of AFG’s fixed maturities was about 3.5 years.
Fair values for AFG’s portfolio are determined by AFG’s internal investment professionals using data from nationally recognized pricing services, non-binding broker quotes and other market information. Fair values of equity securities are generally based on published closing prices. For AFG’s fixed maturity portfolio, approximately 84% was priced using pricing services at December 31, 2021 and 10% was priced primarily by using non-binding broker quotes. When prices obtained for the same security vary, AFG’s internal investment professionals select the price they believe is most indicative of an exit price.
The pricing services use a variety of observable inputs to estimate fair value of fixed maturities that do not trade on a daily basis. Based upon information provided by the pricing services, these inputs include, but are not limited to, recent reported trades, benchmark yields, issuer spreads, bids or offers, reference data, and measures of volatility. Included in the pricing of mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”) are estimates of the rate of future prepayments and defaults of principal over the remaining life of the underlying collateral. Due to the lack of transparency in the process that brokers use to develop prices, valuations that are based on brokers’ prices are classified as Level 3 in the GAAP hierarchy unless the price can be corroborated, for example, by comparison to similar securities priced using observable inputs.
Valuation techniques utilized by pricing services and prices obtained from external sources are reviewed by AFG’s internal investment professionals who are familiar with the securities being priced and the markets in which they trade to ensure the fair value determination is representative of an exit price. To validate the appropriateness of the prices obtained, these investment managers consider widely published indices (as benchmarks), recent trades, changes in interest rates, general economic conditions and the credit quality of the specific issuers. In addition, AFG communicates directly with pricing services regarding the methods and assumptions used in pricing, including verifying, on a test basis, the inputs used by the services to value specific securities.
In general, the fair value of AFG’s fixed maturity investments is inversely correlated to changes in interest rates. The following table demonstrates the sensitivity of such fair values to reasonably likely changes in interest rates by illustrating
the estimated effect on AFG’s fixed maturity portfolio that an immediate increase of 100 basis points in the interest rate yield curve would have at December 31, 2021 (dollars in millions). Effects of increases or decreases from the 100 basis points illustrated would be approximately proportional.
Approximately 88% of the fixed maturities held by AFG at December 31, 2021, were rated “investment grade” (credit rating of AAA to BBB) by nationally recognized rating agencies, 3% were rated “non-investment grade” and 9% were not rated. Investment grade securities generally bear lower yields and lower degrees of risk than those that are unrated and non-investment grade. Management believes that the high-quality investment portfolio should generate a stable and predictable investment return.
Municipal bonds represented approximately 18% of AFG’s fixed maturity portfolio at December 31, 2021. AFG’s municipal bond portfolio is high quality, with over 99% of the securities rated investment grade at that date. The portfolio is well diversified across the states of issuance and individual issuers. At December 31, 2021, approximately 90% of the municipal bond portfolio was held in revenue bonds, with the remaining 10% held in general obligation bonds.
Summarized information for the unrealized gains and losses recorded in AFG’s Balance Sheet at December 31, 2021, is shown in the following table (dollars in millions). Approximately $775 million of available for sale fixed maturity securities had no unrealized gains or losses at December 31, 2021.
The table below sets forth the scheduled maturities of AFG’s available for sale fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2021, based on their fair values. Securities with sinking funds are reported at average maturity. Actual maturities may differ from contractual maturities because certain securities may be called or prepaid by the issuers.
The table below (dollars in millions) summarizes the unrealized gains and losses on fixed maturity securities by dollar amount:
The following table (dollars in millions) summarizes the unrealized losses for all securities with unrealized losses by issuer quality and the length of time those securities have been in an unrealized loss position:
To evaluate fixed maturities for expected credit losses (impairment), management considers the following:
a)whether the unrealized loss is credit-driven or a result of changes in market interest rates,
b)the extent to which fair value is less than cost basis,
c)cash flow projections received from independent sources,
d)historical operating, balance sheet and cash flow data contained in issuer SEC filings and news releases,
e)near-term prospects for improvement in the issuer and/or its industry,
f)third-party research and communications with industry specialists,
g)financial models and forecasts,
h)the continuity of interest payments, maintenance of investment grade ratings and hybrid nature of certain investments,
i)discussions with issuer management, and
j)ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for anticipated recovery in fair value.
Based on its analysis of the factors listed above, management believes AFG will recover its cost basis (net of any allowance) in the fixed maturity securities with unrealized losses and that AFG has the ability to hold the securities until they recover in value and had no intent to sell them at December 31, 2021. Although AFG has the ability to continue holding its fixed maturity investments with unrealized losses, its intent to hold them may change due to deterioration in the issuers’ creditworthiness, decisions to lessen exposure to a particular issuer or industry, asset/liability management decisions, market movements, changes in views about appropriate asset allocation or the desire to offset taxable realized gains. Should AFG’s ability or intent change regarding a particular security, a charge for impairment would likely be required. While it is not possible to accurately predict if or when a specific security will become impaired, increases in the allowance for credit losses could be material to results of operations in future periods. Significant declines in the fair value of AFG’s investment portfolio could have a significant adverse effect on AFG’s liquidity. For information on AFG’s realized gains (losses) on securities, see “Results of Operations - Realized Gains (Losses) on Securities.”
Uncertainties
As more fully explained in the following paragraphs, management believes that the areas posing the greatest risk of material loss are the adequacy of its insurance reserves and contingencies arising out of its former railroad and manufacturing operations.
Property and Casualty Insurance Reserves Estimating the liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses (“LAE”) is inherently judgmental and is influenced by factors that are subject to significant variation. Determining the liability is a complex process incorporating input from many areas of the Company including actuarial, underwriting, pricing, claims and operations management.
The estimates of liabilities for unpaid claims and for expenses of investigation and adjustment of unpaid claims are based upon: (i) the accumulation of case estimates for losses reported prior to the close of the accounting periods on direct business written (“case reserves”); (ii) estimates received from ceding reinsurers and insurance pools and associations; (iii) estimates of claims incurred but not reported (including possible development on known claims); (iv) estimates (based on experience) of expense for investigating and adjusting claims; and (v) the current state of law and coverage litigation.
The process used to determine the total reserve for liabilities involves estimating the ultimate incurred losses and LAE, adjusted for amounts already paid on the claims. The IBNR reserve is derived by estimating the ultimate unpaid reserve liability and subtracting case reserves for loss and LAE. See Note N - “Insurance - Property and Casualty Insurance Reserves” to the financial statements for a discussion of the factors considered and actuarial methods used in determining management’s best estimate of the ultimate liability for unpaid losses and LAE.
The following table shows (in millions) the breakdown of AFG’s property and casualty insurance reserves between case reserves, IBNR reserves and LAE reserves (estimated amounts required to adjust, record and settle claims, other than the claim payments themselves) at December 31, 2021 and gross written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2021.
While current factors and reasonably likely changes in variable factors are considered in estimating the liability for unpaid losses and LAE, there is no method or system that can eliminate the risk of actual ultimate results differing from such estimates.
Following is a discussion of certain critical variables affecting the estimation of loss reserves of the more significant long-tail lines of business (asbestos and environmental liabilities are separately discussed below). Many other variables may also impact ultimate claim costs.
An important assumption underlying reserve estimates is that the cost trends implicitly built into development patterns will continue into the future. However, future results could vary due to an unexpected change in the underlying cost trends. This unexpected change could arise from a variety of sources including a general increase in economic inflation, inflation from social programs, new medical technologies, or other factors such as those listed below in connection with AFG’s largest lines of business. It is not possible to isolate and measure the potential impact of just one of these variables, and future cost trends could be partially impacted by several such variables. However, it is reasonable to address the sensitivity of the reserves to potential impact from changes in these variables by measuring the effect of a possible overall 1% change in future cost trends that may be caused by one or more variables. Utilizing the effect of a 1% change in overall cost trends enables changes greater than 1% to be estimated by extrapolation. Each additional 1% change in the cost trend would increase the effect on net earnings by an amount slightly (about 5%) greater than the effect of the previous 1%. For example, if a 1% change in cost trends in a line of business would change net earnings by $20 million, a 2% change would change net earnings by approximately $41 million.
The estimated cumulative adverse impact that a 1% change in cost trends in AFG’s more significant lines of property and casualty business (exceeding 5% of total reserves) would have on net earnings is shown below (in millions).
The judgments and uncertainties surrounding management’s reserve estimation process and the potential for reasonably possible variability in management’s most recent reserve estimates may also be viewed by looking at how recent historical estimates of reserves have developed. The following table shows (dollars in millions) what the impact on AFG’s net earnings would be on the more significant lines of business if the December 31, 2021, reserves (net of reinsurance) developed at the same rate as the average development of the most recent five years.
(a)Adverse (favorable), net of tax effect.
(b)Excludes asbestos and environmental liabilities.
The following discussion describes key assumptions and important variables that affect the estimate of the reserve for loss and LAE of the more significant lines of business and explains what caused them to change from assumptions used in the preceding period.
Other Liability - Occurrence
This long-tail line of business consists of coverages protecting the insured against legal liability resulting from negligence, carelessness, or a failure to act causing property damage or personal injury to others. Some of the important variables affecting estimation of loss reserves for other liability - occurrence include:
•Litigious climate
•Unpredictability of judicial decisions regarding coverage issues
•Magnitude of jury awards
•Outside counsel costs
•Timing of claims reporting
AFG recorded adverse prior year reserve development of $39 million in 2021, $99 million in 2020 and $143 million in 2019 related to its other liability - occurrence coverage due primarily to continued claim severity increases in excess and umbrella liability coverages.
While management applies the actuarial methods discussed in Note N - “Insurance - Property and Casualty Insurance Reserves” to the financial statements, more judgment is involved in arriving at the final reserve to be held. For recent accident years, more weight is given to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method.
Workers’ Compensation
This long-tail line of business provides coverage to employees who may be injured in the course of employment. Some of the important variables affecting estimation of loss reserves for workers’ compensation include:
•Legislative actions and regulatory and legal interpretations
•Future medical cost inflation
•Economic conditions
•Frequency of reopening claims previously closed
•Advances in medical equipment and processes
•Pace and intensity of employee rehabilitation
•Changes in the use of pharmaceutical drugs
•Changes in mortality trends for permanently injured workers
Approximately 27% and 23% of AFG’s workers’ compensation reserves at December 31, 2021 relate to policies written in Florida and California, respectively.
AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $169 million in 2021 related to its workers’ compensation coverage due to lower than anticipated medical severity. AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $178 million in 2020 due to lower than anticipated medical claim severity and improving claim closure rates, particularly in the southeastern United States and California. AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $180 million in 2019 due to lower than anticipated frequency of lost-time claims and medical severity.
Other Liability - Claims Made
This long-tail line of business consists mostly of directors’ and officers’ liability (“D&O”). Some of the important variables affecting estimation of loss reserves for other liability - claims made include:
•Litigious climate
•Economic conditions
•Variability of stock prices
•Magnitude of jury awards
The general state of the economy and the variability of the stock price of the insured can affect the frequency and severity of shareholder class action suits and other situations that trigger coverage under D&O policies. For example, from 2008 to 2010, economic conditions led to higher frequency of claims, particularly in the D&O policies for small account and not-for-profit organizations. Since then, claim frequency has decreased from its peak in 2010 and has stabilized to near pre-2008 levels.
AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $2 million in 2021, $8 million in 2020 and $4 million in 2019 on its D&O business as claim frequency and severity was less than expected across several prior accident years.
Commercial Auto/Truck Liability/Medical
This line of business is a mix of coverage protecting the insured against legal liability for property damage or personal injury to others arising from the operation of commercial motor vehicles. The property damage liability exposure is usually short-tail with relatively quick reporting and settlement of claims. The bodily injury and medical payments exposures are longer-tailed; although the claim reporting is relatively quick, the final settlement can take longer to achieve. Some of the important variables affecting estimation of loss reserves for commercial auto/truck liability/medical are similar to other liability - occurrence and include:
•Magnitude of jury awards
•Unpredictability of judicial decisions regarding coverage issues
•Litigious climate and trends
•Change in frequency of severe accidents
•Health care costs and utilization of medical services by injured parties
AFG recorded adverse prior year reserve development of $7 million in 2021 for this line of business and favorable prior year reserve development of $16 million in 2020 and $15 million in 2019. While AFG recorded adverse development in 2021 and severity trends for this line of business continue to be elevated, the severity has generally been lower than initially projected in recent years.
Recoverables from Reinsurers and Availability of Reinsurance AFG is subject to credit risk with respect to its reinsurers, as reinsurance contracts do not relieve AFG of its liability to policyholders. To mitigate this risk, substantially all reinsurance is ceded to companies rated “A” or better by S&P or is secured by “funds withheld” or other collateral.
The availability and cost of reinsurance are subject to prevailing market conditions, which are beyond AFG’s control and which may affect AFG’s level of business and profitability. Although the cost of certain reinsurance programs may increase, management believes that AFG will be able to maintain adequate reinsurance coverage at acceptable rates without a material adverse effect on AFG’s results of operations. AFG’s gross and net combined ratios are shown in the table below.
See Item 1 - Business - “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Reinsurance” for more information on AFG’s reinsurance programs. For additional information on the effect of reinsurance on AFG’s historical results of operations see Note N - “Insurance - Reinsurance” to the financial statements.
The following table illustrates the effect that purchasing property and casualty reinsurance has had on AFG’s combined ratio over the last three years.
Asbestos and Environmental-related (“A&E”) Insurance Reserves Asbestos and environmental reserves of the property and casualty group consisted of the following (in millions):
Asbestos reserves include claims asserting alleged injuries and damages from exposure to asbestos. Environmental reserves include claims relating to polluted sites.
Asbestos claims against manufacturers, distributors or installers of asbestos products were presented under the products liability section of their policies, which typically had aggregate limits that capped an insurer’s liability. In addition, asbestos claims are being presented as “non-products” claims, such as those by installers of asbestos products and by property owners or operators who allegedly had asbestos on their property, under the premises or operations section of their policies. Unlike products exposures, these non-products exposures typically had no aggregate limits, creating greater exposure for insurers. Further, in an effort to seek additional insurance coverage, some insureds with installation activities who have substantially eroded their products coverage are presenting new asbestos claims as non-products operations claims or attempting to reclassify previously settled products claims as non-products claims to restore a portion of previously exhausted products aggregate limits.
Approximately 42% of AFG’s net asbestos reserves relate to policies written directly by AFG subsidiaries. Claims from these policies generally are product-oriented claims with only a limited amount of non-products exposures and are dominated by small to mid-sized commercial entities that are mostly regional policyholders with few national target defendants. The remainder is assumed reinsurance business that includes exposures from 1954 to 1983. The asbestos and environmental assumed claims are ceded by various insurance companies under reinsurance treaties. A majority of the individual assumed claims have exposures of less than $100,000 to AFG. Asbestos losses assumed include some of the industry known manufacturers, distributors and installers. Pollution losses include industry known insured names and sites.
Establishing reserves for A&E claims relating to policies and participations in reinsurance treaties and former operations is subject to uncertainties that are significantly greater than those presented by other types of claims. For this group of claims, traditional actuarial techniques that rely on historical loss development trends cannot be used and a range of reasonably possible losses cannot be estimated. Case reserves and expense reserves are established by the claims department as specific policies are identified. In addition to the case reserves established for known claims, management establishes additional reserves for claims not yet known or reported and for possible development on known claims. These additional reserves are management’s best estimate based on periodic comprehensive studies and internal reviews adjusted for payments and identifiable changes, supplemented by management’s review of industry information about such claims, with due consideration to individual claim situations.
Management believes that estimating the ultimate liability for asbestos claims presents a unique and difficult challenge to the insurance industry due to, among other things, inconsistent court decisions, an increase in bankruptcy filings as a result of asbestos-related liabilities, novel theories of coverage, and judicial interpretations that often expand theories of recovery and broaden the scope of coverage. Environmental claims likewise present challenges in prediction, due to uncertainty regarding the interpretation of insurance policies, complexities regarding multi-party involvements at sites, evolving cleanup standards and protracted time periods required to assess the level of cleanup required at contaminated sites.
The following factors could impact AFG’s A&E reserves and payments:
•There is interest at the state level to attempt to legislatively address asbestos liabilities and the manner in which asbestos claims are resolved. These developments are fluid and could result in piecemeal state-by-state solutions.
•The manner by which bankruptcy courts are addressing asbestos liabilities is in flux.
•AFG’s insureds may make claims alleging significant non-products exposures.
While management believes that AFG’s reserves for A&E claims are a reasonable estimate of ultimate liability for such claims, actual results may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded due to the difficulty in predicting the number of future claims, the impact of bankruptcy filings and unresolved issues such as whether coverage exists, whether
policies are subject to aggregate limits on coverage, how claims are to be allocated among triggered policies and implicated years and whether claimants who exhibit no signs of illness will be successful in pursuing their claims. A 1% variation in loss cost trends, caused by any of the factors previously described, would change net earnings by approximately $35 million.
AFG tracks its A&E claims by policyholder. The following table shows, by type of claim, the number of policyholders that did not receive any payments in the calendar year separate from policyholders that did receive a payment. Policyholder counts represent policies written by AFG subsidiaries and do not include assumed reinsurance.
Amounts paid (net of reinsurance recoveries) for asbestos and environmental claims, including LAE, were as follows (in millions):
The survival ratio is a measure often used by industry analysts to compare A&E reserves’ strength among companies. This ratio is typically calculated by dividing reserves for A&E exposures by the three-year average of paid losses, and therefore measures the number of years that it would take to pay off current reserves based on recent average payments. Because this ratio can be significantly impacted by a number of factors such as loss payout variability, caution should be exercised in attempting to determine reserve adequacy based simply on the survival ratio. At December 31, 2021, the property and casualty insurance segment’s three-year survival ratios compare favorably with industry survival ratios published by A.M. Best (as of December 31, 2020, and adjusted for several large portfolio transfers) as detailed in the following table:
During the third quarter of 2021, AFG completed an in-depth internal review of its asbestos and environmental exposures relating to the run-off operations of its property and casualty insurance segment and its exposures related to former railroad and manufacturing operations and sites. In addition to its ongoing internal monitoring of asbestos and environmental exposures, AFG has periodically conducted comprehensive external studies of its asbestos and environmental reserves with the aid of specialty actuarial, engineering and consulting firms and outside counsel, with an in-depth internal review during the intervening years.
During the 2021 internal review, no new trends were identified and recent claims activity was generally consistent with AFG’s expectations resulting from the 2020 external study. As a result, the 2021 review resulted in no net change to AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment’s asbestos and environmental reserves.
A comprehensive external study of AFG’s A&E reserves was completed in the third quarter of 2020. As a result of the 2020 external study, AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment recorded a $47 million pretax special charge to increase its asbestos reserves by $26 million (net of reinsurance) and its environmental reserves by $21 million (net of reinsurance).
Over the past few years, the focus of AFG’s asbestos claims litigation has shifted to smaller companies and companies with ancillary exposures. AFG’s insureds with these exposures have been the driver of the property and casualty segment’s asbestos reserve increases in recent years. AFG is seeing modestly increasing estimates for indemnity and defense compared to prior studies on certain specific open claims. The increase in property and casualty environmental reserves in 2020 was primarily associated with updated estimates of site investigation and remedial costs with respect to existing sites and its estimate of future, but as yet unreported, claims. AFG has updated its view of legal defense costs on open environmental claims as well as a number of claims and sites where the estimated investigation and remediation costs have increased.
An in-depth internal review of AFG’s A&E reserves was completed in the third quarter of 2019. As a result of the 2019 internal review, AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment recorded an $18 million pretax special charge to increase its asbestos reserves by $3 million (net of reinsurance) and its environmental reserves by $15 million (net of reinsurance). The increase in property and casualty environmental reserves relates to updated estimates of site investigation and remedial costs with respect to existing sites and newly identified sites.
Contingencies related to Subsidiaries’ Former Operations The A&E studies and reviews discussed above encompassed reserves for various environmental and occupational injury and disease claims and other contingencies arising out of the railroad operations disposed of by American Premier’s predecessor and certain manufacturing operations disposed of by American Premier and its subsidiaries and by Great American Financial Resources, Inc. AFG recorded a minor charge to increase liabilities for those operations as a result of the 2021 internal review, a pretax special charge of $21 million as a result of the 2020 comprehensive external study and a pretax special charge of $11 million as a result of the 2019 internal review. For a discussion of the charges recorded for those operations, see “Results of Operations - Holding Company, Other and Unallocated.” Liabilities for claims and contingencies arising from these former railroad and manufacturing operations totaled $95 million at December 31, 2021. For a discussion of the uncertainties in determining the ultimate liability, see Note M - “Contingencies” to the financial statements.
MANAGED INVESTMENT ENTITIES
Accounting standards require AFG to consolidate its investments in collateralized loan obligation (“CLO”) entities that it manages and owns an interest in (in the form of debt). See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Managed Investment Entities” and Note G - “Managed Investment Entities” to the financial statements. The effect of consolidating these entities is shown in the tables below (in millions). The “Before CLO Consolidation” columns include AFG’s investment and earnings in the CLOs on an unconsolidated basis.
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING BALANCE SHEET
(*)Elimination of the fair value of AFG’s investment in CLOs and related accrued interest.
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF EARNINGS
(a)Includes income of $3 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 and $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, representing the change in fair value of AFG’s CLO investments plus $4 million in both the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020, in CLO management fees earned.
(b)Elimination of the change in fair value of AFG’s investments in the CLOs, including $3 million and $4 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020, respectively, in distributions recorded as interest expense by the CLOs.
(c)Elimination of management fees earned by AFG.
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF EARNINGS - CONTINUED
(a)Includes income of $20 million in 2021 and a loss of $1 million in 2020, representing the change in fair value of AFG’s CLO investments plus $16 million and $15 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, in CLO management fees earned.
(b)Elimination of the change in fair value of AFG’s investments in the CLOs, including $12 million and $8 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, in distributions recorded as interest expense by the CLOs.
(c)Elimination of management fees earned by AFG.
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF EARNINGS - CONTINUED
(a)Includes income of $1 million representing the change in fair value of AFG’s CLO investments plus $15 million in CLO management fees earned.
(b)Elimination of the change in fair value of AFG’s investments in the CLOs, including $7 million in distributions recorded as interest expense by the CLOs.
(c)Elimination of management fees earned by AFG.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
AFG’s net earnings attributable to shareholders, determined in accordance with GAAP, include certain items that may not be indicative of its ongoing core operations. In addition to discontinued operations, core net operating earnings excludes realized gains (losses) on securities because such gains and losses are influenced significantly by financial markets, interest rates and the timing of sales. In addition, special charges related to coverage that AFG no longer writes, such as asbestos and environmental exposures, are excluded from core earnings.
In January 2021, AFG entered into a definitive agreement to sell its Annuity business to MassMutual. Beginning with the first quarter of 2021 and through the May 31, 2021 effective date of the sale, the results of its annuity segment and the run-off life and long-term care operations are reported as discontinued operations, which included adjusting prior period results to reflect these operations as discontinued.
AFG recorded $914 million in non-core net earnings from the discontinued annuity operations in 2021, which includes a $656 million after tax gain on the sale, compared to $407 million and $378 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. See “Discontinued Annuity Operations” below for details of the impact of the discontinued annuity operations on AFG’s net earnings attributable to shareholders for the fourth quarter of 2020 and years end 2021, 2020 and 2019.
In December 2019, AFG initiated actions to exit the Lloyd’s of London insurance market, which included placing its Lloyd’s subsidiaries including its Lloyd’s Managing Agency, Neon Underwriting Ltd., into run-off. Neon and its predecessor, Marketform, have failed to achieve AFG’s profitability objectives since AFG’s purchase of Marketform in 2008. Consistent with the treatment of other items that are not indicative of AFG’s ongoing operations (both favorable and unfavorable), beginning with the first quarter of 2020, AFG’s core net operating earnings for its property and casualty insurance segment excludes the run-off operations of Neon (“Neon exited lines”). In December 2020, AFG sold GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon, to RiverStone Holdings Limited.
AFG recorded $111 million in non-core losses related to the runoff of the Neon business in 2020, which included a $23 million gain on the sale of the business. In conjunction with the sale, AFG recognized a tax benefit of $72 million, resulting in a net $39 million non-core after-tax loss from the Neon exited lines in 2020. In 2021, AFG recognized a non-core after tax gain of $3 million related to contingent consideration received from the sale of Neon.
The following table (in millions, except per share amounts) identifies non-core items and reconciles net earnings attributable to shareholders to core net operating earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure. AFG believes core net operating earnings is a useful tool for investors and analysts in analyzing ongoing operating trends and for management to evaluate financial performance against historical results because it believes this provides a more comparable measure of its continuing business.
(*)As discussed above, the Neon run-off operations are considered property and casualty insurance non-core earnings (losses). In 2021, AFG recognized a non-core after tax gain of $3 million related to contingent consideration received from the sale of Neon.
AFG reported net earnings attributable to shareholders of $355 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $692 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting higher core net operating earnings, the impact of a loss on retirement of debt in the fourth quarter of 2020, lower net realized gains on securities in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 and net earnings from the discontinued annuity operations in the fourth quarter of 2020. Core net operating earnings for the fourth quarter of 2021 increased $176 million compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting higher underwriting profit, higher net investment income and income from the sale of real estate in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Net earnings attributable to shareholders were $2.00 billion for the full-year of 2021 compared to $732 million in 2020 reflecting higher core net operating earnings, net realized gains on securities in 2021 compared to net realized losses in 2020, the impact of special A&E charges and non-core losses from the Neon exited lines in 2020 and higher net earnings from the discontinued annuity operations in 2021 (through the sale date) compared to 2020. The discontinued annuity operations includes an after-tax gain from the sale of the annuity subsidiaries of $656 million in 2021. Core net operating earnings increased $512 million in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting higher underwriting profit, higher net investment income and income from the sale of real estate in the fourth quarter of 2021, partially offset by higher interest charges on borrowed money and higher holding company expenses. Realized gains (losses) on securities in 2021 and 2020 resulted primarily from the change in fair value of equity securities that were still held at the balance sheet date.
Net earnings attributable to shareholders decreased $165 million for the full-year of 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 due primarily to net realized losses on securities in 2020 compared to net realized gains in 2019 and higher special A&E charges in 2020 compared to 2019, partially offset by higher earnings from the discontinued annuity operations and lower losses from the Neon exited lines in 2020 compared to 2019. Core net operating earnings decreased $1 million in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting higher interest charges on borrowed money and lower investment income due to lower market interest rates, lower dividend income and the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs, partially offset by higher underwriting profit and lower holding company expenses.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - QUARTERS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 AND 2020
Segmented Statement of Earnings
Subsequent to the agreement to sell the Annuity subsidiaries, AFG reports its continuing operations as two segments: (i) Property and casualty insurance (“P&C”) and (ii) Other, which includes holding company costs and income and expenses related to the managed investment entities (“MIEs”).
AFG’s net earnings attributable to shareholders, determined in accordance with GAAP, include certain items that may not be indicative of its ongoing core operations. The following tables for the three months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 identify such items by segment and reconcile net earnings attributable to shareholders to core net operating earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure that AFG believes is a useful tool for investors and analysts in analyzing ongoing operating trends (in millions):
(a)See the reconciliation of core earnings to GAAP net earnings under “Results of Operations - General” for details on the tax and noncontrolling interest impacts of these reconciling items.
(b)As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” the Neon run-off operations are considered property and casualty insurance non-core earnings (losses).
Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations
Performance measures such as underwriting profit or loss and related combined ratios are often used by property and casualty insurers to help users of their financial statements better understand the company’s performance. Underwriting profitability is measured by the combined ratio, which is a sum of the ratios of losses and loss adjustment expenses, and commissions and other underwriting expenses to premiums. A combined ratio under 100% indicates an underwriting profit. The combined ratio does not reflect net investment income, other income, other expenses or federal income taxes.
AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations contributed $485 million in GAAP and core pretax earnings in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $274 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $211 million (77%). The increase in GAAP and core pretax earnings reflects higher underwriting profit and significantly higher net investment income in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 and income for the sale of real estate in the fourth quarter of 2021. Improved results from alternative investments (partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs) were partially offset by lower other net investment income, due primarily to lower market interest rates.
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core earnings before income taxes from its property and casualty insurance operations for the three months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in millions):
Starting in 1986, AFG’s statutory combined ratio has been better than the U.S. industry average for 34 of the 36 years. Management believes that AFG’s insurance operations have performed better than the industry as a result of its specialty niche focus, product line diversification, stringent underwriting discipline and alignment of compensation incentives.
AFG reports the underwriting performance of its Specialty property and casualty insurance business in the following sub-segments: (i) Property and transportation, (ii) Specialty casualty and (iii) Specialty financial.
To understand the overall profitability of particular lines, the timing of claims payments and the related impact of investment income must be considered. Certain “short-tail” lines of business (primarily property coverages) generally have quick loss payouts, which reduce the time funds are held, thereby limiting investment income earned thereon. In contrast, “long-tail” lines of business (primarily liability coverages and workers’ compensation) generally have payouts that are either structured over many years or take many years to settle, thereby significantly increasing investment income earned on related premiums received.
Gross Written Premiums
Gross written premiums (“GWP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $1.74 billion for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $1.72 billion for the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $16 million (1%). Detail of AFG’s property and casualty gross written premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
Reinsurance Premiums Ceded
Reinsurance premiums ceded (“Ceded”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were 27% of gross written premiums for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to 29% of gross written premiums for the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of 2 percentage points. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty reinsurance premiums ceded is shown below (dollars in millions):
Net Written Premiums
Net written premiums (“NWP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $1.27 billion for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $1.23 billion for the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $41 million (3%). Detail of AFG’s property and casualty net written premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
Net Earned Premiums
Net earned premiums (“NEP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $1.45 billion for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $1.33 billion for the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $127 million (10%). Detail of AFG’s property and casualty net earned premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
The $16 million (1%) increase in gross written premiums in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects an increase in the Specialty casualty and Specialty financial sub-segments, partially offset by a decrease in the Property and transportation sub-segment. Overall average renewal rates increased approximately 7% in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Property and transportation Gross written premiums decreased $89 million (14%) in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. This decrease was due primarily to the timing of premium in the crop business and the timing of the renewal of a large account in the transportation business. Average renewal rates increased 6% for this group in the fourth quarter of 2021. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums decreased 7 percentage points for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting lower cessions in the crop insurance operations, partially offset by higher cessions in the transportation businesses.
Specialty casualty Gross written premiums increased $103 million (12%) in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. Significant renewal rate increases and increased exposures contributed to higher premiums in the excess liability and excess and surplus businesses. The mergers and acquisitions liability and executive liability businesses also contributed meaningfully to the year-over-year growth. Average renewal rates for this group increased approximately 7% in the fourth quarter of 2021. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal rates for this group increased approximately 11%. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums were comparable in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the fourth quarter of 2020.
Specialty financial Gross written premiums increased $16 million (8%) in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 due primarily to the favorable impact of economic recovery in the surety business and strong rate increases and new business opportunities in the fidelity business. Average renewal rates for this group increased approximately 7% in the fourth quarter of 2021. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 2 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting higher cessions in the innovative markets business.
Other specialty The amounts shown as reinsurance premiums ceded represent business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty property and casualty insurance sub-segments. Reinsurance premiums assumed increased $4 million (8%) in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting an increase in premiums retained, primarily from businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Combined Ratio
Performance measures such as the combined ratio are often used by property and casualty insurers to help users of their financial statements better understand the company’s performance. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expenses (“LAE”) and underwriting expense ratios. These ratios are calculated by dividing each of the respective expenses by net earned premiums. The table below (dollars in millions) details the components of the combined ratio for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment:
The Specialty property and casualty insurance operations generated an underwriting profit of $281 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $179 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $102 million (57%). The higher underwriting profit in the fourth quarter of 2021 reflects higher underwriting profits in each of the Specialty property and casualty sub-segments. Overall catastrophe losses were $25 million (1.8 points on the combined ratio) in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to catastrophe losses of $20 million (1.5 points) and related net reinstatement premium recoveries of $3 million in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Property and transportation Underwriting profit for this group was $116 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $74 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $42 million (57%). Higher underwriting profitability in the crop operations more than offset lower underwriting profits in the transportation businesses. Catastrophe losses for this group were $15 million (2.5 points on the combined ratio) in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $6 million (1.2 points) in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Specialty casualty Underwriting profit for this group was $140 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $91 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $49 million (54%). This increase reflects higher underwriting profitability in the workers’ compensation, excess liability, excess and surplus, targeted markets and executive liability businesses in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. Catastrophe losses were $3 million (0.6 points on the combined ratio) in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to catastrophe losses of $5 million (0.8 points) and related net reinstatement premium recoveries of $3 million in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Specialty financial Underwriting profit for this group was $24 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $20 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $4 million (20%). This increase reflects higher underwriting profitability in the trade credit, surety and fidelity businesses. Catastrophe losses were $6 million (3.7 points on the combined ratio) in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $7 million (4.5 points) in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Other specialty This group reported an underwriting profit of $1 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to an underwriting loss of $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, a change of $7 million (117%), reflecting lower losses in the business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty sub-segments in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020.
Neon exited lines In December 2019, AFG initiated actions to exit the Lloyd’s of London insurance market, which included placing its Lloyd’s subsidiaries including its Lloyd’s Managing Agency, Neon Underwriting Ltd., into run-off. In December 2020, AFG completed the sale of GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon. AFG recorded $53 million in non-core underwriting losses (including $8 million of net adverse prior year reserve development) related to this business in the fourth quarter of 2020. These losses were offset by a $53 million gain on the sale of Neon recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Consistent with the treatment of other items that are not indicative of AFG’s ongoing operations (both favorable and unfavorable), the $53 million underwriting loss at Neon and offsetting gain on sale in the fourth quarter of 2020 are treated as non-core.
Aggregate Aggregate underwriting results for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment include an underwriting loss of $53 million at Neon in the fourth quarter of 2020, due primarily to catastrophe losses and several large claims. Aggregate underwriting results for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment also include adverse prior year reserve development of $2 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 and $16 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to business outside of the Specialty group that AFG no longer writes.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
AFG’s overall loss and LAE ratio was 56.6% for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to 62.6% for fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of 6.0 percentage points. The components of AFG’s property and casualty losses and LAE amounts and ratio are detailed below (dollars in millions):
Current accident year losses and LAE, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses
The current accident year loss and LAE ratio, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses for AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations was 59.5% for both the fourth quarter of 2021 and the fourth quarter of 2020.
Property and transportation The 3.6 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio in the crop operations.
Specialty casualty The 2.3 percentage points increase in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses reflects an increase in the loss and LAE ratios of the targeted markets and general liability businesses.
Specialty financial The 1.0 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio of the fidelity business, partially offset by an increase in the loss and LAE ratio of the surety, equipment leasing and trade credit businesses.
Net prior year reserve development
AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations recorded net favorable reserve development related to prior accident years of $73 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $32 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $41 million (128%).
Property and transportation Net favorable reserve development of $2 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 reflects lower than expected claim frequency in the aviation business and lower than anticipated claim severity in the ocean marine business, partially offset by higher than expected claim severity in the property and inland marine business. Net favorable reserve development of $29 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the aviation, transportation and agricultural businesses.
Specialty casualty Net favorable reserve development of $55 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 reflects lower than anticipated claim severity in the workers’ compensation businesses. Net favorable reserve development of $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim severity in the workers’ compensation businesses, partially offset by higher than expected claim severity in general liability contractor claims and the public sector and excess liability businesses.
Specialty financial Net favorable reserve development of $13 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency in the surety and trade credit businesses. Net favorable reserve development of $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the fidelity and surety businesses and lower than expected claim severity in the financial institutions business.
Other specialty In addition to the development discussed above, total Specialty prior year reserve development includes net favorable reserve development of $3 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 and net adverse reserve development of $9 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, which includes adverse reserve development of $11 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 associated with AFG’s internal reinsurance program. Both periods include the amortization of deferred gains on the retroactive reinsurance transactions entered into in connection with the sale of businesses in 1998 and 2001.
Aggregate Aggregate net prior accident years reserve development for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment for the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020 includes net adverse reserve development of $8 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to Neon exited lines discussed above under “Neon exited lines.” Aggregate net prior accident years reserve development for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment also includes net adverse reserve development of $2 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 and $16 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to business outside the Specialty group that AFG no longer writes.
Catastrophe losses
AFG generally seeks to reduce its exposure to catastrophes through individual risk selection, including minimizing coastal and known fault-line exposures, and the purchase of reinsurance. Based on data available at December 31, 2021, AFG’s exposure to a catastrophic earthquake or windstorm that industry models indicate should statistically occur once in every 100, 250 or 500 years as a percentage of AFG’s Shareholders’ Equity is shown below:
AFG maintains comprehensive property catastrophe reinsurance coverage for its property and casualty insurance operations, including a $20 million per occurrence net retention, for losses up to $125 million in the vast majority of circumstances. In certain unlikely events, AFG’s ultimate loss under this coverage could be as high as $39 million for a
single occurrence. AFG further maintains supplemental fully collateralized reinsurance coverage up to 94% of $325 million for catastrophe losses in excess of $125 million of traditional catastrophe reinsurance through a catastrophe bond.
Catastrophe losses of $25 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 resulted primarily from storms in multiple regions of the United States, Kentucky tornadoes and Colorado fires. Catastrophe losses of $41 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 resulted primarily from Hurricanes Delta, Laura, Sally and Zeta and the Nashville explosion.
Commissions and Other Underwriting Expenses
AFG’s property and casualty commissions and other underwriting expenses (“U/W Exp”) were $351 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $385 million for the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $34 million (9%). AFG’s underwriting expense ratio, calculated as commissions and other underwriting expenses divided by net premiums earned, was 24.2% for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to 29.0% for the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of 4.8 percentage points. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty commissions and other underwriting expenses and underwriting expense ratios is shown below (dollars in millions):
Property and transportation Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 8.0 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting higher profitability-based ceding commissions received from reinsurers in the crop business and the impact of higher premiums on the ratio in the property and inland marine business.
Specialty casualty Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 0.5 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting higher ceding commissions received from reinsurers as a result of growth in the excess liability business.
Specialty financial Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums increased 2.6 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting higher underwriting expenses in the surety and equipment leasing businesses and higher profitability-based ceding commissions paid in the fidelity business.
Aggregate Aggregate commissions and other underwriting expenses for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment includes $27 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to the Neon exited lines. See “Neon exited lines” above for information about AFG’s exit from the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020.
Property and Casualty Net Investment Income
Net investment income in AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations was $196 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $122 million (excluding the Neon exited lines) in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $74 million (61%). The average invested assets and overall yield earned on investments held by AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations are provided below (dollars in millions):
(*)Adjusts the yield on equity securities and tax-exempt bonds to the fully taxable equivalent yield.
The property and casualty insurance segment’s increase in net investment income for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects the impact of growth in the property and casualty insurance segment and higher earnings from alternative investments, partially offset by the effect of lower market interest rates. The property and casualty insurance segment’s overall yield on investments (net investment income as a percentage of average invested assets) was 5.79% for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to 4.02% for the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of 1.77 percentage points. The annualized return earned on alternative investments (partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs) was 26.3% in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to 17.0% in the prior year period.
In addition to the property and casualty segment’s net investment income from ongoing operations discussed above, the Neon exited lines reported less than $1 million in net investment income in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Property and Casualty Other Income and Expenses, Net
Other income and expenses, net for AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations was net income of $10 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to a net expense of $11 million for the fourth quarter of 2020, a change of $21 million (191%). The table below details the items included in other income and expenses, net for AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations (in millions):
In addition to the property and casualty segment’s other income and expenses, net from ongoing operations discussed above, the Neon exited lines incurred a net expense of less than $1 million in other income and expenses, net in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Holding Company, Other and Unallocated - Results of Operations
AFG’s net GAAP pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance segment (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $47 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $61 million for the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $14 million (23%). AFG’s net core pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance segment (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $47 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $56 million for the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $9 million (16%).
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core loss from continuing operations before income taxes from operations outside of its property and casualty insurance segment for the three months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in millions):
(*)Excludes a pretax non-core loss on retirement of debt of $5 million in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Holding Company and Other - Net Investment Income
AFG recorded net investment income on investments held outside of its property and casualty insurance segment of $16 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $11 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $5 million (45%), reflecting income in the fourth quarter of 2021 from purchases of fixed maturity investments at the holding company and the impact of the stock market performance on a small portfolio of securities held by the parent company that are carried at fair value through net investment income. These securities increased in value by $7 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $9 million in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Holding Company and Other - P&C Fees and Related Expenses
Summit, a workers’ compensation insurance subsidiary, collects fees from a small group of unaffiliated insurers for providing underwriting, policy administration and claims services. In addition, certain of AFG’s property and casualty insurance businesses collect fees from customers for ancillary services such as workplace safety programs and premium financing. In the fourth quarter of 2021, AFG collected $19 million in fees for these services compared to $17 million in the fourth quarter of 2020. Management views this fee income, net of the $13 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 and $12 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, in expenses incurred to generate such fees, as a reduction in the cost of underwriting its property and casualty insurance policies. In addition, AFG’s property and casualty insurance businesses collected $3 million in fees from AFG’s disposed annuity operations during the fourth quarter of 2021 as compensation for certain services provided under a transition services agreement. The expenses related to providing such services are embedded in property and casualty underwriting expenses. Consistent with internal management reporting, these fees and the related expenses are netted and recorded as a reduction of commissions and other underwriting expenses in AFG’s segmented results.
Holding Company and Other - Other Income
Other income in the table above includes $4 million in both the fourth quarter of 2021 and the fourth quarter of 2020, in management fees paid to AFG by the AFG-managed CLOs (AFG’s consolidated managed investment entities). The management fees are eliminated in consolidation - see the other income line in the Consolidate MIEs column under “Results of Operations - Segmented Statement of Earnings.” Excluding amounts eliminated in consolidation, AFG recorded other income outside of its property and casualty insurance segment of $3 million and $1 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the fourth quarter of 2020, respectively.
Holding Company and Other - Other Expenses
Excluding the non-core loss on retirement of debt discussed below, AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance segment recorded other expenses of $47 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $48 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $1 million (2%). This decrease is due primarily to the impact of lower holding company expenses related to employee benefit plans that are tied to stock market performance in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by higher expenses associated with certain incentive compensation plans that are tied to AFG’s financial performance.
Holding Company and Other - Interest Charges on Borrowed Money
AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance segment recorded interest expense of $23 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $24 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $1 million (4%). The decrease in interest expense for the fourth quarter of 2021 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects the redemption of $150 million of 6% Subordinated Debentures in November 2020.
Holding Company and Other - Loss on Retirement of Debt
In November 2020, AFG redeemed its $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6% Subordinated Debentures due in 2055 and wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million.
Realized Gains (Losses) on Securities
AFG’s realized gains (losses) on securities were net gains of $7 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $122 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $115 million (94%). Realized gains (losses) on securities consisted of the following (in millions):
The $6 million net realized gain from the change in the fair value of equity securities in the fourth quarter of 2021 includes gains of $12 million on investments in capital goods companies and $2 million on investments in energy and natural gas companies, partially offset by losses of $5 million on investments in healthcare companies, $2 million on investments in banks and financing companies and $3 million on investments in media companies. The $120 million net realized gain from the change in the fair value of equity securities in the fourth quarter of 2020 includes gains of $28 million on investments in banks and financing companies, $23 million on investments in media companies, $15 million on investments in energy and natural gas companies, $12 million on investments in technology companies, $9 million on investments in retail companies and $5 million on investments in real estate investment trusts.
Realized Gains (Losses) on Subsidiaries
On September 28, 2020, AFG announced that it had reached a definitive agreement to sell GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon, to RiverStone Holdings Limited. AFG recorded a $30 million loss in the third quarter of 2020 to establish a liability equal to the excess of the net carrying value of the assets and liabilities to be disposed over the estimated net sale proceeds. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the estimated loss was adjusted at the closing date to a gain of $23 million based on the final proceeds and the final net assets disposed, which reflects $53 million of non-core losses in the fourth quarter of 2020 at Neon. See Note C - “Acquisitions and Sale of Businesses” to the financial statements.
Consolidated Income Taxes on Continuing Operations
AFG’s consolidated provision for income taxes was $90 million for the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $77 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $13 million (17%). The following is a reconciliation of income taxes at the statutory rate to the provision for income taxes as shown in the segmented statement of earnings (dollars in millions):
See Note L - “Income Taxes” to the financial statements for an analysis of items affecting AFG’s effective tax rate.
Consolidated Noncontrolling Interests in Continuing Operations
AFG’s consolidated net earnings (loss) from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests was net earnings of $2 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 reflecting earnings at Neon, which was sold in December 2020.
Real Estate Entities Acquired from the Annuity Operations
Beginning with the first quarter of 2021, the results of the annuity businesses sold are reported as discontinued operations, in accordance with GAAP, which included adjusting prior period results to reflect these operations as discontinued. Prior to the completion of the sale, AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations acquired approximately $480 million in real estate-related partnerships and AFG parent acquired approximately $100 million of directly owned real estate from those operations. GAAP pretax earnings from continuing operations includes the earnings from these entities through the May 31, 2021 effective date of the sale and certain other expenses that were retained from the annuity operations.
Discontinued Annuity Operations
AFG’s discontinued annuity operations, which were sold in May 2021, contributed $540 million in GAAP pretax earnings in the fourth quarter of 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021, 2020 AND 2019
Segmented Statement of Earnings
Subsequent to the agreement to sell the Annuity subsidiaries, AFG reports its continuing operations as two segments: (i) Property and casualty insurance (“P&C”) and (ii) Other, which includes holding company costs and income and expenses related to the managed investment entities (“MIEs”).
AFG’s net earnings attributable to shareholders, determined in accordance with GAAP, include certain items that may not be indicative of its ongoing core operations. The following tables for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 identify such items by segment and reconcile net earnings attributable to shareholders to core net operating earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure that AFG believes is a useful tool for investors and analysts in analyzing ongoing operating trends (in millions):
(a)See the reconciliation of core earnings to GAAP net earnings under “Results of Operations - General” for details on the tax and noncontrolling interest impacts of these reconciling items.
(b)As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” the Neon run-off operations are considered property and casualty insurance non-core earnings (losses).
Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations
AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations contributed $1.39 billion in GAAP pretax earnings in 2021 compared to $607 million in 2020, an increase of $787 million (130%). Property and casualty core pretax earnings were $1.39 billion in 2021 compared to $776 million in 2020, an increase of $614 million (79%). The increase in GAAP pretax earnings reflects higher core pretax earnings and the impact of losses in the Neon exited lines in 2020. The increase in GAAP pretax earnings also reflects the impact of a pretax non-core special A&E charge of $47 million in 2020. The increase in core pretax earnings reflects higher core underwriting profit and significantly higher net investment income in 2021 compared to 2020 and income from the sale of real estate in the fourth quarter of 2021. Improved results from alternative investments (partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs) were partially offset by lower other net investment income, due primarily to lower interest rates.
AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations contributed $607 million in GAAP pretax earnings in 2020 compared to $649 million in 2019, a decrease of $42 million (6%). Property and casualty core pretax earnings were $776 million in 2020 compared to $743 million in 2019, an increase of $33 million (4%). The decrease in GAAP pretax earnings reflects pretax non-core special A&E charges of $47 million in 2020 compared to $18 million in 2019 and higher non-core losses in
the Neon exited lines, partially offset by higher core pretax earnings. The increase in core pretax earnings reflects higher core underwriting results, partially offset by lower net investment income in 2020 compared to 2019.
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core earnings before income taxes from its property and casualty insurance operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in millions):
AFG reports the underwriting performance of its Specialty property and casualty insurance business in the following sub-segments: (i) Property and transportation, (ii) Specialty casualty and (iii) Specialty financial.
Gross Written Premiums
Gross written premiums (“GWP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $7.95 billion in 2021 compared to $7.09 billion in 2020, an increase of $859 million (12%). GWP decreased $212 million (3%) in 2020 compared to 2019. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty gross written premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
Reinsurance Premiums Ceded
Reinsurance premiums ceded (“Ceded”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were 30% of gross written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2021, 29% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 27% for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 1 percentage point for 2021 compared to 2020 and 2 percentage points for 2020 compared to 2019. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty reinsurance premiums ceded is shown below (dollars in millions):
Net Written Premiums
Net written premiums (“NWP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $5.57 billion in 2021 compared to $5.01 billion in 2020, an increase of $560 million (11%). NWP decreased $329 million (6%) in 2020 compared to 2019. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty net written premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
Net Earned Premiums
Net earned premiums (“NEP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $5.40 billion in 2021 compared to $5.10 billion in 2020, an increase of $305 million (6%). NEP decreased $86 million (2%) in 2020 compared to 2019. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty net earned premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
The $859 million (12%) increase in gross written premiums in 2021 compared to 2020 reflects an increase in each of the Specialty property and casualty sub-segments due primarily to an improving economy, new business opportunities, higher renewal rates and increased exposures. Overall average renewal rates increased approximately 9% in 2021. Excluding the workers’ compensation business, renewal pricing increased nearly 12%.
The $212 million (3%) decrease in gross written premiums in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a decrease in the Specialty casualty and Specialty financial sub-segments, partially offset by an increase in the Property and transportation sub-segment. Overall average renewal rates increased approximately 11% in 2020. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal pricing increased nearly 15%.
Property and transportation Gross written premiums increased $450 million (16%) in 2021 compared to 2020, due primarily to higher premiums in the crop insurance business as a result of higher commodity futures pricing and rate increases, higher premiums in the transportation businesses as a result of new accounts, combined with strong renewals and increased exposures in the alternative risk transfer business. Average renewal rates increased approximately 6% for this group in 2021. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 1 percentage point in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting growth in the crop insurance operations, which cede a larger percentage of premiums than the other businesses in the Property and transportation sub-segment and the impact of reinstatement premiums in 2021 related to winter storms in Texas and a large property loss.
Gross written premiums increased $54 million (2%) in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to growth and new business opportunities in the property and inland marine and ocean marine businesses, partially offset by lower premiums in the transportation businesses, primarily from the return of premiums and reduced exposures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and premium reductions in two large national accounts. Average renewal rates increased nearly 6% for this group in 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 1 percentage point in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting higher cessions in the transportation businesses.
Specialty casualty Gross written premiums increased $446 million (13%) in 2021 compared to 2020. Significant renewal rate increases and new business opportunities contributed to higher premiums in the excess and surplus businesses and renewal rate increases, strong account retention and new business opportunities contributed to premium growth in the targeted markets businesses. The mergers and acquisitions liability and executive liability businesses also contributed meaningfully to the year-over-year growth. Average renewal rates increased approximately 11% for this group in 2021. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal rates for this group increased approximately 17% in 2021. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 2 percentage points in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting growth in the excess and surplus, mergers and acquisitions liability and environmental businesses, which cede a larger percentage of premiums than the other businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Gross written premiums decreased $324 million (9%) in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to the run-off of Neon. Excluding the $567 million in gross written premiums from the Neon exited lines in 2019, gross written premiums increased approximately 8% in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase reflects growth in the excess and surplus, excess liability, targeted markets and directors and officers businesses, primarily the result of renewal rate increases, new business opportunities and higher retentions on renewal business, partially offset by lower premiums in the workers’ compensation businesses due to reduced exposures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic coupled with renewal rate decreases. Average renewal rates increased approximately 14% for this group in 2020. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal rates for this group increased nearly 24% in 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 5 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting growth in the excess and surplus and public sector businesses, which cede a larger percentage of premiums than many of the businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment and higher cessions in the professional liability business.
Specialty financial Gross written premiums increased $55 million (7%) in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to renewal rate increases and new business opportunities within the lender services and fidelity businesses and the favorable impact of economic recovery in the surety business. Average renewal rates for this group increased approximately 7% in 2021. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums decreased 1 percentage point in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting lower cessions in the financial institutions business due to reduced premiums from certain collateral protection insurance that is 100% reinsured.
Gross written premiums decreased $34 million (4%) in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to lower premiums from the impact of various state regulations regarding policy cancellations and the placement of forced coverage in the financial institutions business and COVID-related economic impacts on the surety business and heightened risk selection that has reduced new business in the trade credit business, partially offset by higher premiums in the fidelity business. Average renewal rates for this group increased nearly 8% in 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums decreased 2 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting lower cessions in the financial institutions business.
Other specialty The amounts shown as reinsurance premiums ceded represent business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty property and casualty insurance sub-segments. Reinsurance premiums assumed increased $21 million (11%) in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting an increase in premiums retained, primarily from businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Reinsurance premiums assumed increased $49 million (33%) in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting an increase in premiums retained, primarily from businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Combined Ratio
The table below (dollars in millions) details the components of the combined ratio for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment for 2021, 2020 and 2019:
The Specialty property and casualty insurance operations generated an underwriting profit of $737 million in 2021 compared to $426 million in 2020, an increase of $311 million (73%). The higher underwriting profit in 2021 reflects higher underwriting profits in each of the Specialty property and casualty sub-segments. Underwriting results for the Specialty property and casualty insurance operations include $16 million in COVID-19 related losses (0.3 points on the combined ratio) in 2021 compared to $95 million (1.9 points) in 2020. Overall catastrophe losses were $86 million (1.6 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $12 million for 2021 compared to catastrophe losses of $91 million (1.9 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $2 million for 2020.
The Specialty property and casualty insurance operations generated an underwriting profit of $426 million in 2020 compared to $325 million in 2019, an increase of $101 million (31%), reflecting higher underwriting profits in the Property and transportation and Specialty casualty sub-segments, partially offset by lower underwriting profit in the Specialty financial sub-segment. Underwriting results for the Specialty property and casualty insurance operations include $95 million in COVID-19 related losses (1.9 points on the combined ratio) in 2020. Overall catastrophe losses were $91 million (1.9 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $2 million for 2020 compared to catastrophe losses of $60 million (1.2 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $1 million for 2019.
Property and transportation Underwriting profit for this group was $279 million in 2021 compared to $181 million in 2020, an increase of $98 million (54%). This increase reflects higher underwriting profitability in the crop and ocean marine businesses. COVID-19 related losses for this group were $7 million (0.4 points on the combined ratio) in 2020. Catastrophe losses were $49 million (2.3 points on the combined ratio), primarily the result of winter storms in Texas, Hurricane Ida and Kentucky tornadoes, and related net reinstatement premiums were $9 million in 2021 compared to catastrophe losses of $47 million (2.5 points) in 2020.
Underwriting profit for this group was $181 million in 2020 compared to $79 million in 2019, an increase of $102 million (129%). This increase reflects higher underwriting profitability in the crop operations following record levels of prevented planting claims in 2019 and, to a lesser extent, higher favorable prior year reserve development in the transportation businesses and improved underwriting results in the aviation business and the Singapore branch. COVID-19 related losses for this group were $7 million (0.4 points on the combined ratio) in 2020. Catastrophe losses were $47 million (2.5 points on the combined ratio) in 2020 compared to $32 million (1.8 points) in 2019.
Specialty casualty Underwriting profit for this group was $377 million in 2021 compared to $223 million in 2020, an increase of $154 million (69%). This increase reflects higher underwriting profitability in the excess and surplus, excess liability, workers’ compensation, targeted markets and general liability businesses in 2021 compared to 2020. COVID-19 related losses were $9 million (0.4 points on the combined ratio) in 2021 compared to $60 million (2.7 points) in 2020, primarily in the workers’ compensation and executive liability businesses. Catastrophe losses were $9 million (0.4 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $1 million in 2021 compared to catastrophe losses of $14 million (0.6 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $2 million in 2020.
Underwriting profit for this group was $223 million in 2020 compared to $175 million in 2019, an increase of $48 million (27%). This increase reflects higher year-over-year underwriting profitability in the excess and surplus and excess liability businesses and the impact of $36 million of underwriting losses at Neon in 2019, partially offset by lower year-over-year underwriting profits in the targeted markets and workers’ compensation businesses. See “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for information about AFG’s exit from the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020. COVID-19 related losses were $60 million (2.7 points on the combined ratio) in 2020, primarily in the workers’ compensation and executive liability businesses. Catastrophe losses were $14 million (0.6 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $2 million in 2020 compared to catastrophe losses of $17 million (0.7 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $1 million in 2019.
Specialty financial Underwriting profit for this group was $96 million in 2021 compared to $50 million in 2020, an increase of $46 million (92%) due primarily to higher year-over-year underwriting profitability in the surety, financial institutions, innovative markets and trade credit businesses. COVID-19 related losses were $7 million (1.1 points on the combined ratio) in 2021 compared to $26 million (4.3 points) in 2020, primarily related to trade credit insurance. Catastrophe losses were $26 million (4.0 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $2 million in 2021 compared to catastrophe losses of $26 million (4.3 points) in 2020.
Underwriting profit for this group was $50 million in 2020 compared to $92 million in 2019, a decrease of $42 million (46%) due primarily to lower underwriting profitability in the trade credit, surety and innovative markets businesses and higher year-over year catastrophe losses in the financial institutions business. COVID-19 related losses were $26 million (4.3 points on the combined ratio) in 2020 primarily related to trade credit insurance. Catastrophe losses were $26 million (4.3 points on the combined ratio) in 2020 compared to $10 million (1.6 points) in 2019.
Other specialty This group reported an underwriting loss of $15 million in 2021 compared to $28 million in 2020, a decrease of $13 million (46%). This decrease reflects lower losses in the business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty sub-segments in 2021 compared to 2020.
This group reported an underwriting loss of $28 million in 2020 compared to $21 million in 2019, an increase of $7 million (33%). This increase reflects higher losses in the business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty sub-segments in 2020 compared to 2019.
Aggregate Aggregate underwriting results for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment include asbestos and environmental reserve charges of $47 million in 2020 and $18 million in 2019, an underwriting loss of $135 million at Neon in 2020, due primarily to catastrophe losses, COVID-19 related charges and several large claims, and the $76 million Neon exited lines charge in 2019. See “Asbestos and Environmental-related (“A&E”) Insurance Reserves,” under “Uncertainties” and “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Aggregate underwriting results for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment also include adverse prior year reserve development of $4 million in 2021, $20 million in 2020 and $19 million in 2019, related to business outside of the Specialty group that AFG no longer writes.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
AFG’s overall loss and LAE ratio was 58.5%, 64.1% and 63.0% in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The components of AFG’s property and casualty losses and LAE amounts and ratio are detailed below (dollars in millions):
Current accident year losses and LAE, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses
The current accident year loss and LAE ratio, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses for AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations was 61.7% in 2021, 61.5% in 2020 and 64.0% in 2019.
Property and transportation The 0.2 percentage points increase in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2021 compared to 2020 reflects an increase in the loss and LAE ratio in the property and inland marine business, partially offset by a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio in the crop operations.
The 5.4 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio in the crop operations due to a high level of prevented planting claims resulting from excess rain in 2019 and, to a lesser extent, lower loss and LAE ratios in the aviation and transportation businesses due primarily to rate increases and lower claim frequency in 2020, and lower loss and LAE ratios in non-crop agricultural businesses and the Singapore branch in 2020 compared to 2019.
Specialty casualty The 0.3 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2021 compared to 2020 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratios of the excess and surplus businesses, partially offset by an increase in the loss and LAE ratios of the targeted markets businesses.
The 0.3 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratios of the workers’ compensation, targeted markets, executive liability and excess and surplus businesses, partially offset by the impact of the Neon exited lines in 2019, which has a lower loss and LAE ratio than many of the other businesses in the Specialty casualty group. Excluding the impact of the Neon exited lines, the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses decreased 2.1 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019.
Specialty financial The 0.7 percentage points increase in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2021 compared to 2020 reflects an increase in the loss and LAE ratio of the financial institutions and trade credit businesses, partially offset by a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio of the fidelity business.
The 0.8 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio of the financial institutions business, partially offset by an increase in the loss and LAE ratio of the fidelity business.
Net prior year reserve development
AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations recorded net favorable reserve development related to prior accident years of $283 million in 2021 compared to $213 million in 2020 and $187 million in 2019, an increase of $70 million (33%) and an increase of $26 million (14%), respectively.
Property and transportation Net favorable reserve development of $103 million in 2021 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the transportation businesses, lower than expected losses in the crop business, lower than expected claim severity in the ocean marine business and lower than expected claim frequency in the aviation business.
Net favorable reserve development of $107 million in 2020 reflects lower than expected claim frequency and severity in the aviation, transportation and agricultural businesses.
Net favorable reserve development of $67 million in 2019 reflects lower than expected claim frequency and severity at National Interstate and lower than expected losses in the crop business.
Specialty casualty Net favorable reserve development of $140 million in 2021 reflects lower than anticipated claim severity in the workers’ compensation businesses, partially offset by higher than anticipated claim severity in the general liability and targeted markets businesses.
Net favorable reserve development of $97 million in 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim severity in the workers’ compensation businesses and lower than anticipated claim frequency in the executive liability business, partially offset by higher than expected claim frequency and severity in general liability contractor claims and the excess and surplus and excess liability businesses and higher than anticipated claim severity in the targeted markets businesses.
Net favorable reserve development of $88 million in 2019 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the workers’ compensation businesses, partially offset by higher than expected claim severity in the excess and surplus businesses and higher than expected claim frequency in product liability contractor claims.
Specialty financial Net favorable reserve development of $51 million in 2021 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency in the surety and trade credit businesses and lower than expected claim frequency and severity in the financial institutions business.
Net favorable reserve development of $28 million in 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency in the trade credit business and lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the financial institutions, fidelity and surety businesses.
Net favorable reserve development of $38 million in 2019 reflects lower than expected claim frequency and severity in the surety and financial institutions businesses and lower than anticipated claim severity in the trade credit business.
Other specialty In addition to the reserve development discussed above, total Specialty prior year reserve development includes net adverse reserve development of $11 million, $19 million and $6 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The net adverse reserve development reflects $16 million, $24 million and $12 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, of adverse development associated with AFG’s internal reinsurance program, partially offset by the amortization of the deferred gains on the retroactive reinsurance transactions entered into in connection with the sale of businesses in 1998 and 2001.
Asbestos and environmental reserve charges As previously discussed under “Uncertainties - Asbestos and Environmental-related (“A&E”) Insurance Reserves,” AFG has established property and casualty reserves for claims related to environmental exposures and asbestos claims. While there was no charge recorded in the property and casualty business in 2021, total charges recorded to increase reserves (net of reinsurance recoverable) for A&E exposures of AFG’s property and casualty group (included in loss and loss adjustment expenses) were $47 million in 2020 and $18 million in 2019.
Neon exited lines AFG recorded net adverse prior year reserve development of $19 million in 2020 and $7 million in 2019 related to Neon’s exited lines of business (included in loss and loss adjustment expenses). See “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for information about AFG’s exit of the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020.
Aggregate Aggregate net prior accident years reserve development for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment includes the special A&E charges and reserve development related to the Neon exited lines mentioned above and net adverse reserve development of $4 million, $20 million and $19 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to business outside the Specialty group that AFG no longer writes.
Covid-19 related losses
AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations recorded $16 million in reserve charges related to COVID-19 in 2021 primarily related to the workers’ compensation and trade credit businesses, and recorded favorable development of approximately $19 million of accident year 2020 reserves primarily based on loss experience in the trade credit and executive liability businesses. Underwriting results for AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations in 2020 include $95 million of reserve charges related to COVID-19. Approximately 70% of AFG’s 2020 COVID-19 related losses were reported in the workers’ compensation, executive liability and trade credit businesses, with the remainder spread across numerous other businesses. Given the uncertainties surrounding the ultimate number and scope of claims relating to the pandemic, approximately 61% of the $92 million in cumulative COVID-19 related losses are held as incurred but not reported reserves at December 31, 2021.
In addition, underwriting results for the Neon exited lines includes $20 million of COVID-19 related losses in 2020.
Catastrophe losses
AFG generally seeks to reduce its exposure to catastrophes through individual risk selection, including minimizing coastal and known fault-line exposures, and the purchase of reinsurance. AFG recorded net catastrophe losses of $86 million in 2021 primarily from winter storms in Texas in the first quarter; storms in multiple regions of the United States in the second, third and fourth quarters; Hurricane Ida in the third quarter and Kentucky tornadoes and Colorado fires in the fourth quarter.
Catastrophe losses of $128 million in 2020 resulted primarily from storms and tornadoes in multiple regions of the United States in the first quarter; storms and tornadoes in multiple regions of the United States and civil unrest in the second quarter; Hurricanes Hanna, Laura and Sally, Tropical Storm Isaias, storms and tornadoes in multiple regions of the United States and multiple wildfires in west coast states in the third quarter and Hurricanes Laura, Sally, Delta and Zeta and the Nashville explosion in the fourth quarter.
Catastrophe losses of $60 million in 2019 resulted primarily from winter storms in multiple regions of the United States in the first quarter; storms and tornadoes in multiple regions of the United States in the second quarter; Hurricane Dorian and Tropical Storm Imelda in the third quarter and Typhoons Faxai and Hagibis, storms and tornadoes in the south-central United States and the Kincade fire in California in the fourth quarter.
Commissions and Other Underwriting Expenses
AFG’s property and casualty commissions and other underwriting expenses (“U/W Exp”) were $1.51 billion in 2021 compared to $1.60 billion in 2020, a decrease of $90 million (6%). AFG’s underwriting expense ratio was 28.0% in 2021 compared to 31.4% in 2020, a decrease of 3.4 percentage points.
AFG’s property and casualty U/W Exp were $1.60 billion in 2020 compared to $1.70 billion in 2019, a decrease of $98 million (6%). AFG’s underwriting expense ratio was 31.4% in 2020 compared to 32.8% in 2019, a decrease of 1.4 percentage points.
Detail of AFG’s property and casualty commissions and other underwriting expenses and underwriting expense ratios is shown below (dollars in millions):
Property and transportation Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 3.8 percentage points in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting higher profitability-based ceding commissions received from reinsurers in the crop business and the impact of higher premiums on the ratio in the property and inland marine business in 2021 compared to 2020.
Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums increased 1.1 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting lower profitability-based ceding commissions received from reinsurers in the crop business.
Specialty casualty Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 1.3 percentage points in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting higher ceding commissions received from reinsurers as a result of growth in the excess liability businesses.
Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 4.7 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the runoff of Neon. Neon has a higher expense ratio than many of the other businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment. Excluding Neon exited lines, the underwriting expense ratio decreased 1.5 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting higher ceding commissions received from reinsurers as a result of growth in the excess liability business.
Specialty financial Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 0.4 percentage points in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting the impact of higher premiums on the ratio in 2021 compared to 2020.
Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 1.2 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting the impact of higher premiums on the ratio in the fidelity and equipment leasing businesses and lower travel expenses.
Aggregate Aggregate commissions and other underwriting expenses for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment includes $117 million of underwriting expenses in the Neon run-off operations in 2020 and $30 million related to the Neon exited lines charge in 2019 representing contractual employee severance benefits and other incurred exit costs. See “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Property and Casualty Net Investment Income
Net investment income in AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations was $663 million in 2021 compared to $404 million (excluding the Neon exited lines) in 2020, an increase of $259 million (64%). Net investment income in AFG’s property and casualty operations was $404 million (excluding the Neon exited lines) in 2020 compared to $472 million in 2019, a decrease of $68 million (14%). The average invested assets and overall yield earned on investments held by AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations are provided below (dollars in millions):
(*)Adjusts the yield on equity securities and tax-exempt bonds to the fully taxable equivalent yield.
The property and casualty insurance segment’s increase in net investment income in 2021 compared to 2020 reflects significantly higher earnings from alternative investments (partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs), partially offset by the effect of lower fixed maturity yields, lower short-term interest rates and lower dividend income. The property and casualty insurance segment’s overall yield on investments (net investment income as a percentage of average invested assets) was 5.12% in 2021 compared to 3.44% in 2020, an increase of 1.68 percentage points. The annualized return earned on alternative investments was 25.3% in 2021 compared to 6.6% in 2020.
The decrease in net investment income in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects lower earnings from alternative investments in 2020 as a result of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on financial markets, lower short-term interest rates and lower dividend income, partially offset by growth in the property and casualty insurance segment. The property and casualty insurance segment’s overall yield on investments was 3.44% in 2020 compared to 4.16% in 2019, a decrease of 0.72 percentage points. The annualized return earned on alternative investments was 6.6% in 2020 compared to 10.3% in 2019.
In addition to the property and casualty segment’s net investment income from ongoing operations discussed above, the Neon exited lines reported a $5 million loss in 2020 in net investment income, primarily from changes in the fair value of equity securities.
Property and Casualty Other Income and Expenses, Net
Other income and expenses, net for AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations was a net expense of $6 million in 2021, $34 million in 2020, and $35 million in 2019, a decrease of $28 million (82%) in 2021 compared to 2020 and $1 million (3%) in 2020 compared to 2019. The table below details the items included in other income and expenses, net for AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations (in millions):
In addition to the property and casualty segment’s other income and expenses, net from ongoing operations discussed above, the Neon exited lines incurred a net expense of $5 million in other income and expenses, net during 2020.
Holding Company, Other and Unallocated - Results of Operations
AFG’s net GAAP pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance segment (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $219 million in 2021 compared to $212 million in 2020, an increase of $7 million (3%). AFG’s net core pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance segment (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $208 million in 2021 compared to $186 million in 2020, an increase of $22 million (12%).
AFG’s net GAAP pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance segment (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $212 million in 2020 compared to $191 million in 2019, an increase of $21 million (11%). AFG’s net core pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance segment (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $186 million in 2020 compared to $175 million in 2019, an increase of $11 million (6%).
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core loss from continuing operations before income taxes from operations outside of its property and casualty insurance segment in 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in millions):
(*)Excludes a pretax non-core loss of $11 million related to the settlement of pension liabilities of a small former manufacturing operation in 2021, pretax non-core special A&E charges of $21 million and $11 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and a pretax non-core loss on retirement of debt of $5 million in both 2020 and 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Net Investment Income
AFG recorded net investment income on investments held outside of its property and casualty insurance segment of $36 million, $12 million and $24 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $24 million (200%) increase in 2021 compared to 2020 and the $12 million (50%) decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 are due primarily to the impact of the stock market performance on a small portfolio of securities held by the parent company that are carried at fair value through net investment income. These securities increased in value by $14 million, $5 million and $13 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in net investment income in 2021 also reflects income from directly owned real estate acquired from the annuity group prior to the sale of the annuity business and purchases of fixed maturity investments at the holding company.
Holding Company and Other - P&C Fees and Related Expenses
Summit, a workers’ compensation insurance subsidiary, collects fees from a small group of unaffiliated insurers for providing underwriting, policy administration and claims services. In addition, certain of AFG’s property and casualty insurance businesses collect fees from customers for ancillary services such as workplace safety programs and premium financing. In 2021, AFG collected $73 million in fees for these services compared to $67 million in 2020 and $69 million in 2019. Management views this fee income, net of the $47 million in 2021 and $46 million in 2020 and 2019, in expenses incurred to generate such fees, as a reduction in the cost of underwriting its property and casualty insurance policies. In addition, AFG’s property and casualty insurance businesses collected $7 million in fees from AFG’s disposed annuity operations subsequent to the May 2021 sale as compensation for certain services provided under a transition services agreement. The expenses related to providing such services are embedded in property and casualty underwriting expenses. Consistent with internal management reporting, these fees and the related expenses are netted and recorded as a reduction of commissions and other underwriting expenses in AFG’s segmented results.
Holding Company and Other - Other Income
Other income in the table above includes $16 million in 2021 and $15 million in both 2020 and 2019, in management fees paid to AFG by the AFG-managed CLOs (AFG’s consolidated managed investment entities). The management fees are eliminated in consolidation - see the other income line in the Consolidated MIEs column under “Results of Operations -
Segmented Statement of Earnings.” Excluding amounts eliminated in consolidation, AFG recorded other income outside of its property and casualty insurance segment of $6 million in 2021, $4 million in 2020 and $6 million in 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Other Expenses
Excluding the non-core special A&E charges, the non-core loss on retirement of debt and the non-core loss on pension settlement discussed below, AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance segment recorded other expenses of $172 million in 2021 compared to $129 million in 2020, an increase of $43 million (33%). This increase reflects higher holding company expenses related to employee benefit plans that are tied to stock market performance and higher expenses associated with certain incentive compensation plans that are tied to AFG’s financial performance in 2021 compared to 2020.
Excluding the non-core special A&E charges and the non-core loss on retirement of debt discussed below, AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance segment recorded other expenses of $129 million in 2020 compared to $152 million in 2019, a decrease of $23 million (15%). This decrease reflects lower holding company expenses related to employee benefit plans that are tied to stock market performance and lower expenses associated with certain incentive compensation plans in 2020 compared to 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Interest Charges on Borrowed Money
AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance segment recorded interest expense of $94 million in 2021, $88 million in 2020 and $68 million in 2019. The $6 million (7%) increase in interest expense in 2021 compared to 2020 and the $20 million (29%) increase in interest expense in 2020 compared to 2019 reflect higher average indebtedness. The following table details the principal amount of AFG’s long-term debt balances as of December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in millions):
The increase in interest expense in 2021 compared to 2020 and in 2020 compared to 2019 reflect the following financial transactions completed by AFG between January 1, 2019 and December 31, 2021:
•Issued $125 million of 5.875% Subordinated Debentures in March 2019
•Issued $200 million of 5.125% Subordinated Debentures in December 2019
•Redeemed $150 million of 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures in December 2019
•Issued $300 million of 5.25% Senior Notes in April 2020
•Issued $150 million of 5.625% Subordinated Debentures in May 2020
•Issued $200 million of 4.50% Subordinated Debentures in September 2020
•Redeemed $150 million of 6% Subordinated Debentures in November 2020
Holding Company and Other - Special A&E Charges
As a result of the in-depth internal reviews and comprehensive external study of A&E exposures discussed under “Uncertainties - Asbestos and Environmental-related (“A&E”) Insurance Reserves,” AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance segment recorded a minor charge in 2021, which is included in AFG’s core operating earnings, compared to pretax non-core special charges of $21 million in 2020 and $11 million in 2019 to increase liabilities related to the A&E exposures of AFG’s former railroad and manufacturing operations. The charges are due to relatively small movements across several sites that reflect changes in the scope and costs of investigation and an increase in estimated ongoing operation and maintenance costs. AFG has also increased its reserve for asbestos and toxic substance exposures arising out of these operations. Total charges recorded to increase liabilities
for A&E exposures of AFG’s former railroad and manufacturing operations (included in other expenses) were $9 million in 2021, $28 million in 2020 and $19 million in 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Loss on Retirement of Debt
In November 2020, AFG redeemed its $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6% Subordinated Debentures due in 2055 and wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million. In December 2019, AFG redeemed its $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures due in 2054 at par value and wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million.
Holding Company and Other - Loss on Pension Settlement
In the second quarter of 2021, AFG settled pension liabilities related to a small former manufacturing operation resulting in a pretax non-core loss of $11 million.
Realized Gains (Losses) on Securities
AFG’s realized gains (losses) on securities were net gains of $110 million in 2021 compared to net losses of $75 million in 2020, a change of $185 million (247%). AFG’s consolidated realized gains (losses) on securities were net losses of $75 million in 2020 compared to net gains of $155 million in 2019, a change of $230 million (148%). Realized gains (losses) on securities consisted of the following (in millions):
The $110 million net realized gain from the change in the fair value of equity securities in 2021 includes gains of $29 million on investments in energy and natural gas companies, $18 million on investments in banks and financing companies, $17 million on investments in media companies, $14 million on investments in healthcare companies and $9 million on investments in capital goods companies.
The $69 million net realized loss from the change in the fair value of equity securities in 2020 includes losses of $24 million on investments in banks and financing companies, $31 million on investments in energy and natural gas companies, $14 million on real estate investment trusts, $11 million from investments in media companies and $5 million on investments in insurance companies.
The $155 million net realized gain from the change in the fair value of equity securities in 2019 includes gains of $64 million on investments in banks and financing companies, $19 million on investments in media companies, $16 million on investments in technology companies, $14 million on investments in insurance companies, $7 million on investments in healthcare companies and $6 million on investments in real estate investment trusts.
Realized Gains (Losses) on Subsidiaries
In 2021, AFG recognized a pretax gain on sale of subsidiary of $4 million related to contingent consideration received on the sale of Neon. See “Results of Operations - General” for the discussion of the December 2019 decision to exit the Lloyd’s of London insurance market.
On September 28, 2020, AFG announced that it had reached a definitive agreement to sell GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon, to RiverStone Holdings Limited. AFG recorded a $30 million loss in the third quarter of 2020 to establish a liability equal to the excess of the net carrying value of the assets and liabilities to be disposed over the estimated net sale proceeds. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the estimated loss was adjusted at the closing date to a gain of $23 million based on the final proceeds and the final net assets disposed, which reflects $53 million of non-core losses in the fourth quarter of 2020 at Neon. See Note C - “Acquisitions and Sale of Businesses” to the financial statements.
Consolidated Income Taxes on Continuing Operations
AFG’s consolidated provision for income taxes on continuing operations was $254 million in 2021 compared to $25 million in 2020, an increase of $229 million (916%). AFG’s consolidated provision for income taxes on continuing operations was $25 million in 2020 compared to $143 million in 2019, a decrease of $118 million (83%). See Note L - “Income Taxes” to the financial statements for an analysis of items affecting AFG’s effective tax rate.
Consolidated Noncontrolling Interests in Continuing Operations
AFG’s consolidated net earnings (loss) from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests was a net loss of $11 million in 2020 compared to $28 million in 2019, a decrease of $17 million (61%). Each period reflects losses at Neon, AFG’s United-Kingdom-based Lloyd’s insurer, which was sold in December 2020. See Note C - “Acquisitions and Sale of Businesses” to the financial statements.
Net losses from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests in 2019 includes $18 million related to the $76 million non-core charge for costs associated with AFG’s plans to exit the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020. See “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Real Estate Entities Acquired from the Annuity Operations
Beginning with the first quarter of 2021, the results of the annuity businesses to be sold are reported as discontinued operations, in accordance with GAAP, which included adjusting prior period results to reflect these operations as discontinued. Prior to the completion of the sale, AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations acquired approximately $480 million in real estate-related partnerships and AFG parent acquired approximately $100 million of directly owned real estate from those operations. GAAP pretax earnings from continuing operations includes the earnings from these entities through the May 31, 2021 effective date of the sale and certain other expenses that will be retained from the annuity operations.
The retained real estate entities contributed $51 million in GAAP pretax earnings through the May 31, 2021 effective date of the sale compared to $49 million in 2020, an increase of $2 million (4%). This increase reflects higher earnings from the real estate-related partnerships through the sale date compared to 2020.
The retained real estate entities contributed $49 million in GAAP pretax earnings in 2020 compared to $37 million in 2019, an increase of $12 million (32%). This increase reflects higher earnings from the real estate-related partnerships in 2020 compared to 2019.
Discontinued Annuity Operations
AFG’s discontinued annuity operations, which were sold on May 31, 2021, contributed $324 million in GAAP pretax earnings (excluding the gain on the sale of the annuity operations) in 2021 compared to $509 million in 2020, a decrease of $185 million (36%), reflecting the following:
•lower net realized gains on securities through the date of the sale in May 2021 compared to 2020,
•significantly higher earnings from partnerships and similar investments,
•the negative impact from the run-off of higher yielding investments and lower short-term interest rates,
•the positive impact of strong stock market performance in 2021,
•the negative impact of lower than expected interest rates in both 2021 and 2020 on the accounting for fixed indexed annuities (“FIAs”),
•the negative impact of unlocking actuarial assumptions in the third quarter of 2020, and
•the negative impact of the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts in 2021.
AFG’s discontinued annuity operations contributed $509 million in GAAP pretax earnings in 2020 compared to $474 million in 2019, an increase of $35 million (7%), reflecting the following:
•higher net realized gains on securities in 2020 compared to 2019,
•lower earnings from partnerships and similar investments,
•the positive impact of strong stock market performance in 2019,
•the negative impact of significantly lower than expected interest rates in both 2020 and 2019 on the accounting for FIAs,
•higher charges from the unlocking of actuarial assumptions in the third quarter of 2020 compared to the third quarter of 2019, and
•the negative impact of the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The following table details AFG’s earnings before and after income taxes and the gain on the sale from its discontinued annuity operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in millions):
(*)Results through the May 31, 2021 effective date of the sale.
RECENTLY ADOPTED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” to the financial statements for a discussion of accounting guidance adopted on January 1, 2020, which provides a new credit loss model for determining credit-related impairments for financial instruments measured at amortized cost (mortgage loans, premiums receivable and reinsurance recoverables) and requires an entity to estimate the credit losses expected over the life of an exposure or pool of exposures.