Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are an arrhythmia management company focused on improving the way cardiac arrhythmias are diagnosed and treated. Despite several decades of effort by the incumbents in this field, the clinical and economic challenges associated with arrhythmia treatment continue to be a huge burden for patients, providers and payors. We are committed to advancing the field of electrophysiology with a unique array of products and technologies which will enable more physicians to treat more patients more effectively and efficiently. Through internal product development, acquisitions and global partnerships, we have established a global sales presence delivering a broad portfolio of highly differentiated electrophysiology products. Our goal is to provide our customers with a complete solution for catheter-based treatment of cardiac arrhythmias in each of our geographic markets.
Our product portfolio includes novel access catheters, diagnostic and mapping catheters, ablation catheters, mapping and imaging consoles and accessories, as well as supporting algorithms and software programs. Our foundational and most highly differentiated product is our AcQMap imaging and mapping system. Our paradigm-shifting AcQMap System offers a novel approach to mapping the drivers and maintainers of arrhythmias with unmatched speed and precision. With the ability to rapidly and accurately identify ablation targets and to confirm both ablation success and procedural completion, we believe our AcQMap System addresses the primary unmet need in electrophysiology procedures today.
We were incorporated in the State of Delaware on March 25, 2011 and are headquartered in Carlsbad, California. Early versions of our AcQMap System and certain related accessory products have been used in the United States since May 2018
and Western Europe since July 2016 in a limited, pilot launch capacity, where our focus was on optimizing workflow and validating our value proposition. We fully commenced the launch of our commercial-grade console and software products in the first quarter of 2020. Critical to our launch were a series of recent strategic transactions and regulatory approvals, including: FDA 510(k) clearance and CE Mark of our second-generation AcQMap console and SuperMap software suite; the addition of an integrated family of transseptal crossing and steerable introducer systems to our product portfolio through our acquisition of Rhythm Xience; and the acquisition of our AcQBlate Force sensing product line from Biotronik. Since our full launch, we have continued to enhance our product portfolio and global presence by entering into bi-lateral distribution agreements with Biotronik in May 2020, which added a full suite of diagnostic and ablation catheters to our product portfolio and significantly expanded our international distribution and market development capabilities.
We market our electrophysiology products worldwide to hospitals and electrophysiologists that treat patients with arrhythmias. We have strategically developed a direct selling presence in the United States and select markets in Western Europe where cardiac ablation is a standard of care and third-party reimbursement is well-established. In these markets, we install our AcQMap console and workstation with customer accounts and then sell our disposable products to those accounts for use with our system. In other international markets, we leverage our partnership with Biotronik to install our AcQMap console and workstation with customer accounts and then to sell our disposable products to those accounts. Once an AcQMap console and workstation is established in a customer account, our revenue from that account becomes predominantly recurring in nature and derived from the sale of our portfolio of disposable products used with our system. Our currently marketed disposable products include access sheaths, transseptal crossing tools, diagnostic and mapping catheters, ablation catheters and accessories. We plan to leverage the geographically concentrated nature of procedure volumes and the recurring nature of our sales to drive an increasingly efficient commercial model.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated revenue of $17.3 million and $8.5 million, respectively, of which 52% and 43%, respectively, was from customers located outside of the United States. Since our inception, we have generated significant losses. Our net loss was $117.7 million and $102.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $478.7 million and $361.0 million, respectively, and working capital of $107.8 million and $129.5 million, respectively. Prior to our IPO in August 2020, our operations were financed primarily by aggregate net proceeds from the sale of our convertible preferred stock and principal of our converted debt of $253.9 million, as well as other indebtedness.
On January 19, 2022, we announced a corporate restructuring to reduce our operating expenses and optimize our cash resources, pursuant to which we undertook a RIF and implemented additional cost reduction measures. The restructuring was the result of a detailed review of our strategic priorities, the external environment, and cost structure and is intended to sharpen our focus and strengthen our financial position. As part of the restructuring, we intend to prioritize maximizing console utilization and procedure volume growth in targeted geographic regions, as well as a more focused scope of product development initiatives. Based on the timing of notifications under the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (WARN) Act, we expect to start realizing the benefits of our restructuring plan beginning late in the first quarter of 2022.
The sales organization will continue to focus on driving utilization and procedure growth in targeted geographic regions. Investments in research and development and clinical and regulatory affairs will have a focused scope on key product development initiatives. Additionally, we will continue to incur costs as a public company that we did not incur prior to our initial public offering or incurred prior to our initial public offering at lower rates, including increased costs for employee-related expenses, director and officer insurance premiums, audit and legal fees, investor relations fees, fees to members of our board of directors and expenses for compliance with public company reporting requirements under the Exchange Act and rules implemented by the SEC, as well as Nasdaq rules. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur substantial net losses and negative cash flows from operations for at least the next several years.
Key Business Metrics
We regularly review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key business metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. We believe that the following metrics are representative of our current business. However, we anticipate these metrics may change or may be substituted for additional or different metrics as our business grows and as we introduce new products.
Installed Base
Our mapping and therapy platform is enabled by our AcQMap console that we install at customer sites globally. We believe our installed base is a key driver of our business model, enabling utilization and disposable pull-through. We define our installed base as the cumulative number of AcQMap consoles and workstations placed into service at customer sites. Beginning in late 2019, we began to install our second-generation AcQMap console and workstation with customers under evaluation contracts. Under these evaluation contracts, we place our AcQMap console and workstation with customers for no upfront fee to the customer during the applicable evaluation period and seek to reach agreement with the customer for the purchase of the console and workstation in the form of a contractual commitment to purchase a minimum amount of our disposable products or a cash purchase. Our total installed base as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 is set forth in the table below:
Procedure Volumes
Once an AcQMap console and workstation is established in a customer account, our revenue from that account becomes predominantly recurring in nature and derived from the sale of our portfolio of disposable products used with our system. Procedure volumes and the utilization of our AcQMap console will be the primary driver of our business over the long-term.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, physicians performed 1,570 and 930 procedures, respectively, including non-contact mapping and contact mapping worldwide, and therapeutic ablations outside the U.S.
Our total procedure volumes as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 is set forth in the table below:
Factors Affecting Our Performance
There are a number of factors that have impacted, and we believe will continue to impact, or that we expect to impact, our results of operations and growth. These factors include:
•Market Acceptance. The growth of our business will depend substantially on our ability to increase our installed base. Once an AcQMap console and workstation is established in a customer account, our revenue from that account becomes predominantly recurring in nature and derived from the sale of our portfolio of disposable products used with our system. Our ability to increase our installed base will depend on our ability to gain broader acceptance of our AcQMap System by continuing to make physicians and other hospital staff aware of the benefits of the AcQMap System, thereby generating increased demand for system installations and the frequency of use of our disposable products. Although we are attempting to increase our installed base through our established relationships and focused sales efforts, we cannot provide assurance that our efforts will be successful.
•Commercial Organization Size and Effectiveness. As of December 31, 2021, our commercial organization consisted of 97 individuals with substantial applicable medical device, sales and clinical experience, which is comprised of sales representatives, sales managers, mappers and marketing personnel. We intend to continue to make significant investments in our commercial organization in training, developing, continuing education, and targeted increases in sales representatives, sales managers and mappers to help facilitate further adoption of our products among existing and new customer accounts. The effectiveness with which we manage our commercial organization and the speed at which newly hired personnel contribute to business performance can impact our revenue growth or our costs incurred in anticipation of such growth.
•Strategic Partnerships and Acquisitions. We have in the past, and may in the future, enter into strategic partnerships and acquire complementary businesses, products or technologies. For example, we have entered into strategic partnerships with Innovative Health and Stereotaxis and, most recently, we entered into our Global Alliance for Electrophysiology with Biotronik in May 2020. In addition,
we added an integrated family of transseptal crossing and steerable introducer systems to our product portfolio through our acquisition of Rhythm Xience in June 2019 and acquired our AcQBlate Force Sensing Ablation System from Biotronik in July 2019. Our strategic partnerships and acquisitions have helped us establish a global sales presence delivering a broad portfolio of highly differentiated electrophysiology products. Our ability to grow our revenue will depend substantially on our ability to leverage our strategic partnerships and acquisitions to achieve distribution at a global scale, broaden our product portfolio and enable and accelerate global connectivity.
•Continued Investment in Innovation. Our business strategy relies significantly on innovation to develop and introduce new products and to differentiate our products from our competitors. In 2021, research and development continued to provide both new products as well as generational improvements to the current product lines through the release of multiple versions of software and disposable products including significant improvements to our mapping system hardware. Additionally, research efforts evolved into development projects for advanced therapies, improved navigational accuracy and enhanced mapping capabilities. We expect our investments in research and development to decrease as we have a focused scope on key product development initiatives. We plan our research and development expenditures with internal initiatives, as well as potentially licensing or acquiring technology from third parties. We also expect expenditures associated with our manufacturing organization to grow over time as production volume increases and we bring new products to market. Our internal and external investments will be focused on initiatives that we believe will offer the greatest opportunity for growth and profitability. With a significant investment in research and development, a strong focus on innovation and a well-managed innovation process, we believe we can continue to innovate and grow. Introducing additional, innovative products is also expected to help support our existing installed base and help drive demand for additional installations of our system. If, however, our future innovations are not successful in meeting customers’ needs or prove to be too costly relative to their perceived benefit, we may not be successful. Moreover, as cost of products sold, operating expenses and capital expenditures fluctuate over time, we may experience short-term, negative impacts to our results of operations and cash flows, but we are undertaking such investments in the belief that they will contribute to long-term growth.
•Product and Geographic Mix; Timing. Our financial results, including our gross margins, may fluctuate from period to period due to a variety of factors, including: average selling prices; production volumes; the cost of direct materials; the timing of customer orders or medical procedures and the timing and number of system installations; the number of available selling days in a particular period, which can be impacted by a number of factors such as holidays or days of severe inclement weather in a particular geography; the mix of products sold and the geographic mix of where products are sold; the level of reimbursement available for our products; discounting practices; manufacturing costs; product yields; headcount and cost-reduction strategies. For example, gross margins on the sale of our products by our direct selling organization in the United States and Western Europe are higher than gross margins on the sale of our products by Biotronik in other parts of the world. Moreover, gross margins on the sale of our proprietary products are generally higher than gross margins on the sale of products we source through our strategic partnerships with third parties. Future selling prices and gross margins for our products may fluctuate due to a variety of other factors, including the introduction by others of competing products or the attempted integration by third parties of capabilities similar to ours into their existing products. We aim to mitigate downward pressure on our selling prices by increasing the value proposition offered by our products through innovation. While we have not yet experienced significant seasonality in our results, it is not uncommon in our industry to experience seasonally weaker revenue during the summer months and end-of-year holiday season.
•Regulatory Approvals/Clearances and Timing and Efficiency of New Product Introductions. In May 2021, we received FDA approval to initialize an atrial fibrillation IDE trial in the United States with the AcQBlate Force Sensing Ablation System. Additionally, we received CE Mark approval for a broad suite of electrophysiology products that includes the AcQCross family of universal transseptal crossing devices, the next-generation AcQGuide MAX and AcQGuide VUE large bore delivery sheaths and the next-generation AcQMap mapping catheter in May 2021. We also received FDA clearance of our AcQCross family of universal transseptal crossing devices in April 2021. Further, we received CE Mark in December 2020 in Europe for the use of our AcQBlate Force Sensing Ablation System and are seeking FDA PMA for this system in the United States, as well as regulatory clearance or approval of our other pipeline products in the United States and in international markets. Our ability to grow our revenue will depend on our obtaining necessary regulatory approvals or
clearances for our products. In addition, as we introduce new products, we expect to build our inventory of components and finished goods in advance of sales, which may cause quarterly and annual fluctuations in our results of operations.
•Competition. Our industry is intensely competitive, subject to rapid change and significantly affected by new product introductions and other market activities of industry participants. Our most significant competitors are large, well-capitalized companies. We must continue to successfully compete considering our competitors’ existing and future products and related pricing and their resources to successfully market to the physicians who could use our products. Publication of clinical results by us, our competitors and other third parties can also have a significant influence on whether, and the degree to which, we are able to gain market share and increase utilization of our products.
•COVID-19 Pandemic. Beginning in early March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures imposed to contain this pandemic disrupted and are expected to continue to impact our business. Moreover, beginning in March 2020 and continuing through the filing of this Form 10-K, access to hospitals and other customer sites was restricted, which negatively impacted our ability to install our AcQMap consoles and workstations in new accounts and for our sales representatives and mappers to promote the use of our products with physicians. Over the past 12 months, we have continued to observe intermittent suspension of many elective procedures, as well as nursing and staffing shortages associated with the resurgence of COVID-19 in geographies where we sell, market and distribute our products. In addition, the impact of COVID-19 has varied by region and by healthcare facility, hampering our ability to forecast the sustained impact on our business from COVID-19. The magnitude of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our productivity, results of operations and financial position, and its disruption to our business and our clinical programs and timelines, will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the pandemic, associated restrictions and other measures designed to prevent the spread of COVID-19 and on our ability to conduct business in the ordinary course. Quarantines, shelter-in-place and similar government orders and capacity restrictions have also impacted, and may continue to impact, our third-party manufacturers and suppliers, and could in turn adversely impact the availability or cost of materials, which could disrupt our supply chain. The markets we serve are likely to see continued impacts from COVID-19 for the foreseeable future, and the emergence of new variants of COVID-19 creates significant uncertainty as to how long COVID-19 will continue to impact our business.
In addition, we may experience meaningful variability in our yearly revenue and gross profit/loss as a result of a number of factors, including, but not limited to: inventory write-offs and write-downs; costs, benefits and timing of new product introductions; the availability and cost of components and raw materials; fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, inflation rates and interest rates; and our ability to realize the benefits of our recent corporate restructuring. Additionally, we may experience quarters in which our costs and operating expenses, in particular our research and development expenses, fluctuate depending on the stage and timing of product development.
While certain of these factors may present significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges that we must address. See the section titled “Risk Factors” for more information.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists of: (i) revenue from the sale of our disposable products; (ii) systems; and (iii) service/other revenue. In the United States and select markets in Western Europe where we have developed a direct selling presence, we install our AcQMap console and workstation with our customer accounts and then generate revenue from the sale of our disposable products to these accounts for use with our system. We also generate revenue from the direct sale of our AcQMap console into hospital accounts as well as revenue through long-term customer commitments on disposable purchases. In other international markets, we leverage our partnership with Biotronik to install our AcQMap console and workstation with customer accounts and then generate revenue from Biotronik’s sale of our disposable products to these accounts for use with our system. Our currently marketed disposable products include access sheaths, transseptal crossing tools, diagnostic and mapping catheters, ablation catheters and accessories.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, approximately 27% and 29%, respectively, of our sales were denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars, primarily in Euros and the British Pound Sterling. Our revenue is subject to fluctuation based on the foreign currency in which our products are sold.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Cost of Products Sold
Cost of products sold consist primarily of raw materials, direct labor, manufacturing overhead associated with the production and sale of our disposable products and, to a more limited extent, production and depreciation of our AcQMap console and workstation that we install with our customer accounts. We depreciate equipment over a three-year period. Cost of products sold also includes expenditures for warranty, field service, freight, royalties and inventory reserve provisions. We expect cost of products sold to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as our revenue increases.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs (including stock-based compensation) for personnel directly engaged in research and development activities, clinical trial expenses, equipment costs, materials costs, allocated rent and facilities costs and depreciation.
Research and development expenses related to possible future products are expensed as incurred. We also accrue and expense costs for activities associated with clinical trials performed by third parties as incurred. All other costs relative to setting up clinical trial sites are expensed as incurred. Clinical trial site costs related to patient enrollment are accrued as patients are entered into the trials.
To align resources with our current strategic direction, we have undertaken a planned RIF and are implementing additional cost reduction measures. Due to this strategic realignment, we expect our research and development expenses to moderate in absolute dollars in the upcoming years.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs (including stock-based compensation) for personnel in sales, executive, finance and other administrative functions, allocated rent and facilities costs, legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting and consulting services, marketing costs and insurance costs.
To align resources with our current strategic direction, we have undertaken a planned RIF and are implementing additional cost reduction measures. Due to this strategic realignment, we expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to decrease in absolute dollars in the upcoming years.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The change in fair value of contingent consideration relates to the contingent consideration associated with our June 2019 acquisition of Rhythm Xience, an entity with an integrated family of transseptal crossing and steerable introducer systems. This acquisition included potential earn out considerations based on the achievement of certain regulatory milestones and revenue milestones. Changes in the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration earn out are recognized in the statement of operations and comprehensive loss, and reflect the changes within this account.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
We accounted for certain of our freestanding warrants to purchase shares of our common stock and preferred stock as liabilities at fair value. On August 10, 2020, in connection with the closing of our IPO, the warrants no longer met the definition of a derivative. Accordingly, the fair value of the common and preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital in the consolidated balance sheet.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily relates to our 2019 Credit Agreement with OrbiMed Royalty Opportunities II, LP and Deerfield Private Design Fund II, L.P.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes. The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
* Not meaningful
(1)The following tables sets forth our revenue for disposables, systems and service/other for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(2) The following table sets forth the stock-based compensation expense included in our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
Revenue was $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $8.8 million, or 104%, was attributable to a $5.2 million increase in purchase volume of our disposable products used in electrophysiology procedures as a result of a higher installed base and increased procedures, an increase of $2.4 million in system sales, and $1.2 million in services/other.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Cost of Products Sold
Cost of products sold was $32.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $17.0 million, or 107%, was primarily driven by an increase of $6.8 million due to the growth in revenue and a $7.5 million increase in depreciation and freight expense to support the higher installed base. Gross margin was negative 91% for the year ended December 31, 2021, and negative 88% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease in gross margin was attributable to several factors including, product and geographic mix, higher depreciation associated with placed equipment, higher field service expenses, as well as the write-off of excess and obsolete inventory in 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $36.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $33.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $3.2 million, or 10%, was primarily attributable to $2.9 million in increased compensation and related costs from higher headcount.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $63.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $50.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $13.2 million, or 26%, was primarily attributable to $10.8 million in increased compensation and $3.1 million in increased insurance costs in connection with our operations as a public company, partially offset by $0.7 million in decreased consulting expenses.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a change in fair value of contingent consideration of a decrease of $3.7 million and an increase of $0.1 million, respectively, for the change in the fair value of the contingent consideration for the acquisition of Rhythm Xience. The decrease in 2021 was primarily attributable to a decrease in projected net revenue, along with a decrease to the expected term.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense, net was $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease of $5.1 million, or 48%, was primarily attributable to a prior year change of $5.6 million in the fair value of the warrant liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has limited revenue, has incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception, and we anticipate that we will incur significant losses for at least the next several years. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $107.9 million and $139.8 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net losses were $117.7 million and $102.0 million, respectively, and our net cash
used in operating activities was $99.7 million and $85.2 million respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $478.7 million and $361.0 million, respectively, and working capital of $107.8 million and $129.5 million, respectively.
Prior to our IPO in August 2020, our operations had been financed primarily by aggregate net proceeds from the sale of our convertible preferred stock and principal of our converted debt of $253.9 million, as well as other indebtedness. On August 10, 2020, we issued 10,147,058 shares of common stock in our IPO, which included 1,323,529 shares of common stock issued upon the exercise in full by the underwriters of an option to purchase additional shares of our common stock, at the public offering price less underwriting discounts and commissions. The price to the public was $18.00 per share, for net proceeds to us of $166.3 million.
In July 2021, we issued 6,325,000 shares of common stock in a public offering, which included 825,000 shares of common stock issued upon the underwriter's exercise in full of an option to purchase additional shares of common stock. The price to the public for each share was $14.00. We received gross proceeds of $88.6 million from the offering. Net of underwriting discounts and commission and other offering expenses, we received proceeds of $82.7 million from the offering.
With the closing of the Company’s IPO in August 2020 and follow on offering in July 2021 and the January 2022 RIF, we believe the Company’s current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are sufficient to fund operations for at least the next 12 months. However, the Company may need to raise additional funds through the issuance of additional debt, equity or both. Until such time, if ever, that the Company can generate revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, the Company expects to finance its operations through equity or debt financings, which may not be available to the Company on the timing needed or on terms that the Company deems to be favorable. To the extent that the Company raises additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of its stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting the Company’s ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If the Company is unable to maintain sufficient financial resources, its business, financial condition and results of operations will be materially and adversely affected. The Company may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate its product discovery and development activities or future commercialization efforts.
Our future liquidity and capital funding requirements will depend on numerous factors, including:
•our revenue growth;
•our ability to drive improved manufacturing efficiency;
•our research and development efforts;
•our sales and marketing activities;
•our success in leveraging our strategic partnerships, including with Biotronik, as well as entrance into any other strategic partnerships or strategic transactions in the future;
•our ability to raise additional funds to finance our operations;
•the outcome, costs and timing of any clinical trial results for our current or future products;
•the emergence and effect of competing or complementary products;
•the availability and amount of reimbursement for procedures using our products;
•our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•our ability to retain our current employees and the need and ability to hire additional management and sales, scientific and medical personnel;
•the terms and timing of any collaborative, licensing or other arrangements that we have or may establish;
•debt service requirements;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies;
•our ability to realize the anticipated benefits of our corporate restructuring; and
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, investment in our commercial organization and related expenses, clinical research and development services, laboratory and related supplies, legal and other regulatory expenses, general administrative costs and working capital. In addition, we have acquired, and may in the future seek to acquire or invest in, additional businesses, products or technologies that we believe could complement or expand our portfolio, enhance our technical capabilities or otherwise offer growth opportunities. For example, in June 2019, we acquired Rhythm Xience, a medical device company specializing in the design and manufacture of transseptal crossing and steerable introducer systems, for $3.0 million in cash. The cash payment did not include the potential $17.0 million in earn out consideration to be paid based on the achievement of certain regulatory milestones and revenue milestones. In February 2020, we issued to the former owners of Rhythm Xience 119,993 shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock and paid them $2.5 million in connection with the regulatory and revenue milestones earned to date. In addition, pursuant to the Biotronik License Agreement, we paid Biotronik a $3.0 million upfront fee at the time the agreement was signed, as well as a technology transfer fee consisting of $7.0 million in cash in December 2019 and $5.0 million in shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock in February 2020. We are required to pay the Biotronik Parties up to $10.0 million, of which $2.0 million has been paid as of December 31, 2021, upon the achievement of various regulatory and sales-related milestones, as well as unit-based royalties on any sales of force sensing catheters. We also incur costs as a public company that we did not incur prior to our IPO or incurred prior to our IPO at lower rates.
Under Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Subtopic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern, we have the responsibility to evaluate whether conditions and/or events could raise substantial doubt about our ability to meet our future financial obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. We believe management’s plans sufficiently alleviate the risk of substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for at least twelve months from the date that the accompanying consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K were issued. Going concern matters are more fully discussed in Note 1, “Organization and Description of Business - Liquidity and Capital Resources” of our consolidated financial statements. Additionally, we will need to raise additional funds through the issuance of debt and/or equity securities or otherwise, which may not be available to us on the timing needed or on terms that we deem to be favorable. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we are unable to maintain sufficient financial resources, our business, financial condition and results of operations will be materially and adversely affected. To raise sufficient additional funds, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product discovery and development activities or future commercialization efforts. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain the needed financing on acceptable terms or at all. In addition, our recent corporate restructuring is intended to reduce our operating expenses and optimize our cash resources. Based on the timing of notifications under the WARN Act, we expect to start realizing the benefits of our restructuring plan beginning late in the first quarter of 2022; however, there can be no assurance that we realize the benefits of the restructuring on the anticipated timeline, or at all.
Debt Obligations
On May 20, 2019, we entered into the 2019 Credit Agreement. The 2019 Credit Agreement provided us with a senior term loan facility in aggregate principal amount of $70.0 million, of which we borrowed $40.0 million upon closing. Of the remaining $30.0 million, none is available for borrowing. The 2019 Credit Agreement bears interest per annum at 7.75% plus LIBOR for such interest period, and the principal amount of term loans outstanding under the 2019 Credit Agreement is due on May 20, 2024. The 2019 Credit Agreement can be prepaid but is subject to prepayment penalties. The 2019 Credit Agreement provides for final payment fees of an additional $4.6 million that are due upon prepayment, on the maturity date or upon acceleration.
Upon the occurrence and during an event of default, which includes but is not limited to payment default, covenant default or the occurrence of a material adverse change, the lenders may declare all outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest immediately due and payable, there would be an increase in the applicable interest rate by 10% per annum and the lenders would be entitled to exercise their other rights and remedies provided for under the 2019 Credit Agreement. Additionally, the lenders may request repayment of a portion of obligations outstanding under the 2019 Credit Agreement to the extent of the Company’s receipt of any (i) net casualty proceeds or (ii) net asset sales proceeds, as defined.
Our obligations under the 2019 Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets, including our intellectual property, and is guaranteed by our subsidiary. The 2019 Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and restrictive
covenants, including with respect to our ability to enter into fundamental transactions, incur additional indebtedness, grant liens, pay any dividend or make any distributions to our holders, make investments and merge or consolidate with any other person or engage in transactions with our affiliates, but does not include any financial covenants, other than a minimum liquidity requirement.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $99.7 million of cash, an increase of $14.5 million from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was attributable to higher net losses of $15.7 million and a decrease in non-cash items of $1.1 million, including a decrease in the fair value of warrant liability of $5.6 million and a decrease in the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $3.8 million, offset by an increase in depreciation expense of $3.0 million, an increase in AcQMap Systems converted to sales of $2.2 million, an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $1.7 million, an increase in the amortization of premiums on marketable securities of $0.8 million, and an increase in amortization of debt issuance costs of $0.6 million, partially offset by favorable changes in working capital of $2.3 million.
Investing Activities
Total cash provided by investing activities was $19.1 million and used in investing activities was $63.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash provided by investing activities during 2021 was related to proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $107.7 million and sales of marketable securities of $8.6 million. These inflows were partially offset by purchases of marketable securities of $87.3 million and purchases of property and equipment of $10.0 million.
Cash used in investing activities during 2020 was related to purchases of marketable securities of $114.7 million and purchases of property and equipment of $11.2 million. These outflows were partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $45.0 million and sales of marketable securities of $17.1 million.
Financing Activities
Total cash provided by financing activities was $79.6 million and $164.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $84.9 million is primarily related to the difference in proceeds from our follow on offering in the current year and our IPO in the prior year of $83.6 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for clinical trials and with vendors for preclinical trials and other services and products for operating purposes which are cancellable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days prior written notice
Further, the agreement to acquire Rhythm Xience requires us to pay the former owners of Rhythm Xience up to $15.0 million in additional cash earn out consideration based on the achievement of certain regulatory and revenue milestones, of which $5.9 million has been paid as of December 31, 2021. In February 2020, we issued to the former owners of Rhythm Xience 119,993 shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock valued at $2.2 million. In addition, pursuant to the Biotronik License Agreement, we issued to Biotronik $5.0 million in shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock in February 2020, and we
are required to pay the Biotronik Parties up to $10.0 million, of which $2.0 million has been paid as of December 31, 2021, upon the achievement of various regulatory and sales-related milestones, as well as unit-based royalties on any sales of force sensing catheters.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the SEC rules and regulations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
We account for revenue earned from contracts with customers under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, and ASC 842, Leases, or ASC 842. The core principle of ASC 606 is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle:
•Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer.
•Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
•Step 3: Determine the transaction price.
•Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
•Step 5: Recognize revenue when, or as, the company satisfies a performance obligation.
ASC 842 provides guidance on determining if an agreement contains a lease. ASC 842 defines a lease as a contract, or part of a contract, that conveys the right to control the use of identified property, plant or equipment for a period of time in exchange for consideration.
We usually place our AcQMap System at customer sites under evaluation agreements and we generate revenue from the sale of disposable products used with the AcQMap System. Disposable products primarily include AcQMap Catheters and AcQGuide Steerable Sheaths. Outside of the U.S., we also have the Qubic Force Device which generates revenue from the sale of the AcQBlate FORCE Ablation Catheters. We provide the disposable products in exchange for consideration, which occurs when a customer submits a purchase order and the Company provides disposables at the agreed upon prices in the invoice. Generally, customers purchase disposable products using separate purchase orders after the equipment has been provided to the customer for free with no binding agreement or requirement to purchase any disposable products. We have elected the practical expedient and accounting policy election to account for the shipping and handling as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer the disposable products and not as a separate performance obligation.
We sell the AcQMap System to customers along with software updates on a when-and-if-available basis, as well as the Qubic Force Device and a transseptal crossing line of products which can be used in a variety of heart procedures and does not need to be accompanied with an AcQMap System or Qubic Force Device. Included in the transseptal crossing line of products are primarily the AcQRef introducer sheath, the AcQGuide sheaths and the AcQCross Transseptal Dilator/Needle.
We also enter into deferred equipment agreements that are generally structured such that we agree to provide an AcQMap System at no up-front charge, with title of the device transferring to the customer at the end of the contract term, in exchange for the customer’s commitment to purchase disposables at a specified price over the term of the agreement, which generally ranges from two to four years. We have determined that the deferred equipment agreements include an embedded sales-type lease. We allocate contract consideration under deferred equipment agreements containing fixed annual disposable purchase commitments to the underlying lease and non-lease components at contract inception. We expense the cost of the device at the inception of the agreement and record a financial lease asset equal to the gross consideration allocated to the lease. The lease asset will be reduced by payments for minimum disposable purchases that are allocated to the lease.
Lastly, we enter into short-term operating leases, for the rental of the system after an evaluation. These lease agreements impose no requirement on the customer to purchase the equipment and the equipment is not transferred to the customer at the end of the lease term. The short-term nature of the lease agreements does not result in lease payments accumulating to an amount that equals the value of the equipment nor is the lease term reflective of the economic life of the equipment.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for all stock-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of stock options, restricted stock awards, or RSAs, restricted stock units, or RSUs, and restricted stock units with non-market performance and service conditions, or PSUs, to be recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on their respective grant date fair values. We estimate the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The RSAs, RSUs and PSUs are valued based on the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. The Company expenses stock-based compensation related to stock options, RSAs and RSUs over the requisite service period. As the PSUs have a performance condition, compensation expense was recognized for each vesting tranche over the respective requisite service period of each tranche upon the registration statement used in connection with the Company’s IPO being declared effective on August 5, 2020, when the Company’s management deemed it probable that the performance conditions were satisfied. The Company recognized a cumulative true-up adjustment related to PSUs once the conditions became probable of being satisfied as the related service period had been completed in a prior period. All stock-based compensation costs are recorded in cost of products sold, research and development expense or selling, general, and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based upon the respective employee’s or non-employee’s roles within the Company. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur.
In addition, we have an employee stock purchase plan, or ESPP, which has an offering period commencing on the first trading day on or after February 1 and August 1 of each year and terminating on the last trading day on or before July 31 and January 31, respectively. In November 2021, we amended our ESPP offering periods beginning in 2022 after the January 31 purchase, to commence on the first trading day on or after May 15 and November 15 of each year and terminating on the last trading day on or before November 14 and May 14, respectively. On each purchase date, which falls on the last date of each offering period, ESPP participants will purchase shares of common stock at a price per share equal to 85% of the lesser of (1) the fair market value per share of the common stock on the offering date or (2) the fair market value of the common stock on the purchase date. We recognizer an expense in the amount equal to the estimated fair value of the discount.
Fair Value Measurements
Accounting guidance regarding fair value measurements addresses how companies should measure fair value when they are required to use a fair value measure for recognition or disclosure purposes under GAAP and provides a common definition of fair value to be used throughout GAAP. It defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly fashion between market participants at the measurement date. In addition, it establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for the disclosure of fair value measurements. The valuation hierarchy is based upon the transparency of inputs to the valuation of an asset or liability as of the measurement date. The level in the hierarchy within which a given fair value measurement falls is determined based on the lowest level input that is significant to the measurement (Level 1 being the highest and Level 3 being the lowest). We classify our contingent consideration liability, discussed below, as Level 3.
In connection with certain of our acquisitions, additional contingent consideration can be earned by the sellers upon achievement of certain milestones and revenue-based targets in certain years. The initial fair value of the revenue-based contingent consideration was calculated through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation utilizing revenue projections for the respective earn-out period, corresponding targets and approximate timing of payments as outlined in the purchase agreement. The analyses used the following assumptions: (i) expected term; (ii) risk-adjusted net sales; (iii) risk-free interest rate; and (iv) expected volatility of net sales.
Estimated payments, as determined through the respective model, were further discounted by a credit spread assumption to account for credit risk. The fair value of the milestones-based contingent consideration was determined by probability weighting and discounting to the respective valuation date at our cost of debt. Our cost of debt was determined by performing a synthetic credit rating for us and selecting yields based on companies with a similar credit rating. The contingent consideration is revalued to fair value each period, and any increase or decrease is recorded in operating loss. The fair value of the contingent consideration may be impacted by certain unobservable inputs, most significantly with regard to discount rates, expected volatility and historical and projected performance. Significant changes to these inputs in isolation could result in a significantly different fair value measurement.
Warrant Liability
We accounted for certain common stock warrants and convertible preferred stock warrants outstanding as a liability, in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, at fair value and adjusted the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. On August 10, 2020 when the warrants were converted and became equity classified warrants, the fair value of the common and preferred stock warrant liability was estimated using a Black-Scholes model. The underlying equity included in the Black-Scholes model was based on the IPO share price of $18.00.
This liability was subject to re-measurement at each reporting period and upon conversion to equity-classified warrants, and any change in fair value was recognized in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. In connection with the IPO on August 10, 2020, the common stock warrants and convertible preferred stock warrants that had been liability-classified, were automatically converted into an equal number of warrants to purchase common stock and became equity-classified. The fair value of the outstanding liability on the conversion date was reclassified to additional paid-in capital in our consolidated balance sheet.
Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to periodic impairment testing. Goodwill is assigned to a reporting unit and the reporting unit’s goodwill is tested for impairment at least on an annual basis and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. In the evaluation of goodwill for impairment, which we perform annually during the fourth quarter, we could first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances led to a determination that it was more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. We could also elect to perform a quantitative impairment test without first assessing qualitative factors.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements, including the respective dates of adoption and expected effects on our results of operations and financial condition, see Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference in response to this item.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. As such, we are eligible for exemptions from various reporting requirements applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation, and an exemption from the requirements to obtain a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements. We have elected to take advantage of certain of the reduced disclosure obligations and may elect to take advantage of other reduced reporting requirements in our future filings with the SEC. As a result, the information that we provide to our stockholders may be different than you might receive from other public reporting companies in which you hold equity interests.
In addition, an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this provision of the JOBS Act. As a result, we will not be subject to new or revised accounting standards at the same time as other
public companies that are not emerging growth companies. Therefore, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to those of companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of: (i) December 31, 2025; (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion; (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year; or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
We are also a smaller reporting company as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.