Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
Certain statements included in this section constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are made based on management’s current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects upon the Company. The Company’s actual results may differ, possibly materially, from expectations or estimates reflected in such forward-looking statements. Certain important factors that could cause actual results to differ, possibly materially, from expectations or estimates reflected in such forward-looking statements can be found in the “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” sections herein.
MD&A OVERVIEW
The following financial review provides a discussion of the Company’s results of operations and financial condition, as well as a summary of the Company’s critical accounting estimates. This section should be read in conjunction with Part I - Item 1. Business and the audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report. This MD&A is divided into the following sections:
Page
Executive Summary
Industry Trends
Outlook
Results of Operations
Investments
Hedging Activities
Policy Liabilities
Benefit Plans
Policyholder Protection
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company elected to omit discussion on the earliest of the three years covered by the consolidated financial statements presented in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Readers should refer to Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations located in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed on February 23, 2021, for reference to discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019, the earliest of the three years presented. Amounts reported in this MD&A may not foot due to rounding.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
COVID-19
The impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic on the Company continues to evolve. Both Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. have taken measures to address employee health and safety and increase employees’ ability to develop and maintain more flexible working conditions, with return to office undertaken as warranted by local conditions, and operations have remained stable throughout 2021. The Company continues to monitor its investment portfolios to adjust to market conditions, including the continuing recovery, changes in monetary policy and inflation. Both Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. have accelerated investments in digital initiatives to improve productivity, efficiency and customer service over the long term.
In 2021, sales for Aflac Japan in yen terms increased 7.7%, compared to 2020, reflecting the launch of a new medical product in January 2021 and a new nursing care product in September 2021, and favorable comparisons due to pandemic conditions in 2020. In 2021, sales for Aflac U.S. increased 16.9%, compared to 2020, reflecting increased sales activity as a result of the ongoing economic reopening in the U.S. and favorable comparisons due to pandemic conditions in 2020.
Pandemic-related claims and associated reserve increases in both Japan and the U.S. did not materially impact financial results in 2021 and were more than offset by a reduction in claims related to non-COVID-19 medical needs. The pandemic’s impact on economic conditions contributed to sales declines in 2020 and headwinds to sales in 2021, pressuring premium growth rates, which have been partially offset by lower lapse rates in the U.S. The Company has not experienced material realized losses or impairments and credit losses associated with the pandemic. The Company continues to monitor the effects and risks of COVID-19, including its variants (both known and emerging), to assess its impact on economic conditions in Japan and the U.S. and on the Company's business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital position. Those impacts may cause changes to estimates of future earnings, capital deployment, regulatory capital position, segment dividend payout ratios and other measures the Company provides in this MD&A.
The Company’s efforts and other developments are outlined below.
•Investment Portfolio
The Company's investment portfolio was well-positioned entering the crisis, and the Company continues to follow its strategy of investing primarily in fixed maturity securities to generate a reliable stream of income. Fundamental credit analysis and actively managing the risk profile of the portfolio contributed to the current quality of the Company’s investments. Economic and market conditions have continued to improve since the onset of the pandemic. The continued path of the recovery remains uncertain given the potential longer term impacts of the pandemic. This includes structural changes in employment patterns which are impacting multiple sectors of the economy and contributing to disruptions in the global supply chain, triggering price increases across several areas of the broader economy. Supply shortages, upward pressure on wages to attract employees and higher commodity prices have all driven near-term increases in inflation. It remains unclear whether the current elevated levels of inflation are transitory or more lasting, making the ultimate impact on the global economy and markets uncertain, with resulting uncertainty as to the impact on the Company's investments.
•Aflac Japan initiatives
As of December 31, 2021, Aflac Japan had over 50% of its workforce working remotely. Aflac Japan continues to evaluate return to the office measures; however, throughout the pandemic, Aflac Japan has evaluated its operational capabilities and anticipates that the remote configuration could remain for an indefinite period of time without materially impacting operations.
Aflac Japan remains focused on generating new business from existing and prospective customers through direct mail and digital methods. Aflac Japan has also accelerated investments in digital and paperless initiatives designed to increase long term productivity, efficiency, customer service and business continuity.
•Aflac U.S. and Corporate and Other initiatives
As of December 31, 2021, over 50% of U.S. employees were working remotely. The Company's return to worksite for U.S. based employees is expected to be a phased approach that begins in the first quarter of 2022, subject to factors including vaccination rates, the return schedule of school systems and the availability of child care, the
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
number of COVID-19 cases and the COVID-19 replication rate, and the emergence of new variants and hospital capacity in areas of the U.S. where the Company has significant operations. For those employees who are working in one of the Company's worksites, safety protocols have been put in place that align with or exceed those recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). After the return to worksite, the Parent Company and Aflac U.S. expect to adopt a workforce model comprised of a mix of full time office employees, full time remote employees, and employees who will split their time between office and remote work.
The Parent Company and Aflac U.S. also continue to maintain several actions taken for its employees. These include a commitment to cover the costs of COVID-19 testing and extended paid leave in certain circumstances.
Aflac U.S. policy sales, enrollment and agent recruiting functions are highly dependent upon face-to-face interaction between independent agents and brokers with prospective and new customers and agents. Throughout the pandemic, opportunities for such interaction have been significantly reduced by reactions to the pandemic, such as social distancing, shelter in place orders and work from home initiatives. Notwithstanding the general improvement of economic conditions to date, the impact of pandemic conditions on Aflac U.S. sales remains subject to uncertainty as the effects of varying levels of vaccination and the emergence of COVID-19 variants continue to develop. Aflac U.S. has accelerated investments in digital initiatives designed to improve long term productivity, efficiency and customer service. Further, Aflac U.S. is in its third year of the build-out of its business in the Consumer Markets channel for the digital direct-to-consumer sale of insurance and sales made through that platform have continued to grow.
•Major government initiatives
Government authorities in Japan and the U.S. have implemented several initiatives in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including actions designed to mitigate the adverse health effects of the virus and those designed to provide broad-based relief and economic support to all aspects of the economy.
The FSA has requested that financial service providers in Japan respond appropriately while continuing their essential operations. This request includes insurance companies, which have been asked to continue essential operations such as benefits and claims payment, including policyholder loans. The FSA has also requested insurance companies to consider flexible interpretation and application of insurance policy provisions and measures required for products from the standpoint of protecting policyholders. In accordance with the FSA’s request, Aflac Japan implemented a measure to pay accidental death benefits and accidental serious disability benefits under its accidental death benefit rider in cases of death or specified serious disabilities from COVID-19.
Throughout the pandemic, Aflac Japan has also followed the guidance of the FSA in terms of treating customers with care, ensuring ease and timeliness of claims payments and extended coverage for temporary medical facilities and telemedicine in certain circumstances, and waiver of interest on certain policyholder loans. In mid-2021, in response to the state of emergency declaration issued by the Government of Japan in July 2021 and August 2021, the grace period on certain premium payments was extended to January 31, 2022 and February 28, 2022, respectively.
Throughout the pandemic, Aflac U.S. has taken steps to comply with COVID-19-related directives issued by state regulatory authorities, including those requiring or requesting premium grace periods. As of December 31, 2021, premium grace periods remained in effect in two states and Puerto Rico. Aflac U.S. continues to work with policyholders in these states upon notification of COVID-19-related impacts. Aflac U.S. experienced some increase in policy lapses in 2021 in certain states where premium grace periods expired. As the few remaining premium grace periods expire, Aflac U.S. expects an increase in lapse rates, and a decrease in corresponding persistency rates.
Performance Highlights
For the full year of 2021, total revenues were down .2% to $22.1 billion, compared with $22.1 billion for the full year of 2020. Net earnings were $4.3 billion, or $6.39 per diluted share, compared with $4.8 billion, or $6.67 per diluted share, for the full year of 2020. Net earnings in 2020 reflect a $1.4 billion benefit primarily from the release of valuation allowances on deferred foreign tax credits, which were allowed due to U.S. tax regulations released in September 2020.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Results for 2021 included pretax net investment gains of $468 million, compared with net investment losses of $270 million in 2020. Net investment gains in 2021 included a decrease in credit loss allowances of $27 million; $264 million of net gains from certain derivative and foreign currency gains or losses; $164 million of net gains on equity securities; and $13 million of net gains from sales and redemptions.
The average yen/dollar exchange rate(1) in 2021 was 109.79, or 2.7% weaker than the rate of 106.86 in 2020.
Adjusted earnings(2) for the full year of 2021 were $4.0 billion, or $5.94 per diluted share, compared with $3.6 billion, or $4.96 per diluted share, in 2020. The weaker yen/dollar exchange rate impacted adjusted earnings per diluted share by $.06.
Total investments and cash at December 31, 2021 were $143.0 billion, compared with $149.8 billion at December 31, 2020. In 2021, Aflac Incorporated repurchased $2.3 billion, or 43.3 million of its common shares. At December 31, 2021, the Company had 55.8 million remaining shares authorized for repurchase.
Shareholders’ equity was $33.3 billion, or $50.99 per share, at December 31, 2021, compared with $33.6 billion, or $48.46 per share, at December 31, 2020. Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2021 included a net unrealized gain on investment securities and derivatives of $9.6 billion, compared with a net unrealized gain of $10.3 billion at December 31, 2020. Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2021 also included an unrealized foreign currency translation loss of $2.0 billion, compared with an unrealized foreign currency translation loss of $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020. The annualized return on average shareholders’ equity in 2021 was 12.9%.
Shareholders’ equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) (adjusted book value)(2) was $25.9 billion, or $39.65 per share at December 31, 2021, compared with $24.6 billion, or $35.56 per share, at December 31, 2020. The annualized adjusted return on equity excluding foreign currency impact(2) in 2021 was 16.1%.
(1) Yen/U.S. dollar exchange rates are based on the published MUFG Bank, Ltd. telegraphic transfer middle rate (TTM).
(2) See the Results of Operations section of this MD&A for a definition of this non-U.S. GAAP financial measure.
INDUSTRY TRENDS
The Company is impacted by financial markets, economic conditions, regulatory oversight and a variety of trends that affect the industries where it competes.
Financial and Economic Environment
The Company’s business and results of operations are materially affected by conditions in the global capital markets and the economy generally. Stressed conditions, volatility and disruptions in global capital markets, particular markets, or financial asset classes can have an adverse effect on the Company, in part because the Company has a large investment portfolio and its insurance liabilities and derivatives are sensitive to changing market factors. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for the risk factor entitled, "Difficult conditions in global capital markets and the economy, including those caused by COVID-19, could have a material adverse effect on the Company's investments, capital position, revenue, profitability, and liquidity and harm the Company's business."
Demographics
Aflac Japan Segment
With Japan’s aging population and the rise in healthcare costs, supplemental health care insurance products remain attractive. However, due to the aging population and decline in birthrate, new opportunities for customer demographics are not as readily available. Japan’s existing customers and potential customers seek products that are easily understood, cost-effective and can be accessed through technology-enabled devices.
Aflac U.S. Segment
Customer demographics continue to evolve and new opportunities present themselves in different customer segments such as the millennial and multicultural markets. Customer expectations and preferences are changing. Trends indicate existing customers and potential customers seek cost-effective solutions that are easily understood and can be accessed through technology-enabled devices. Additionally, income protection and the health needs of retiring baby boomers are continuing to shape the insurance industry.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Regulatory Environment
See Item 1. Business - Aflac Japan Government Regulation and Aflac U.S. Government Regulation for a discussion of regulatory developments that may impact the Company and the associated risks.
Competitive Environment
See Item 1. Business - Aflac Japan Competitive Markets and Aflac U.S. Competitive Markets for a discussion of the competitive environment and the basis on which the Company competes in each of its segments.
2022 OUTLOOK
The Company’s strategy to drive long-term shareholder value is to pursue growth through product development, distribution expansion and digital advancements to improve the customer experience.
The Company's objectives in 2022 are to navigate the COVID-19 pandemic while maintaining strong pre-tax margins in its Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. segments, continuing to invest in digital technology, and integrating and building upon recent acquisitions. The Company believes that its strategy of positioning itself for future growth and efficiency while defending and leveraging its market-leading position, powerful brand recognition and diverse distribution in Japan and the U.S. will provide support toward these objectives.
The Company announced a 21.2% increase in the first quarter 2022 dividend compared to the prior quarter, and it intends to maintain strong capital ratios in Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. in support of its commitment to shareholder dividends while remaining tactical in its deployment of capital in the form of share repurchases and opportunistic investments. The Company intends to maintain a minimum SMR of 500% for Aflac Japan and a target minimum RBC of approximately 400% for Aflac, consistent with the Company's risk management practices.
Aflac Japan Segment
For Aflac Japan, the Company anticipates that the shift in premiums over the last five years from first sector savings products to third sector cancer and medical products and first sector protection products, will continue to result in moderately lower benefit ratios in the Aflac Japan segment. The Company expects that benefit and expense ratios will continue to experience some level of revenue pressure due to the impact of paid up policies and reduced sales during the COVID-19 pandemic. For the 2022 through 2023 period, the Company expects a decline in Aflac Japan revenue in the range of 3.0% to 4.0% on a compound annual growth rate basis, with a benefit ratio in the range of 67.0% to 69.0% and an expense ratio in the range of 20.5% to 22.5%. The Company expects Aflac Japan to continue to operate with an expense ratio toward the upper end of the range in 2022.
Aflac U.S. Segment
For Aflac U.S., the Company expects benefit ratios to normalize in 2022 and for expense ratios to remain elevated in light of investments into U.S. platforms, while revenues that have faced pressure due to the impact of the global pandemic are anticipated to return to growth in the near term. For the 2022 through 2023 period, the Company expects Aflac U.S. revenue growth of 1.0% to 4.0% on a compound annual growth rate basis, with a benefit ratio in the range of 48.0% to 52.0% and an expense ratio in the range of 38.0% to 41.0%.
Corporate and other
The Company expects Corporate and other results to reflect stable net investment income in 2022 compared to 2021, assuming that U.S. interest rates remain stable.
For important disclosures applicable to statements made in this 2022 Outlook, please see the Risk Factors section and the statement on Forward-Looking Information at the beginning of Item 1. Business, the Risk Factors identified in Item 1A. and Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The Company earns its revenues principally from insurance premiums and investments. The Company’s operating expenses primarily consist of insurance benefits provided and reserves established for anticipated future insurance benefits, general business expenses, commissions and other costs of selling and servicing its products. Profitability for the Company depends principally on its ability to price its insurance products at a level that enables the Company to earn a margin over the costs associated with providing benefits and administering those products. Profitability also depends on, among other items, actuarial and policyholder behavior experience on insurance products, and the Company's ability to attract and retain customer assets, generate and maintain favorable investment results, effectively deploy capital and utilize tax capacity, and manage expenses.
This document includes references to the Company’s financial performance measures which are not calculated in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) (non-U.S. GAAP). The financial measures exclude items that the Company believes may obscure the underlying fundamentals and trends in insurance operations because they tend to be driven by general economic conditions and events or related to infrequent activities not directly associated with insurance operations.
Due to the size of Aflac Japan, where the functional currency is the Japanese yen, fluctuations in the yen/dollar exchange rate can have a significant effect on reported results. In periods when the yen weakens, translating yen into dollars results in fewer dollars being reported. When the yen strengthens, translating yen into dollars results in more dollars being reported. Consequently, yen weakening has the effect of suppressing current period results in relation to the comparable prior period, while yen strengthening has the effect of magnifying current period results in relation to the comparable prior period. A significant portion of the Company’s business is conducted in yen and never converted into dollars but translated into dollars for U.S. GAAP reporting purposes, which results in foreign currency impact to earnings, cash flows and book value on a U.S. GAAP basis. Management evaluates the Company's financial performance both including and excluding the impact of foreign currency translation to monitor, respectively, cumulative currency impacts on book value and the currency-neutral operating performance over time. The average yen/dollar exchange rate is based on the published MUFG Bank, Ltd. telegraphic transfer middle rate (TTM).
The Company defines the non-U.S. GAAP financial measures included in this document as follows:
•Adjusted earnings are adjusted revenues less benefits and adjusted expenses. Adjusted earnings per share (basic or diluted) are the adjusted earnings for the period divided by the weighted average outstanding shares (basic or diluted) for the period presented. The adjustments to both revenues and expenses account for certain items that cannot be predicted or that are outside management’s control. Adjusted revenues are U.S. GAAP total revenues excluding adjusted net investment gains and losses. Adjusted expenses are U.S. GAAP total acquisition and operating expenses including the impact of interest cash flows from derivatives associated with notes payable but excluding any nonrecurring or other items not associated with the normal course of the Company’s insurance operations and that do not reflect the Company's underlying business performance. Management uses adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per diluted share to evaluate the financial performance of the Company’s insurance operations on a consolidated basis and believes that a presentation of these financial measures is vitally important to an understanding of the underlying profitability drivers and trends of the Company’s insurance business. The most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures for adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per share (basic or diluted) are net earnings and net earnings per share, respectively.
•Adjusted net investment gains and losses are net investment gains and losses adjusted for i) amortized hedge cost/income related to foreign currency exposure management strategies and certain derivative activity, ii) net interest cash flows from foreign currency and interest rate derivatives associated with certain investment strategies, which are both reclassified to net investment income, and iii) the impact of interest cash flows from derivatives associated with notes payable, which is reclassified to interest expense as a component of total adjusted expenses. The Company considers adjusted net investment gains and losses important as it represents the remainder amount that is considered outside management’s control, while excluding the components that are within management’s control and are accordingly reclassified to net investment income and interest expense. The most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure for adjusted net investment gains and losses is net investment gains and losses.
•Amortized hedge costs/income represent costs/income incurred or recognized as a result of using foreign currency derivatives to hedge certain foreign exchange risks in the Company's Japan segment or in Corporate and other. These amortized hedge costs/ income are estimated at the inception of the derivatives based on the specific terms of each contract and are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the hedge. The
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Company believes that amortized hedge costs/income measure the periodic currency risk management costs/income related to hedging certain foreign currency exchange risks and are an important component of net investment income. There is no comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure for amortized hedge costs/ income.
•Adjusted earnings excluding current period foreign currency impact are computed using the average foreign currency exchange rate for the comparable prior-year period, which eliminates fluctuations driven solely by foreign currency exchange rate changes. Adjusted earnings per diluted share excluding current period foreign currency impact is adjusted earnings excluding current period foreign currency impact divided by the weighted average outstanding diluted shares for the period presented. The Company considers adjusted earnings excluding current period foreign currency impact and adjusted earnings per diluted share excluding current period foreign currency impact important because a significant portion of the Company's business is conducted in Japan and foreign exchange rates are outside management’s control; therefore, the Company believes it is important to understand the impact of translating foreign currency (primarily Japanese yen) into U.S. dollars. The most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures for adjusted earnings excluding current period foreign currency impact and adjusted earnings per diluted share excluding current period foreign currency impact are net earnings and net earnings per share, respectively.
•Adjusted book value is the U.S. GAAP book value (representing total shareholders’ equity), less AOCI as recorded on the U.S. GAAP balance sheet. Adjusted book value per common share is adjusted book value at the period end divided by the ending outstanding common shares for the period presented. The Company considers adjusted book value and adjusted book value per common share important as they exclude AOCI, which fluctuates due to market movements that are outside management’s control. The most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures for adjusted book value and adjusted book value per common share are total book value and total book value per common share, respectively.
•Adjusted return on equity excluding foreign currency impact is adjusted earnings excluding the current period foreign currency impact divided by average shareholders’ equity, excluding AOCI. The Company considers adjusted return on equity excluding foreign currency impact important as it excludes changes in foreign currency and components of AOCI, which fluctuate due to market movements that are outside management's control. The most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure for adjusted return on equity excluding foreign currency impact is ROE as determined using net earnings and average total shareholders’ equity.
•U.S. dollar-denominated investment income excluding foreign currency impact represents amounts excluding foreign currency impact on U.S. dollar-denominated investment income using the average foreign currency exchange rate for the comparable prior year period. The Company considers U.S. dollar-denominated investment income excluding foreign currency impact important as it eliminates the impact of foreign currency changes on the Aflac Japan segment results, which are outside management’s control. The most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure for U.S. dollar-denominated investment income excluding foreign currency impact is the corresponding net investment income amount from the U.S. dollar denominated investments translated to yen.
The following table is a reconciliation of items impacting adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per diluted share to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures of net earnings and net earnings per diluted share, respectively, for the years ended December 31.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Reconciliation of Net Earnings to Adjusted Earnings
(1) See reconciliation of net investment (gains) losses to adjusted net investment (gains) losses below.
(2) One-time tax benefit recognized in 2020 representing the release of valuation allowances on deferred foreign tax credits due to new tax regulations.
(3) Prior period foreign currency impact reflected as “N/A” to isolate change for current period only.
Reconciling Items
Net Investment Gains and Losses
Reconciliation of Net Investment (Gains) Losses to Adjusted Net Investment (Gains) Losses
The Company's investment strategy is to invest primarily in fixed maturity securities to provide a reliable stream of investment income, which is one of the drivers of the Company’s profitability. This investment strategy incorporates asset-liability matching (ALM) to align the expected cash flows of the portfolio to the needs of the Company's liability structure. The Company does not purchase securities with the intent of generating investment gains or losses. However, investment gains and losses may be realized as a result of changes in the financial markets and the creditworthiness of specific issuers, tax planning strategies, and/or general portfolio management and rebalancing. The realization of investment gains and losses is independent of the underwriting and administration of the Company's insurance products. Net investment gains and losses excluded from adjusted earnings include the following:
•Securities Transactions
•Credit Losses
•Changes in the Fair Value of Equity Securities
•Certain Derivative and Foreign Currency Activities.
Securities Transactions, Credit Losses and Changes in the Fair Value of Equity Securities
Securities transactions include gains and losses from sales and redemptions of investments where the amount received is different from the amortized cost of the investment. Credit losses include losses for held-to-maturity fixed maturity securities, available-for-sale fixed maturity securities, loan receivables, loan commitments and reinsurance recoverables. Changes in the fair value of equity securities are the result of gains or losses driven by fluctuations in market prices.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain Derivative and Foreign Currency Activities
The Company's derivative activities include:
•foreign currency forwards and options used in hedging foreign exchange risk on U.S. dollar-denominated investments in Aflac Japan's portfolio, with options used on a standalone basis and/or in a collar strategy
•foreign currency forwards and options used to economically hedge certain portions of forecasted cash flows denominated in yen and hedge the Company's long term exposure to a weakening yen
•cross-currency interest rate swaps, also referred to as foreign currency swaps, associated with certain senior notes and subordinated debentures
•foreign currency swaps that are associated with VIE bond purchase commitments, and investments in special-purpose entities, including VIEs where the Company is the primary beneficiary
•interest rate swaps used to economically hedge interest rate fluctuations in certain variable-rate investments
•interest rate swaptions used to hedge changes in the fair value associated with interest rate fluctuations for certain U.S. dollar-denominated available-for-sale fixed-maturity securities
•bond purchase commitments at the inception of investments in consolidated VIEs.
Gains and losses are recognized as a result of valuing these derivatives, net of the effects of hedge accounting. The Company also excludes from adjusted earnings the accounting impacts of remeasurement associated with changes in the foreign currency exchange rate.
For additional information regarding net investment gains and losses, including details of reported amounts for the periods presented, see Notes 3 and 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other and Non-recurring Items
The U.S. insurance industry has a policyholder protection system that provides funds for the policyholders of insolvent insurers. The system can result in periodic charges to the Company as a result of insolvencies/bankruptcies that occur with other companies in the life insurance industry. Some states permit member insurers to recover assessments paid through full or partial premium tax offsets. These charges neither relate to the ordinary course of the Company’s business nor reflect the Company’s underlying business performance, but result from external situations not controlled by the Company. The Company excludes any charges associated with U.S. guaranty fund assessments and the corresponding tax benefit or expense from adjusted earnings.
In Japan, the government also requires the insurance industry to contribute to a policyholder protection corporation that provides funds for the policyholders of insolvent insurers; however, these costs are calculated and administered differently than in the U.S. In Japan, these costs are not directly related to specific insolvencies or bankruptcies, but are rather a regular operational cost for an insurance company. Based on this structure, the Company does not remove the Japan policyholder protection expenses from adjusted earnings.
Other items excluded from adjusted earnings included integration costs related to the Company's acquisition of Zurich North America's U.S. Corporate Life and Pensions business; these costs primarily consist of expenditures for legal, accounting, consulting, integration of systems and processes and other similar services. These integration costs amounted to $26 million and $13 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company considers the costs associated with the early redemption of its debt to be unrelated to the underlying fundamentals and trends in its insurance operations. Additionally, these costs are driven by changes in interest rates subsequent to the issuance of the debt, and the Company considers these interest rate changes to represent economic conditions not directly associated with its insurance operations. In May 2021, the Parent Company used a portion of the net proceeds from its April 2021 issuance of various series of senior notes to redeem $700 million of its 3.625% senior notes due June 2023. The pretax expense due to the early redemption of these notes was $48 million. In January 2020, the Parent Company used the net proceeds from senior notes issued in December 2019 to redeem $350 million of its 4.00% senior notes due February 2022. The pretax expense due to the early redemption of these notes was $15 million.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Income Taxes
The Company's combined U.S. and Japanese effective income tax rate on pretax earnings was 18.7% in 2021 and (14.9)% in 2020. In 2021, the combined effective tax rate differs from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to new tax regulations released in the third quarter of 2020 and historic and solar tax credits. In 2020, the combined effective tax rate differs from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the release of certain valuation allowances established on the Company's deferred foreign tax credit benefits. The release of these valuation allowances was a result of the issuance of Final and Proposed Regulations by the U.S. Treasury and Internal Revenue Service in September 2020, and resulted in a one-time income tax benefit of $1.4 billion in the third quarter of 2020. Total income taxes were $1.0 billion in 2021 and $(.6) billion in 2020. Japanese income taxes on Aflac Japan's results account for most of the Company's consolidated income tax expense.
For additional information, see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Critical Accounting Estimates - Income Taxes section of this MD&A.
The Company expects that its effective tax rate for future periods will be approximately 20%. The effective tax rate continues to be subject to future tax law changes both in the U.S. and in foreign jurisdictions. See the risk factor entitled "Tax rates applicable to the Company may change" in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors for more information.
Foreign Currency Translation
Aflac Japan’s premiums and a significant portion of its investment income are received in yen, and its claims and most expenses are paid in yen. Aflac Japan purchases yen-denominated assets and U.S. dollar-denominated assets, which may be hedged to yen, to support yen-denominated policy liabilities. Yen-denominated income statement accounts are translated to U.S. dollars using the weighted average Japanese yen/U.S. dollar foreign exchange rate for the reporting period, except realized gains and losses on securities transactions which are translated at the exchange rate on the trade date of each transaction. Yen-denominated balance sheet accounts are translated to U.S. dollars using the spot Japanese yen/U.S. dollar foreign exchange rate at the end of the reporting period.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS BY SEGMENT
U.S. GAAP financial reporting requires that a company report financial and descriptive information about operating segments in its annual and interim period financial statements. Furthermore, the Company is required to report a measure of segment profit or loss, certain revenue and expense items, and segment assets. The Company's insurance business consists of two segments: Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. Aflac Japan is the principal contributor to consolidated earnings. In addition, the Parent Company, other business units that are not individually reportable, and business activities, including reinsurance retrocession activities, not included in Aflac Japan or Aflac U.S. are included in Corporate and other. See the Item 1. Business section of this Form 10-K for a summary of each segment's products and distribution channels.
Consistent with U.S. GAAP guidance for segment reporting, pretax adjusted earnings is the Company's U.S. GAAP measure of segment performance. The Company believes that a presentation of this measure is vitally important to an understanding of the underlying profitability drivers and trends of its business. Additional performance measures used to evaluate the financial condition and performance of the Company's segments are listed below.
•Operating Ratios
•New Annualized Premium Sales
•New Money Yield
•Return on Average Invested Assets
•Average Weekly Producer
For additional information on the Company’s performance measures included in this MD&A, see the Glossary of Selected Terms found directly following Part IV. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the reconciliation of segment results to the Company's consolidated U.S. GAAP results and additional information.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
AFLAC JAPAN SEGMENT
Aflac Japan Pretax Adjusted Earnings
Changes in Aflac Japan's pretax adjusted earnings and profit margins are primarily affected by morbidity, mortality, expenses, persistency and investment yields. The following table presents a summary of operating results for Aflac Japan for the years ended December 31.
Aflac Japan Summary of Operating Results
(1) Net interest cash flows from derivatives associated with certain investment strategies of $(33) and $9 in 2021 and 2020, respectively, have been reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings as a component of net investment income.
In yen terms, Aflac Japan's net earned premiums decreased in 2021, primarily due to constrained sales during the COVID-19 pandemic and an anticipated decrease in first sector and third sector premiums as policies reached premium paid-up status. Adjusted net investment income increased in 2021 primarily due to higher alternative and floating rate income and lower hedge costs.
Annualized premiums in force at December 31, 2021, were ¥1.36 trillion, compared with ¥1.43 trillion in 2020. The decrease in annualized premiums in force in yen of 4.7% in 2021 and 4.2% in 2020 was driven primarily by limited-pay products reaching paid up status and lower sales during the COVID-19 pandemic. Annualized premiums in force, translated into dollars at respective year-end exchange rates, were $11.8 billion in 2021 and $13.8 billion in 2020.
Aflac Japan's investment portfolios include U.S. dollar-denominated securities and reverse-dual currency securities (yen-denominated debt securities with dollar coupon payments). In years when the yen strengthens in relation to the dollar, translating Aflac Japan's U.S. dollar-denominated investment income into yen lowers growth rates for net investment income, total adjusted revenues, and pretax adjusted earnings in yen terms. In years when the yen weakens, translating
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
U.S. dollar-denominated investment income into yen magnifies growth rates for net investment income, total adjusted revenues, and pretax adjusted earnings in yen terms.
The following table illustrates the effect of translating Aflac Japan's U.S. dollar-denominated investment income and related items into yen by comparing certain segment results with those that would have been reported had foreign currency exchange rates remained unchanged from the prior year. Amounts excluding foreign currency impact on U.S. dollar-denominated investment income were determined using the average foreign currency exchange rate for the comparable prior year period. See non-U.S. GAAP financial measures defined above.
Aflac Japan Percentage Changes Over Prior Year
(Yen Operating Results)
For the Years Ended December 31,
The following table presents a summary of operating ratios in yen terms for Aflac Japan for the years ended December 31.
In 2021, the benefit ratio to total premiums decreased, compared to the prior year, primarily due to favorable third sector claims experience, higher surrenders in Aflac Japan's third sector business, and the continued change in mix of first and third sector business. In 2021, the adjusted expense ratio increased slightly mainly due to an increase in personnel expenses and an increase in advertising expenses related to promotion of new medical and care products. In total for 2021, the pretax adjusted profit margin increased primarily due to lower benefit ratios.
Aflac Japan Sales
The following table presents Aflac Japan's new annualized premium sales for the years ended December 31.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following table details the contributions to Aflac Japan's new annualized premium sales by major insurance product for the years ended December 31.
(1) Includes term and whole life
The foundation of Aflac Japan's product portfolio has been, and continues to be, third sector products, which include cancer, medical and income support insurance products. Aflac Japan has been focusing more on promotion of cancer and medical insurance products in this low-interest-rate environment. These products are less interest-rate sensitive and more profitable compared to first sector savings products. With continued cost pressure on Japan’s health care system, the Company expects the need for third sector products will continue to rise in the future and that the medical and cancer insurance products Aflac Japan provides will continue to be an important part of its product portfolio.
Sales of protection-type first sector and third sector products on a yen basis increased 7.8% in 2021, compared with 2020. The increase reflected the introduction of new products in the first and third quarters of 2021. Nevertheless, during 2021 Aflac Japan continued to face various degrees of COVID-19 related restrictions in Japan that served to limit face-to-face sales opportunities.
Sales of Aflac Japan cancer products in the Japan Post Group channel experienced a material decline beginning in August 2019 which continued in 2021. Japan Post Group resumed proactive sales of cancer insurance policies on April 1, 2021 and Aflac Japan continues to strengthen the strategic alliance. In April 2022, approximately 10,000 employees of Japan Post Co. are expected to be transferred to Japan Post Insurance. Japan Post Group has informed Aflac Japan that these employees' responsibilities will include sales of Japan Post Insurance products and Aflac Japan products to the exclusion of other financial products. The Company expects continued collaboration to further position both companies for long-term growth and a gradual improvement of Japan Post Group cancer insurance sales in the intermediate term. For example, during 2021 Aflac Japan has observed an increase in the number of proposals to potential customers in the Japan Post Group channel, and the Japan Post Group is expected to conduct a nationwide campaign to improve certain sales process practices. For additional information, see the risk factor entitled "Sales of the Company's products and services are dependent on its ability to attract, retain and support a network of qualified sales associates, brokers and employees in the U.S. and sales associates and other distribution partners in Japan," in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Aflac Japan continues to promote digital and web-based sales to groups and use
of its system that enables smart device-based insurance application by allowing the customer and an Aflac Japan operator
to see the same screen through their smart devices. Further, Aflac Japan continues to utilize its virtual sales tool that enables online consultations and policy applications to be completed entirely online.
The following table details the contributions to Aflac Japan's new annualized premium sales by agency type for the years ended December 31.
(1) Includes Japan Post
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In 2021, Aflac Japan recruited 62 new sales agencies. At December 31, 2021, Aflac Japan was represented by more than 8,000 sales agencies, with approximately 112,000 licensed sales associates employed by those agencies. The number of sales agencies has declined in recent years due to Aflac Japan's focus on supporting agencies with strong management frameworks, high productivity and more producing agents.
At December 31, 2021, Aflac Japan had agreements to sell its products at 360 banks, approximately 90% of the total number of banks in Japan.
Strategic Alliance with Japan Post Holdings
As previously reported, on December 19, 2018, the Parent Company and Aflac Japan entered into a Basic Agreement with Japan Post Holdings Co., Ltd., a Japanese corporation (Japan Post Holdings). Pursuant to the terms of the Basic Agreement, among other items, Japan Post Holdings and Aflac Japan agreed to reconfirm existing initiatives regarding cancer insurance and to consider new joint initiatives, including leveraging digital technology in various processes and cooperation in new product development to promote customer-centric business management. In June 2021, the Parent Company, Aflac Japan and Japan Post Group agreed to pursue several specific initiatives toward building a "'Co-creation Platform' to support customers and local communities," consistent with Japan Post Group's medium-term management plan announced in May 2021. The initiatives are directed at, among other items, the promotion of Aflac Japan cancer insurance, digital transformation within the Japan Post Group, and certain diversity efforts.
On February 28, 2019, the Parent Company entered a Shareholders Agreement with Japan Post Holdings, J&A Alliance Holdings Corporation, a Delaware corporation, solely in its capacity as trustee of J&A Alliance Trust, a New York voting trust (Trust), and General Incorporated Association J&A Alliance, a Japanese general incorporated association. Pursuant to the Shareholders Agreement, Japan Post Holdings agreed to cause the Trust to use commercially reasonable efforts to acquire, through open market or private block purchases in the U.S., beneficial ownership of approximately 7% of the Common Stock in connection with the Basic Agreement. According to a Schedule 13G/A filed by Japan Post Holdings with the SEC on January 6, 2021, the Trust had beneficially acquired 7.45% of the outstanding Common Shares as of December 31, 2020. Japan Post Holdings is the sole beneficiary of the Trust.
On May 1, 2020, the Parent Company filed a registration statement on Form S-3 that registered the sale of its common stock from time to time by J&A Alliance Holdings Corporation in its capacity as trustee of the Trust. The filing was made strictly pursuant to a contractual requirement contained in the Shareholders Agreement. Notwithstanding the filing of the Form S-3, the Trust continues to be subject to a lockup period for a period expiring four years after the Trust acquired 7% of the Parent Company's outstanding shares. After expiration of such period, the Trust has agreed not to own more than the greater of 10% of the Parent Company’s outstanding shares or such shares representing 22.5% of the voting rights in the Parent Company.
In light of the fact that the shares acquired by the Trust, like all Aflac Incorporated common shares, will be eligible for 10-for-1 voting rights after being held for 48 consecutive months, the Shareholders Agreement further provides for voting restrictions that effectively limit the trustee’s voting rights to no more than 20% of the voting rights in the Parent Company and further restrict the trustee’s voting rights with respect to certain change in control transactions. Japan Post Holdings will not have a Board seat on the Parent Company’s Board of Directors and will not have rights to control, manage or intervene in the management of the Parent Company.
The foregoing is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Basic Agreement, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed December 19, 2018, and the Shareholders Agreement, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 10.50 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed April 26, 2019, the terms of which exhibits are incorporated herein by reference.
Aflac Japan Investments
The level of investment income in yen is affected by available cash flow from operations, the timing of investing the cash flow, yields on new investments, the effect of yen/dollar exchange rates on U.S. dollar-denominated investment income, and other factors.
As part of the Company's portfolio management and asset allocation process, Aflac Japan invests in yen and U.S. dollar-denominated investments. Yen-denominated investments primarily consist of JGBs, public and private fixed maturity securities and public equity securities. Aflac Japan's U.S. dollar-denominated investments include fixed maturity investments and growth assets, including alternative investments in limited partnerships or similar investment vehicles. Aflac Japan has been investing in both publicly-traded and privately originated U.S. dollar-denominated investment-grade
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
and below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities and loan receivables, and has entered into foreign currency forwards and options to hedge the currency risk on the fair value of a portion of the U.S. dollar investments.
The following table details the investment purchases for Aflac Japan for the years ended December 31.
See the Investments section of this MD&A for further discussion of these investment programs, and see Notes 1, 3 and 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding loans and loan receivables.
Funds available for investment include cash flows from operations, investment income, and funds generated from maturities, redemptions, securities lending, and other securities transactions. Securities lending is also used from time to time to accelerate the availability of funds for investment. Purchases of securities from period to period are determined based on multiple objectives including appropriate portfolio diversification, the relative value of a potential investment and availability of investment opportunities, liquidity, credit and other risk factors while adhering to the Company's investment policy guidelines.
The following table presents the results of Aflac Japan's investment yields for the years ended and as of December 31.
(1) Includes fixed maturity securities, commercial mortgage and other loans, equity securities, and excludes alternative investments in limited partnerships
(2) Reported on a gross yield basis; excludes investment expenses, external management fees, and amortized hedge costs
(3) Net of investment expenses and amortized hedge costs, year-to-date number reflected on a quarterly average basis
The decrease in the Aflac Japan new money yield in 2021 was primarily due to lower yields on floating rate asset classes.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
See Notes 3, 4 and 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Investments and Hedging Activities sections of this MD&A for additional information on the Company's investments and hedging strategies.
AFLAC U.S. SEGMENT
Aflac U.S. Pretax Adjusted Earnings
Changes in Aflac U.S. pretax adjusted earnings and profit margins are primarily affected by morbidity, mortality, expenses, persistency and investment yields. The following table presents a summary of operating results for Aflac U.S. for the years ended December 31.
Aflac U.S. Summary of Operating Results
(1) Net interest cash flows from derivatives associated with certain investment strategies of $2 and $3 in 2021 and 2020, respectively, have been reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings as a component of net investment income.
In 2021, Aflac U.S. net earned premiums decreased, primarily due to constrained sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Total adjusted revenues decreased in 2021, mainly due to the decline in net earned premiums from reduced sales activity, partially offset by the increase in adjusted net investment income from higher variable net investment income. The increase in pretax adjusted earnings was primarily driven by the lower-than-expected benefit ratios due to lower incurred claims related to pandemic conditions.
Annualized premiums in force decreased 1.6% in 2021 and decreased 3.2% in 2020. Annualized premiums in force at December 31 were $6.0 billion in 2021, compared with $6.1 billion in 2020.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following table presents a summary of operating ratios for Aflac U.S. for the years ended December 31.
The benefit ratio to total premiums decreased in 2021, compared with 2020, reflecting reduced estimates of both COVID-19-related and non-COVID-19-related incurred claims since the advent of the pandemic. The adjusted expense ratio increased in 2021, compared with 2020, primarily due to planned spending on buy-to-build investments, offset slightly by lower deferred policy acquisition cost (DAC) amortization related to elevated persistency. The pretax adjusted profit margin increased in 2021 when compared with 2020, primarily due to lower benefit ratios.
Aflac U.S. Sales
The following table presents Aflac's U.S. new annualized premium sales for the years ended December 31.
New annualized premium sales for accident insurance, the leading Aflac U.S. product category, increased 12.7%, disability sales increased 14.2%, critical care insurance sales (including cancer insurance) increased 13.0%, and hospital indemnity insurance sales increased 6.6% in 2021, compared with 2020. The increase in sales for Aflac U.S. in 2021 is primarily attributable to increased sales activity as a result of the ongoing economic reopening in the U.S. and favorable comparisons due to pandemic conditions in 2020. Aflac U.S. expects this trend of increasing sales to continue in 2022. See the Executive Summary section entitled COVID-19 of this MD&A for additional information.
The following table details the contributions to Aflac's U.S. new annualized premium sales by major insurance product category for the years ended December 31.
(1) Includes cancer, critical illness and hospital intensive care products
In 2021, the Aflac U.S. sales force included an average of approximately 6,000 U.S. agents, including brokers, who were actively producing business on a weekly basis. The Company believes that this average weekly producer equivalent metric allows sales management to monitor progress and needs, as well as serve as a leading indicator of future production capacity. Aflac U.S. believes that during 2021, constraints in the labor market limited its recruiting of new sales agents, and that limitations on face-to-face sales opportunities during the COVID-19 pandemic suppressed the development of newly recruited agents into business producers and the productivity of veteran agents and brokers. While
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
gains were made in recruiting in 2021 compared to 2020, most notably among recruited brokers, Aflac U.S. believes that the above factors have acted as a headwind to sales and to growth in the number of average weekly producers during 2021. Aflac U.S. remains focused on mitigating and reversing these trends as the U.S. economy continues to recover from the pandemic.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Aflac U.S. remains focused on supporting its agency channel, most of which are small businesses, by offering financial support and an extended value proposition. The Aflac U.S. sales team has pivoted to accommodate preferred enrollment conditions which include realizing sales at the worksite through in-person enrollment, an enrollment call center, video enrollment through co-browsing and self-enrollment. The traditional agent sales team is also using virtual recruiting and training through video conferencing in order to maintain or increase the recruiting pipeline. The Aflac U.S. broker sales team is focused on product enhancements due to COVID-19 as well as leveraging technology based solutions to drive enrollment.
In November 2020, the Company, through its insurance subsidiaries Aflac and Aflac New York, acquired Zurich North America’s U.S. Corporate Life and Pensions business, which consists of group life, disability and absence management products. Aflac and Aflac New York agreed to reinsure on an indemnity basis Zurich North America’s U.S. in-force group life and disability policies with annualized earned premium of over $100 million. Aflac also acquired assets needed to support the group life and disability business, along with an absence management platform.
Aflac U.S. Investments
The level of investment income is affected by available cash flow from operations, the timing of investing the cash flow, yields on new investments, and other factors.
As part of the Company's portfolio management and asset allocation process, Aflac U.S. invests in fixed maturity investments and growth assets, including public equity securities and alternative investments in limited partnerships. Aflac U.S. has been investing in both publicly traded and privately originated investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities and loan receivables.
The following table details the investment purchases for Aflac U.S. as of December 31.
Funds available for investment include cash flows from operations, investment income, and funds generated from maturities, redemptions, and other securities transactions. Purchases of securities from period to period are determined based on multiple objectives, including appropriate portfolio diversification, the relative value of a potential investment and availability of investment opportunities, liquidity, credit and other risk factors while adhering to the Company's investment policy guidelines.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following table presents the results of Aflac's U.S. investment yields for the years ended and as of December 31.
(1) Includes fixed maturity securities, commercial mortgage and other loans, equity securities, and excludes alternative investments in limited partnerships
(2) Reported on a gross yield basis; excludes investment expenses and external management fees
(3) Net of investment expenses, year-to-date number reflected on a quarterly average basis
The increase in the Aflac U.S. new money yield for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to higher allocations to floating rate asset classes.
See Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Market Risks of Financial Instruments - Credit Risk subsection of