Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (“Business Combination”). We have reviewed, and continue to review, a number of opportunities to enter into a Business Combination with an operating business, but we are not able to determine at this time whether we will complete a Business Combination with any of the target businesses that we have reviewed or with any other target business.
We intend to consummate a Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (the “Public Offering”) that closed on August 16, 2021 (the “Close Date”) and the private placement of warrants to purchase our Class A ordinary shares (“Private Placement Warrants”) that occurred at the Close Date, and from additional issuances of, if any, our capital stock and our debt, or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
At December 31, 2021, we held cash of $1,738,011 and current liabilities of $11,289,610. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
For the period from April 12, 2021 (“Inception”) to December 31, 2021, we earned net income of $9,115,757. Net income consisted primarily due to gains from changes in the fair value of derivative liabilities of $10,400,000, offset by professional fees and other expenses of $1,284,243. Our business activities from Inception to December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of costs associated with our formation and Public Offering, and identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition targets for a Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the closing of the Public Offering (as described below), our only sources of liquidity were an initial sale of Class F ordinary shares (the “Founder Shares”) to our sponsor, AfterNext HealthTech Sponsor, Series LLC, a Delaware series limited liability company (the “Sponsor”), and the proceeds of a promissory note (the “Note”) from the Sponsor, in the amount of $750,000.
The registration statement for our Public Offering was declared effective by the SEC on August 11, 2021. In our Public Offering, we sold 25,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the effectiveness of our Public Offering, we closed the private placement of an aggregate of 4,666,667 warrants to purchase our Class A ordinary shares (the “Private Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per warrant, to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $7,000,000. On the Close Date, we placed $250,000,000 of proceeds (including $8,750,000 of deferred underwriting discount) from the Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants into a non-interest bearing U.S. based trust account at J.P. Morgan Chase, N.A, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee (the “Trust Account”) and held the remaining portion (net of offering expenses, other than underwriting discounts, paid upon the consummation of the Public Offering) of such proceeds outside the Trust Account.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,738,011 and working capital of $302,605, excluding derivative liabilities.
Starting January 2022, the funds in the Trust Account may be invested only in specified U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 180 days or less and in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
Effective November 2, 2021, we entered into a promissory note in which our Sponsor committed to lending us up to $7,000,000, if needed, to timely satisfy any of our financial obligations or debt service requirements through August 16, 2023, and further to defer any required repayment of existing loans, or any loans made during the period from the Close Date to August 16, 2023, until the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or August 16, 2023. On November 5, 2021, we borrowed $2,000,000 under the promissory note. The note is non-interest bearing.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our Business Combination aside from temporary loans from our Sponsor. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Class A ordinary shares at the completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination (including from our affiliates or affiliates of our Sponsor).
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities. On the Close Date, we entered into an administrative support agreement pursuant to which we have agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $50,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services. Upon the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the condensed financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A “Expenses of Offering”. We incurred offering costs allocated to the Class A ordinary shares contained in the Units sold in connection with our Public Offering primarily consisting of underwriter discounts, accounting and legal services, securities registration expenses and exchange listing fees. Offering costs of $14,188,153 allocated to the issuance and sale of the Class A ordinary shares contained in the Units were charged to temporary equity, and offering costs of $709,408 allocated to the issuance and sale of the warrants included in the Units were expensed.
Derivative Liabilities
We evaluated our Warrants and Private Placement Warrants (collectively, “Warrant Securities”) in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that the Warrant Securities could not be accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrant Securities meet the definition of a derivative in accordance with ASC 815, the Warrant Securities are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and measured at fair value at inception (the Close Date) and remeasured at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Redeemable Ordinary Shares
All of the 25,000,000 Class A ordinary shares sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with our liquidation if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to our second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within our control require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable ordinary shares are affected by charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) applicable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period, plus to the extent dilutive the incremental number of shares of ordinary shares to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury stock method. As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding Warrants and Private Placement Warrants to purchase up to 13,000,000 Class A ordinary shares. The weighted average of these shares was excluded from the calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share since the exercise of these instruments is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per ordinary share.
We have two classes of ordinary shares, Class A ordinary shares and Class F ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of ordinary shares.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.