ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on October 14, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Shares, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below and the search for a business combination target. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,099,494, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $1,521,992, offset by interest earned on our Trust account of $28,148 and the change in fair value of our FPA Asset of $394,350. For the period from October 14, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,000, which consisted of formation and operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 11, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 45,000,000 Public Shares, at a price of $10.00 per Public Share, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 5,000,000 Public Shares, generating gross proceeds of $450,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 1,100,000 Private Placement Shares to the Sponsor at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Share generating gross proceeds of $11,000,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Shares, a total of $450,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account, and we had $1,995,000 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $25,304,775 in transaction costs, including $9,000,000 of underwriting fees, $15,750,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $554,775 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 net cash used in operating activities was $1,066,544. Net loss of $1,099,494 was impacted by the change in the fair value of the FPA asset and interest earned on the assets held in the Trust Account offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash held in the Trust Account of $450,028,147. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $398,681 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $2,000,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into shares of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per share. The shares would be identical to the Private Placement Shares. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had no outstanding borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, we may need to obtain additional financing because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with the Business Combination.
Going Concern
We must consummate an initial Business Combination within 24 months (or 27 months, as applicable) from the closing of our Initial Public Offering or during any Extension Period. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial Business Combination within this time. If an initial Business Combination is not
consummated within this time, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should an initial Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 11, 2023.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial, and administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on January 11, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per share, or $15,750,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We entered into a forward purchase agreement which will provide for the purchase of a certain number of shares (the “forward purchase shares”), up to 5,000,000 forward purchase shares for $10.00 per share, or an aggregate purchase price of $50,000,000 in a private placement to close concurrently with the closing of a Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Polices (“GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
FPA Asset
The Company accounts for the Forward Purchase Agreement (“FPA”) as a derivative instrument based on an assessment of the specific terms of the FPA and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the FPA is a freestanding financial instrument pursuant to ASC 480 and meets the definition of a derivative asset or liability
pursuant to ASC 480. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of execution of the FPA and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the FPA is outstanding. Changes in the estimated fair value of the FPA between reporting periods is recognized as a non-cash
gain or loss on the statement of operations. The inputs used by the Company to value its FPA require estimation by the Company. To demonstrate the sensitivity to the most judgmental areas of this estimate, a 1% increase in the present value of the security input would increase the Company’s FPA asset by approximately $500,000.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update
(“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020- 06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the accounting pronouncement and therefore has not yet adopted as of December 31, 2021.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our unaudited condensed financial statements.