Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We are a leading manufacturer and distributor of agricultural equipment and related replacement parts throughout the world. We sell a full range of agricultural equipment, including tractors, combines, self-propelled sprayers, hay tools, forage equipment, seeding and tillage equipment, implements, and grain storage and protein production systems. Our products are widely recognized in the agricultural equipment industry and are marketed under a number of well-known brand names, including: Challenger®, Fendt®, GSI®, Massey Ferguson® and Valtra®, supported by our Fuse® precision agriculture solutions. We distribute most of our products through a combination of approximately 3,200 dealers and distributors as well as associates and licensees. In addition, we provide retail and wholesale financing through our finance joint ventures with Rabobank.
The COVID-19 pandemic and other economic factors continue to create volatility in the global economy, initially through government-mandated facility closures, higher absentee rates, and reduced production at both our factories and the factories that supply us with parts and components; and, more recently, through supply chain disruptions. In addition, we have had to incur various costs related to preventing the spread of COVID-19, including changes to our factories and other facilities and those related to enabling remote work. We expect COVID-19 to continue to impact our business, although the manner and extent to which it impacts us will depend on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic, the timing, distribution and impact of vaccinations, and possible mutations of the virus that are more contagious or resistant to current vaccines. Measures taken by governments around the world, as well as businesses, including us, and the general public in order to limit the spread of COVID-19 will impact our business as well. These factors, along with increasing industrial demand, could negatively affect production levels, particularly caused by delays in the receipts of parts and components. Supply chain issues of particular concern include a wide range of parts and components with a portion arising from the global semiconductor shortage. We may continue to face supplier bottlenecks and delays in all regions as well as challenges with freight logistics, and we continue to work to mitigate the impact of these issues in order to meet increased end-market demand.
Financial Highlights
We sell our equipment and replacement parts to our independent dealers, distributors and other customers. A large majority of our sales are to independent dealers and distributors that sell our products to end users. To the extent practicable, we attempt to sell products to our dealers and distributors on a level basis throughout the year to reduce the effect of seasonal
demands on our manufacturing operations and to minimize our investment in inventories. However, retail sales by dealers to farmers are highly seasonal and are a function of the timing the planting and harvesting seasons. In certain markets, particularly in North America, there is often a time lag, which varies based on the timing and level of retail demand, between our sale of the equipment to the dealer and the dealer’s sale to a retail customer.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the percentage relationship to net sales of certain items included in our Consolidated Statements of Operations:
___________________________________
(1) Rounding may impact summation of amounts.
2021 Compared to 2020
Net income attributable to AGCO Corporation and subsidiaries for 2021 was $897.0 million, or $11.85 per diluted share, compared to $427.1 million, or $5.65 per diluted share, for 2020.
Net sales for 2021 were approximately $11,138.3 million, or 21.7% higher than 2020, primarily due to improved market demand. Regionally, net sales were higher in all regions during 2021 compared to 2020. Net sales were negatively impacted by extended COVID-related production shutdowns in both Europe and South America during the first half of 2020. Income from operations was approximately $1,001.4 million in 2021 compared to approximately $599.7 million in 2020. The increase in income from operations during 2021 was primarily the result of higher net sales and production volumes and improved margins, which benefited from positive pricing impacts and a favorable sales mix that offset substantial inflationary material and freight cost pressures along with higher manufacturing costs. Net income per diluted share was favorably impacted by the reversal of valuation allowances previously established against our deferred tax assets in both the United States and Brazil during 2021. In addition, our 2020 income from operations included approximately $20.0 million of a non-cash goodwill impairment charge during the second quarter of 2020 related to a tillage and seeding equipment joint venture in which we formerly owned a 50% interest in our North American (“NA”) region.
Regionally, income from operations in our Europe/Middle East (“EME”) region increased by approximately $170.1 million in 2021 compared to 2020, driven primarily by higher net sales and increased production volumes as well as positive pricing realization, which offset higher material costs and engineering expenses. In our North American region, income from operations improved by approximately $44.4 million compared to the prior year. Higher net sales and production levels, a
richer product mix and favorable pricing impacts contributed to the improvement in the region and helped to offset material cost inflation. In South America, income from operations increased approximately $102.9 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase reflects increased net sales and production volumes, a better sales mix and favorable price realization, offsetting increasing material costs. Income from operations in our Asia/Pacific/African (“APA”) region increased approximately $51.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to higher net sales and an improved product mix.
Industry Market Conditions
Elevated agricultural commodity prices continue to support favorable farm economics resulting in farmers upgrading and replacing aging fleets. These improved conditions generated industry growth across all the major equipment markets during 2021. Future demand for agricultural equipment will be influenced by farm income, which is a function of commodity and protein prices, crop yields and government support.
In North America, industry unit retail sales of utility and high horsepower tractors increased approximately 14% in 2021 compared to 2020. Industry unit retail sales of combines increased approximately 24% in 2021 compared to 2020. Retail sales growth was strongest for high horsepower tractors in 2021 as compared to 2020 where an extended fleet age and favorable commodity prices stimulated demand.
In Western Europe, industry unit retail sales of tractors for 2021 increased approximately 16% compared to 2020. Industry unit retail sales of combines for 2021 increased approximately 3% compared to 2020. Industry sales increased across all major markets compared to 2020. Higher wheat, dairy and livestock prices, combined with improved levels of crop production, generated positive farm economics and farmer sentiment.
In South America, industry unit retail sales of tractors for 2021 increased approximately 22% compared to 2020. Industry unit retail sales of combines for 2021 increased approximately 20% compared to 2020. The improved demand was primarily in the large markets of Brazil and Argentina, as well as in smaller South American markets. Healthy crop production as well as favorable exchange rates supported positive economic conditions for farmers who continue to replace aged equipment.
Results of Operations
Net sales for 2021 were $11,138.3 million compared to $9,149.7 million for 2020, primarily as a result of improved market demand. The following table sets forth, for the year ended December 31, 2021, the impact to net sales of currency translation by geographical segment (in millions, except percentages):
Regionally, net sales in North America increased in 2021 compared to 2020, with growth in sales of tractors and Precision Planting equipment. In the EME region, net sales were higher during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to increased sales in all major markets, with the largest increases contributed by growth in tractors, combines and replacement parts. Net sales increased in South America in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to higher net sales of tractors, combines, planting equipment, parts as well as grain and protein equipment. In the APA region, net sales increased in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to net sales increases in China and Australia, as well as recovery in Africa. We estimate that worldwide average price increases were approximately 6.6% and 1.6% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Consolidated net sales of tractors and combines, which comprised approximately 61.1% of our net sales in 2021, increased approximately 23.0% in 2021 compared to 2020. Unit sales of tractors and combines increased approximately 16.7% during 2021 compared to 2020. The difference between the unit sales change and the change in net sales was primarily the result of foreign currency translation, pricing and sales mix changes.
The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the percentage relationship to net sales of certain items included in our Consolidated Statements of Operations (in millions, except percentages):
____________________________________
(1) Rounding may impact summation of amounts.
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales increased during 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the benefit of higher net sales and production levels, as well as positive pricing, which was partially offset by the impact of material cost inflation. Production hours increased across all regions during 2021. Overall, global production hours increased approximately 25% on a global basis during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily as a result of stronger market demand during 2021. Our production facilities continue to face supply chain and logistics disruptions as well as material and freight cost inflation. These disruptions impact our ability to produce and ship units, as well as contribute to labor inefficiencies, and result in carrying higher than anticipated raw material and work in process inventory levels. We expect these conditions to continue, which may impact production levels and net sales and margins in future periods.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A expenses”) and engineering expenses, as a percentage of net sales, were lower during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by the increases in net sales. The absolute level of SG&A expenses increased during 2021 following prior year actions to lower expenses while operations were suspended, such as reduced field sales and marketing activities and lower travel expenses. We recorded stock compensation expense of approximately $26.6 million and $36.8 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively, within SG&A expenses, as is more fully explained in Notes 1 and 10 of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
During 2020, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of approximately $20.0 million related to a tillage and seeding equipment joint venture in which we formerly owned a 50% interest. The impairment charge was recorded as “Impairment charges” within our Consolidated Statements of Operations, with an offsetting benefit of approximately $10.0 million included within “Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests.”
We recorded restructuring expenses of approximately $15.3 million and $19.7 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively. The restructuring expenses primarily related to severance and other related costs associated with the rationalization of employee headcount at various manufacturing facilities and administrative offices located in the United States, Europe and South America during 2021 and 2020, as well as the rationalization of our grain storage and protein production systems operations. See Note 3 of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest expense, net was $6.7 million for 2021 compared to $15.0 million for 2020 resulting primarily from higher interest income in 2021 as compared to 2020. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further information on our available funding.
Other expense, net was $50.4 million in 2021 compared to $22.7 million in 2020. We have a minority equity interest in Tractors and Farm Equipment Limited (“TAFE”). During 2020, TAFE repurchased a portion of its common stock from us resulting in a gain of approximately $32.5 million recorded within “Other expense, net.” See Note 14 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. In addition, losses on sales of receivables, primarily related to our accounts receivable sales agreements with our finance joint ventures in North America, Europe and Brazil, were approximately $24.5 million and $24.1 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We recorded an income tax provision of $108.4 million in 2021 compared to $187.7 million in 2020. Our tax provision and effective tax rate are impacted by the differing tax rates of the various tax jurisdictions in which we operate, permanent differences for items treated differently for financial accounting and income tax purposes, losses in jurisdictions where no income tax benefit is recorded, and provisions for unrecognized income tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had gross deferred tax assets of $291.8 million and $360.9 million, respectively, including $69.5 million and $62.9 million, respectively, related to net operating loss carryforwards. At December 31, 2021, we had total valuation allowances as an offset to our gross deferred tax assets of approximately $47.4 million. This valuation allowance included allowances against deferred tax assets (including net operating loss carryforwards) in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions. As of December 31, 2021, our income tax provision included the benefit of reversals of approximately $67.8 million and $55.6 million related to valuation allowances previously established against the Company’s net deferred tax assets in the United States and Brazil, respectively. Improvements in income in the United States and Brazil during 2020 and 2021, along with updated future projected income levels, supported the reversal of both of the valuation allowances. At December 31, 2020, we had total valuation allowances as an offset to the gross deferred tax assets of approximately $181.0 million. This valuation allowance included allowances against deferred tax assets (including net operating loss carryforwards) in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions. Realization of the net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 will depend on generating sufficient taxable income in future periods, net of reversing deferred tax liabilities. We believe it is more likely than not that the remaining net deferred tax assets should be able to be realized. Refer to Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Equity in net earnings of affiliates, which is primarily comprised of income from our AGCO Finance joint ventures, was $65.6 million in 2021 compared to $45.5 million in 2020, primarily due to higher net earnings from our AGCO Finance joint ventures. See “Finance Joint Ventures” for further information regarding our finance joint ventures and their results of operations and Note 5 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
2020 Compared to 2019
A comparison of the results of operations for 2020 versus that of 2019 was included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
AGCO Finance Joint Ventures
Our AGCO Finance joint ventures provide both retail financing and wholesale financing to our dealers in the United States, Canada, Europe, Brazil, Argentina and Australia. The joint ventures are owned by AGCO and by a wholly-owned subsidiary of Rabobank. The majority of the assets of the finance joint ventures consist of finance receivables. The majority of the liabilities consist of notes payable and accrued interest. Under the various joint venture agreements, Rabobank or its affiliates provide financing to the finance joint ventures, primarily through lines of credit. We do not guarantee the debt obligations of the joint ventures. In the United States and Canada, we guarantee certain minimum residual values to those joint ventures upon expiration of certain eligible leases between the finance joint ventures and end users. See “Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements” and Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2021, our capital investment in the finance joint ventures, which is included in “Investment in affiliates” on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, was approximately $359.2 million compared to approximately $395.3 million as of December 31, 2020. The total finance portfolio in our finance joint ventures was approximately $10.9 billion and $10.7 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The total finance portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 included approximately $9.2 billion and $8.8 billion, respectively, of retail receivables and $1.7 billion and $1.9 billion of wholesale receivables from AGCO dealers as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The wholesale receivables either were sold directly to AGCO Finance without recourse from our operating companies, or AGCO Finance provided the financing directly to the dealers. During 2021, we did not make additional investments in our finance joint ventures, and we received dividends of approximately $84.4 million from certain of our finance joint ventures. During 2020, we made approximately $1.9 million of additional investments in our finance joint ventures, and there were no dividends paid from our finance joint ventures. Our finance joint ventures were restricted from paying dividends to us during 2020 as a result of COVID-19 pandemic banking regulations. Our share in the earnings of the finance joint ventures, included in “Equity in net earnings of affiliates” within our Consolidated Statements of Operations, was approximately $64.4 million and $45.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, with the increase in earnings primarily due to higher income in our finance joint ventures in the U.S., Canada and France during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Outlook
Our operations are subject to the cyclical nature of the agricultural industry. Sales of our equipment are affected by, among other things, changes in net cash farm income, farm land values, weather conditions, the demand for agricultural commodities, commodity and protein prices and general economic conditions.
Global industry demand for farm equipment is expected to be higher across all major markets during 2022. Our net sales are expected to increase in 2022 compared to 2021, resulting from improved sales volumes and pricing, partially offset by negative foreign currency translation. Gross and operating margins are expected to improve from 2021 levels, reflecting the impact of higher net sales and production volumes as well as pricing initiatives to offset material cost inflation. Engineering expenses and other technology investments are expected to increase in 2022 compared to 2021 to support our product development plans as well as our precision agriculture and digital initiatives.
Our outlook is also based on current estimates of supplier component deliveries, and the ability of the Company's supply chain to deliver parts and components on schedule is currently difficult to predict. If supply chain performance worsens, our results of operations will be adversely impacted. Refer to “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our financing requirements are subject to variations due to seasonal changes in inventory and receivable levels. In addition, unusual events such as the recent supply chain disruptions can result in increases in inventories and, consequentially, our financing requirements. Internally generated funds are supplemented when necessary from external sources, primarily our credit facility and accounts receivable sales agreement facilities. We believe that the following facilities, together with available cash and internally generated funds, will be sufficient to support our working capital, capital expenditures and debt service requirements for the foreseeable future (in millions):
____________________________________
(1) The amounts above are gross of debt issuance costs of an aggregate amount of approximately $4.8 million.
On October 6, 2021, we issued €600.0 million (or approximately $680.8 million as of December 31, 2021) of senior notes at an issue price of 99.993%. The notes mature on October 6, 2028, and interest is payable annually, in arrears, at 0.800%. The senior notes contain covenants restricting, among other things, the incurrence of certain secured indebtedness. The senior notes are subject to both optional and mandatory redemption in certain events.
During October 2021, we used the proceeds received from the senior notes to repay our €150.0 million (or approximately $173.4 million as of October 8, 2021) senior term loan due 2022, $370.0 million related to our multi-currency revolving credit facility, and two of our 2016 senior term loans due October 2021 with an aggregate amount outstanding of €192.0 million (or approximately $223.8 million as of October 19, 2021). In August 2021, prior to the issuance of the senior notes, we repaid two of our 2018 senior term loans due August 2021 with an aggregate amount of €72.0 million (or approximately $85.5 million as of August 1, 2021).
In October 2018, we entered into a multi-currency revolving credit facility of $800.0 million. The credit facility matures on October 17, 2023. Interest accrues on amounts outstanding under the credit facility, at our option, at either (1) LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 0.875% to 1.875% based on our credit rating, or (2) the base rate, which is equal to the higher of (i) the administrative agent’s base lending rate for the applicable currency, (ii) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, and (iii) one-month LIBOR for loans denominated in U.S. dollars plus 1.0%, plus a margin ranging from 0.0% to 0.875% based on our credit rating. As mentioned previously, on October 15, 2021, we repaid $370.0 million of our multicurrency revolving credit facility as a result of the issuance of our 0.800% senior notes due 2028. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility, and the ability to borrow was approximately $800.0 million under the revolving credit facility.
On April 15, 2020, we borrowed €117.5 million and $133.8 million under a term loan facility that had been added to our multi-currency revolving credit facility. While outstanding, the loans bore interest at one-month LIBOR plus a margin of 1.625%. We repaid the two loans on February 16, 2021 (for an aggregate amount of approximately $276.0 million as of that date). Refer to Note 7 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our current facilities.
As described above, our credit facility allows us to select from among various interest rate options. Due to the phase-out of LIBOR, LIBOR-based rates no longer will be available for borrowings denominated in U.S. dollars after December 31, 2022, and for loans denominated in other currencies after December 31, 2021. The interest rates reflected in the our credit facility were designed to accommodate the discontinuation of LIBOR-based rates and a shift to the “Secured Overnight Financing Rate” (“SOFR”) or a base rate, and, as such, we do not believe that moving to the other rates will have a materially adverse effect on our results of operations or financial position. In addition, the credit facility agreement also provides for an expedited amendment process once a replacement for LIBOR is established, which we may elect to utilize to add additional interest-rate alternatives.
On January 25, 2019, we borrowed €250.0 million (or approximately $283.7 million as of December 31, 2021) from the European Investment Bank. The loan matures on January 24, 2025. Interest is payable on the term loan at 1.002% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears.
In October 2018, we entered into a term loan agreement with Rabobank in the amount of €150.0 million. Interest was payable on the term loan quarterly in arrears at an annual rate, equal to the EURIBOR plus a margin ranging from 0.875% to 1.875% based on our credit rating. As mentioned previously, during October 2021, we repaid this term loan of approximately $173.4 million as of October 8, 2021 with the proceeds from our 0.800% senior notes due 2028.
In October 2016, we borrowed an aggregate amount of €375.0 million through a group of seven related term loan agreements. These agreements had maturities ranging from October 2019 to October 2026. Of the 2016 term loans, we repaid an aggregate amount of €56.0 million (or approximately $61.1 million) of two of these term loans in October 2019. Additionally, as mentioned previously, we repaid €192.0 million (or approximately $223.8 million as of October 19, 2021) upon maturity of two 2016 senior term loans in October 2021. In August 2018, we borrowed an additional aggregate amount of indebtedness of €338.0 million through a group of another seven related term loan agreements. In August 2021, prior to the issuance of the senior notes due 2028, we repaid two of our 2018 senior term loans upon maturity with an aggregate amount of €72.0 million (or approximately $85.5 million as of August 1, 2021). On February 1, 2022, we repaid an additional amount of €72.5 million (or approximately $81.7 million) of one of our 2018 senior term loans due August 2023 with existing cash on hand. The provisions of the term loan agreements are substantially identical in nature with the exception of interest rate terms and maturities. In aggregate, as of December 31, 2021, we had indebtedness of approximately €393.0 million (or approximately $445.9 million as of December 31, 2021) under a total group of eight remaining term loan agreements. As of February 1, 2022, as a result of a further repayment discussed previously, we had indebtedness of €320.5 million (or approximately $361.0 million) through a group of seven remaining term loan agreements. As of December 31, 2021, for the term loans with a fixed interest rate, interest is payable in arrears on an annual basis, with interest rates ranging from 0.90% to 2.26% and maturity dates between August 2023 and August 2028. For the term loans with a floating interest rate, interest is payable in arrears on a semi-annual basis, with interest rates based on the EURIBOR plus a margin ranging from 0.90% to 1.25% and maturity dates between August 2023 and August 2025.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had short-term borrowings due within one year of approximately $90.8 million and $33.8 million, respectively.
We are in compliance with the financial covenants contained in these facilities and expect to continue to maintain such compliance. Should we ever encounter difficulties, our historical relationship with our lenders has been strong and we anticipate their continued long-term support of our business. Refer to Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information regarding our current facilities, including the financial covenants contained in each debt instrument.
Our accounts receivable sales agreements in North America, Europe and Brazil permit the sale, on an ongoing basis, of a majority of our receivables to our U.S., Canadian, European and Brazilian finance joint ventures. The sales of all receivables are without recourse to us. We do not service the receivables after the sales occur, and we do not maintain any direct retained interest in the receivables. These agreements are accounted for as off-balance sheet transactions and have the effect of reducing accounts receivable and short-term liabilities by the same amount. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the cash received from receivables sold under the U.S., Canadian, European and Brazilian accounts receivable sales agreements for the years then ended was approximately $1.3 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively.
In addition, the Company sells certain trade receivables under factoring arrangements to other financial institutions around the world. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the cash received from these arrangements for the years then ended was approximately $215.4 million and $199.9 million, respectively.
Our finance joint ventures in Europe, Brazil and Australia also provide wholesale financing directly to our dealers. The receivables associated with these arrangements also are without recourse to us. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, these finance joint ventures had approximately $82.1 million and $85.2 million, respectively, of outstanding accounts receivable associated with these arrangements. These arrangements are accounted for as off-balance sheet transactions.
In order to efficiently manage our liquidity, we generally pay vendors in accordance with negotiated terms. To enable vendors to obtain payment in advance of our payment due dates to them, we have established programs in certain markets with financial institutions under which the vendors have the option to be paid by the financial institutions earlier than the payment due dates. When vendors receive early payments they receive discounted amounts and we then pay the financial institutions the face amounts of the invoices on the payment due dates. We do not reimburse vendors for any costs they incur for participation in the programs. Amounts owed to the financial institutions are presented as “Accounts payable” in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Should we not be able to negotiate extended payment terms with our vendors, or should financial institutions no longer be willing to participate in early payment programs with us, we would expect to have sufficient liquidity to timely pay our vendors without any material impact on us or our financial position.
Our debt to capitalization ratio, which is total indebtedness divided by the sum of total indebtedness and stockholders’ equity, was 29.7% at December 31, 2021 compared to 34.8% at December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
Cash flows provided by operating activities were approximately $660.2 million during 2021 compared to approximately $896.5 million during 2020. The decrease during 2021 was primarily due to an increase in inventories, partially offset by increases in net income and accounts payable as compared to 2020. Supply chain disruptions resulted in higher raw material and work-in-process inventory levels during 2021 as compared to the prior year. Free cash flow, which is defined as “Net cash provided by operating activities” less “Purchases of property, plant and equipment”, was approximately $390.4 million during 2021, as compared to approximately $626.6 million during 2020.
Our working capital requirements are seasonal, with investments in working capital typically building in the first half of the year and then reducing in the second half of the year. We had $1,559.5 million in working capital at December 31, 2021, as compared with $1,005.6 million at December 31, 2020. Accounts receivable and inventories, combined, at December 31, 2021 were approximately $754.8 million higher than at December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher net sales and production levels, as well as the significant impact of supply chain constraints during 2021.
Share Repurchase Program
In August and November 2021, we entered into two accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) agreements with financial institutions to repurchase an aggregate of $135.0 million of shares of our common stock. We received approximately 952,204 shares in these transactions as of December 31, 2021. On January 19, 2022, we received additional 113,824 shares upon final settlement of our November 2021 ASR agreement. In February and March 2020, we entered into two ASR agreements with financial institutions to repurchase an aggregate of $55.0 million of shares of our common stock. We received approximately 970,141 shares in these transactions as of December 31, 2020. All shares received under the ASR agreements were retired upon receipt, and the excess of the purchase price over par value per share was recorded to a combination of “Additional paid-in capital” and “Retained earnings” within the our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contractual Obligations and Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations:
Indebtedness - As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $44.4 million of payments due during the year ended December 31, 2022, related to indebtedness and certain short-term obligations, in addition to approximately $15.1 million of interest payments associated with indebtedness we expect to pay during 2022. Interest payments generally do not vary materially year to year. Indebtedness amounts reflect the principal amount of our senior term loan, senior notes, credit facility and certain short-term borrowings, gross of any debt issuance costs. Refer to Note 7 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our indebtedness.
Capital and operating lease obligations - As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $4.0 million and $45.7 million of payments due during the year ended December 31, 2022, related to capital and operating lease obligations, respectively. Refer to Note 17 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our lease obligations.
Unconditional purchase obligations - As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $131.1 million of outstanding purchase obligations payable during the year ended December 31, 2022. These obligations generally do not vary materially year to year.
Other short-term and long-term obligations - As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $40.1 million of income tax liabilities related to uncertain income tax provisions connected with ongoing income tax audits in various jurisdictions due during the year ended December 31, 2022. Additionally, we had approximately $37.8 million of estimated future minimum contribution requirements under our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit pension and postretirement plans due during the year ended December 31, 2022. Refer to Notes 6 and 8 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our uncertain tax positions and pension and postretirement plans, respectively. These obligations comprise a majority of our other short-term and long-term obligations.
Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Guarantees
We maintain a remarketing agreement with our finance joint venture in the United States, whereby we are obligated to repurchase up to $6.0 million of repossessed equipment each calendar year. We believe any losses that might be incurred on the resale of this equipment will not materially impact our financial position or results of operations, due to the fact that the repurchase obligations would be equivalent to the fair value of the underlying equipment.
At December 31, 2021, we guaranteed indebtedness owed to third parties of approximately $25.2 million, primarily related to dealer and end-user financing of equipment. Such guarantees generally obligate us to repay outstanding finance obligations owed to financial institutions if dealers or end users default on such loans through 2027. Losses under such guarantees historically have been insignificant. In addition, we generally would expect to be able to recover a significant portion of the amounts paid under such guarantees from the sale of the underlying financed farm equipment, as the fair value of such equipment is expected to offset a substantial portion of the amounts paid. We also guarantee indebtedness owed to certain of our finance joint ventures if dealers or end users default on loans. Losses under such guarantees historically have been insignificant and the guarantees are not material. We believe the credit risk associated with all of these guarantees is not material to our financial position or results of operations.
In addition, at December 31, 2021, we had accrued approximately $23.3 million of outstanding guarantees of residual values that may be owed to our finance joint ventures in the United States and Canada due upon expiration of certain eligible operating leases between the finance joint ventures and end users. The maximum potential amount of future payments under the guarantee is approximately $160.7 million.
Other
At December 31, 2021, we had outstanding designated and non-designated foreign exchange contracts with a gross notional amount of approximately $3,681.9 million. The outstanding contracts as of December 31, 2021 range in maturity through October 2022. We also had outstanding designated steel commodity contracts with a gross notional amount of approximately $31.9 million that range in maturity through July 2022. See Note 11 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
As discussed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources,” we sell a majority of our wholesale accounts receivable in North America, Europe and Brazil to our U.S., Canadian, European and Brazilian finance joint ventures. We also sell certain accounts receivable under factoring arrangements to financial institutions around the world. We have determined that these facilities should be accounted for as off-balance sheet transactions.
Contingencies
We are party to various claims and lawsuits arising in the normal course of business. We closely monitor these claims and lawsuits and frequently consult with our legal counsel to determine whether they may, when resolved, have a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operations and accrue and/or disclose loss contingencies as appropriate. See Note 12 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Related Parties
In the ordinary course of business, we engage in transactions with related parties. See Note 14 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding related party transactions and their impact to our consolidated results of operations and financial position.
Foreign Currency Risk Management
We have significant manufacturing locations in the United States, France, Germany, Finland, Italy, China and Brazil, and we purchase a portion of our tractors, combines and components from third-party foreign suppliers, primarily in various European countries and in Japan. We also sell products in approximately 140 countries throughout the world. The majority of our net sales outside the United States are denominated in the currency of the customer location, with the exception of sales in Middle East, Africa, Asia and parts of South America, where net sales are primarily denominated in British pounds, Euros or the United States dollar.
We manage our transactional foreign currency exposure by hedging foreign currency cash flow forecasts and commitments arising from the anticipated settlement of receivables and payables and from future purchases and sales. Where naturally offsetting currency positions do not occur, we hedge certain, but not all, of our exposures through the use of foreign currency contracts. Our translation exposure resulting from translating the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries into United States dollars may be partially hedged from time to time. When practical, this translation impact is reduced by financing local operations with local borrowings. Our hedging policy prohibits use of foreign currency contracts for speculative trading purposes.
The total notional value of our foreign currency instruments was $3,681.9 million and $3,722.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, inclusive of both those instruments that are designated and qualified for hedge accounting and non-designated derivative instruments. We enter into cash flow hedges to minimize the variability in cash flows of assets or liabilities or forecasted transactions caused by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, and we enter into foreign currency contracts to economically hedge receivables and payables on our balance sheets that are denominated in foreign currencies other than the functional currency. In addition, we use derivative and non-derivative instruments to hedge a portion of our net investment in foreign operations against adverse movements in exchange rates. See Note 11 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about our hedging transactions and derivative instruments.
Assuming a 10% change relative to the currency of the hedge contracts, the fair value of the foreign currency instruments could be negatively impacted by approximately $52.6 million as of December 31, 2021. Due to the fact that these instruments are primarily entered into for hedging purposes, the gains or losses on the contracts would largely be offset by losses and gains on the underlying firm commitment or forecasted transaction.
Interest Rate Risk
Our interest expense is, in part, sensitive to the general level of interest rates. We manage our exposure to interest rate risk through our mix of floating rate and fixed rate debt. From time to time, we enter into interest rate swap agreements to manage our exposure to interest rate fluctuations. See Notes 7 and 11 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Based on our floating rate debt and our accounts receivable sales facilities outstanding at December 31, 2021, a 10% increase in interest rates, would have increased, collectively, “Interest expense, net” and “Other expense, net” for the year ended December 31, 2021 by approximately $2.1 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements and their impact to our consolidated results of operations and financial position.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. In the preparation of these financial statements, we make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The significant accounting policies followed in the preparation of the financial statements are detailed in Note 1 of our Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We believe that our application of the policies discussed below involves significant levels of judgment, estimates and complexity.
Due to the levels of judgment, complexity and period of time over which many of these items are resolved, actual results could differ from those estimated at the time of preparation of the financial statements. Adjustments to these estimates would impact our financial position and future results of operations.
Discount and Sales Incentive Allowances
We provide various volume bonus and sales incentive programs with respect to our products. These sales incentive programs include reductions in invoice prices, reductions in retail financing rates, dealer commissions and dealer incentive allowances. In most cases, incentive programs are established and communicated to our dealers on a quarterly basis. The incentives are paid either at the time of the cash settlement of the receivable (which is generally at the time of retail sale), at the time of retail financing, at the time of warranty registration, or at a subsequent time based on dealer purchase volumes. The incentive programs are product line specific and generally do not vary by dealer. The cost of sales incentives associated with dealer commissions and dealer incentive allowances is estimated based upon the terms of the programs and historical experience, is based on a percentage of the sales price, and estimates for sales incentives are made and recorded at the time of sale for expected incentive programs using the expected value method. These estimates are reassessed each reporting period and are revised in the event of subsequent modifications to incentive programs, as they are communicated to dealers. The related provisions and accruals are made on a product or product-line basis and are monitored for adequacy and revised at least quarterly in the event of subsequent modifications to the programs. Interest rate subsidy payments, which are a reduction in retail financing rates, are recorded in the same manner as dealer commissions and dealer incentive allowances. Volume discounts are estimated and recognized based on historical experience, and related reserves are monitored and adjusted based on actual dealer purchase volumes and the dealers’ progress towards achieving specified cumulative target levels. Estimates of these incentives are based on the terms of the programs and historical experience. All incentive programs are recorded and presented as a reduction of revenue, due to the fact that we do not receive a distinct good or service in exchange for the consideration provided. In the United States and Canada, reserves for incentive programs related to accounts receivable not sold to our U.S. and Canadian finance joint ventures are recorded as “accounts receivable allowances” within our Consolidated Balance Sheets due to the fact that the incentives are paid through a reduction of future cash settlement of the receivable. Globally, reserves for incentive programs that will be paid in cash or credit memos, as is the case with most of our volume discount programs, as well as sales incentives associated with accounts receivable sold to our finance joint ventures, are recorded within “Accrued expenses” within our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
At December 31, 2021, we had recorded an allowance for discounts and sales incentives of approximately $610.3 million that will be paid either through a reduction of future cash settlements of receivables and through credit memos to our dealers or through reductions in retail financing rates paid to our finance joint ventures. If we were to allow an additional 1% of sales incentives and discounts at the time of retail sale for those sales subject to such discount programs, our reserve would increase by approximately $22.9 million as of December 31, 2021. Conversely, if we were to decrease our sales incentives and discounts by 1% at the time of retail sale, our reserve would decrease by approximately $22.9 million as of December 31, 2021.
Deferred Income Taxes and Uncertain Income Tax Positions
We recorded an income tax provision of $108.4 million in 2021 compared to $187.7 million in 2020 and $180.8 million in 2019. Our tax provision and effective tax rate are impacted by the differing tax rates of the various tax jurisdictions in which we operate, permanent differences for items treated differently for financial accounting and income tax purposes, losses in jurisdictions where no income tax benefit is recorded and provisions for unrecognized income tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions.
As of December 31, 2021, our income tax provision included the benefit of reversals of approximately $67.8 million and $55.6 million related to valuation allowances previously established against the Company’s net deferred tax assets in the United States and Brazil, respectively. Improvements in income in the United States and Brazil during 2020 and 2021, along
with updated future projected income levels, supported the reversal of both of the valuation allowances. In addition, we maintain a valuation allowance to reserve a portion of our net deferred tax assets in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets may not be realized. We assessed the likelihood that our deferred tax assets should be recovered from estimated future taxable income and the current economic climate, as well as available tax planning strategies and determined that the adjustment to the valuation allowance was appropriate. We believe it is more likely than not that we should be able to realize our remaining net deferred tax assets, net of the valuation allowance, in future years.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had gross deferred tax assets of $291.8 million and $360.9 million, respectively, including $69.5 million and $62.9 million, respectively, related to net operating loss carryforwards. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had total valuation allowances as an offset to our gross deferred tax assets of $47.4 million and $181.0 million, respectively. These valuation allowances are held against deferred tax assets (including net operating loss carryforwards) in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions. Realization of the remaining deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 depends on generating sufficient taxable income in future periods, net of reversing deferred tax liabilities. We believe it is more likely than not that the remaining net deferred tax assets should be able to be realized.
We recognize income tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only when there is a more than 50% likelihood that the tax positions will be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the positions. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately $246.4 million and $227.9 million, respectively, of gross unrecognized tax benefits, all of which would impact our effective tax rate if recognized. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately $40.1 million and $57.1 million, respectively, of current accrued taxes related to uncertain income tax positions connected with ongoing tax audits in various jurisdictions that we expect to settle or pay in the next 12 months. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain income tax positions in income tax expense. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits of approximately $32.7 million and $39.4 million, respectively. See Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our uncertain income tax positions.
Pensions
We sponsor defined benefit pension plans covering certain employees, principally in the United Kingdom, the United States, Germany, Switzerland, Finland, France, Norway and Argentina. Our primary plans cover certain employees in the United States and the United Kingdom.
In the United States, we sponsor a funded, qualified defined benefit pension plan for our salaried employees, as well as a separate funded qualified defined benefit pension plan for our hourly employees. Both plans are closed to new entrants and frozen, and we fund at least the minimum contributions required under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 and the Internal Revenue Code to both plans. In addition, we maintain an unfunded, nonqualified defined benefit pension plan for certain senior executives, which is our Executive Nonqualified Pension Plan (“ENPP”). The ENPP also is closed to new entrants, and, during 2021, we amended the ENPP to freeze future salary benefit accruals as of December 31, 2024 and to eliminate a lifetime annuity feature for participants reaching age 65 subsequent to December 31, 2022.
In the United Kingdom, we sponsor a funded defined benefit pension plan that provides an annuity benefit based on participants’ final average earnings and service. Participation in this plan is limited to certain older, longer service employees and existing retirees. This plan is closed to new participants.
See Note 8 of our Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information regarding costs and assumptions for employee retirement benefits.
Nature of Estimates Required. The measurement date for all of our benefit plans is December 31. The measurement of our pension obligations, costs and liabilities is dependent on a variety of assumptions provided by management and used by our actuaries. These assumptions include estimates of the present value of projected future pension payments to all plan participants, taking into consideration the likelihood of potential future events such as salary increases and demographic experience. These assumptions may have an effect on the amount and timing of future contributions.
Assumptions and Approach Used. The assumptions used in developing the required estimates include, but are not limited to, the following key factors:
• Discount rates • Inflation
• Salary growth • Expected return on plan assets
• Retirement rates and ages • Mortality rates
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we used a globally consistent methodology to set the discount rate in the countries where our largest benefit obligations exist. In the United States, the United Kingdom and the Euro Zone, we constructed a hypothetical bond portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds and then applied the cash flows of our benefit plans to those bond yields to derive a discount rate. The bond portfolio and plan-specific cash flows vary by country, but the methodology in which the portfolio is constructed is consistent. In the United States, the bond portfolio is large enough to result in taking a “settlement approach” to derive the discount rate, in which high-quality corporate bonds are assumed to be purchased and the resulting coupon payments and maturities are used to satisfy our U.S. pension plans’ projected benefit payments. In the United Kingdom and the Euro Zone, the discount rate is derived using a “yield curve approach,” in which an individual spot rate, or zero coupon bond yield, for each future annual period is developed to discount each future benefit payment and, thereby, determine the present value of all future payments. We use a spot yield curve to determine the discount rate applicable in the United Kingdom to measure the U.K. pension plan’s service cost and interest cost. Under the settlement and yield curve approaches, the discount rate is set to equal the single discount rate that produces the same present value of all future payments.
The other key assumptions and methods were set as follows:
•Our inflation assumption is based on an evaluation of external market indicators.
•The salary growth assumptions reflect our long-term actual experience, the near-term outlook and assumed inflation.
•The expected return on plan asset assumptions reflects asset allocations, investment strategy, historical experience and the views of investment managers, and reflects a projection of the expected arithmetic returns over ten years.
•Determination of retirement rates and ages as well as termination rates, based on actual plan experience, actuarial standards of practice and the manner in which our defined benefit plans are being administered.
•The mortality rates for the U.K. defined benefit pension plan was updated during 2021 to reflect the latest expected improvements in the life expectancy of the plan participants. The mortality rates for the U.S. defined benefit pension plans were also updated during 2021 to reflect the Society of Actuaries’ most recent findings on the topic of mortality.
•The fair value of assets used to determine the expected return on assets does not reflect any delayed recognition of asset gains and losses.
The effects of actual results differing from our assumptions are accumulated and amortized over future periods and, therefore, generally affect our recognized expense in such periods.
Our U.S. and U.K. defined benefit pension plans, including our ENPP, comprised approximately 85% of our consolidated projected benefit obligation as of December 31, 2021. The effects of a 25 basis point change in certain actuarial assumptions on the 2022 net annual pension and ENPP costs and related benefit obligations as of December 31, 2021 would be as follows:
Unrecognized actuarial net losses related to our defined benefit pension plans and ENPP were $291.7 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to $385.1 million as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in unrecognized net actuarial losses between years primarily resulted from higher discount rates at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020, as well as a result of the amendment to our ENPP as previously discussed. The unrecognized net actuarial losses will be impacted in future periods by actual asset returns, discount rate changes, currency exchange rate fluctuations, actual demographic experience and certain other factors. For some of our defined benefit pension plans, these losses, to the extent they exceed 10% of the greater of the plan’s liabilities or the fair value of assets (“the gain/loss corridor”), will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the periods discussed as follows. For our U.S. salaried, U.S. hourly and U.K. defined benefit pension plans, the population covered is predominantly inactive participants, and losses related to those plans, to the extent they exceed the gain/loss corridor, will be amortized over the average remaining lives of those participants while covered by the respective plan. For our ENPP, the population is predominantly active participants, and losses related to the plan will be amortized over the average future working lifetime of the active participants expected to receive benefits. As of December 31, 2021, the average amortization periods were as follows:
Unrecognized prior service cost related to our defined benefit pension plans was $7.1 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to $20.1 million as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in the unrecognized prior service cost between years is due primarily to the amortization of unrecognized prior service cost related to prior plan amendments, as well as the amendment in 2021 previously discussed related to our ENPP. The 2021 amendment resulted in both a curtailment gain and a net prior service credit.
As of December 31, 2021, our unfunded or underfunded obligations related to our defined benefit pension plans and ENPP were approximately $89.2 million, primarily related to our defined benefit pension plans in Europe and the United States. In 2021, we contributed approximately $36.0 million towards those obligations, and we expect to fund approximately $36.3 million in 2022. Future funding is dependent upon compliance with local laws and regulations and changes to those laws and regulations in the future, as well as the generation of operating cash flows in the future. We currently have an agreement in place with the trustees of the U.K. defined benefit plan that obligates us to fund approximately £15.6 million per year (or approximately $21.1 million) towards that obligation through December 2022. The funding arrangement is based upon the current funded status and could change in the future as discount rates, local laws and regulations, and other factors change.
See Note 8 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding the investment strategy and concentration of risk.
Goodwill, Other Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets
We test goodwill for impairment, at the reporting unit level, annually and when events or circumstances indicate that fair value of a reporting unit may be below its carrying value. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, for example, a component. We combine and aggregate two or more components of an operating segment as a single reporting unit if the components have similar economic characteristics. Our reportable segments are not our reporting units.
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually as of October 1 using a qualitative assessment or a quantitative one-step assessment. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine the fair value of our reporting units more likely than not exceeds their carrying value of net assets, no further evaluation is necessary. For reporting units where we perform a one-step quantitative assessment, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its respective carrying value of net assets, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value of net assets, the goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying value of net assets is higher than the fair value of the reporting unit, an impairment charge is recorded in the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value.
We utilize a combination of valuation techniques, including an income approach, whereby the present value of future expected operating net cash flows are calculated using a discount rate; and a guideline public company method, whereby EBITDA and revenue multiples are derived from the market prices of stocks of companies that are engaged in the same or similar lines of business and that are actively traded on a free and open market. Assumptions included in these approaches can positively and negatively impact the results of our assessments such as interest rates, sales and margin growth rates, tax rates, cost structures, market share, pricing, capital expenditures, working capital levels and the use of control premiums. For all
reporting units, a 10 percent decrease in the estimated fair value would have had no effect on the carrying value of goodwill as of our annual measurement date on October 1, 2021.
We review our long-lived assets, which include intangible assets subject to amortization, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The evaluation for recoverability is performed at a level where independent cash flows may be attributed to either an asset or asset group. If we determine that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group is not recoverable based on the expected undiscounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group, an impairment loss is recorded equal to the excess of the carrying amounts over the estimated fair value of the long-lived assets. Estimates of future cash flows are based on many factors, including current operating results, expected market trends and competitive influences. We also evaluate the amortization periods assigned to our intangible assets to determine whether events or changes in circumstances warrant revised estimates of useful lives. Assets to be disposed of by sale are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value, less estimated costs to sell.
We make various assumptions, including assumptions regarding future cash flows, market multiples, growth rates and discount rates, in our assessments of the impairment of goodwill, other indefinite-lived intangible assets and long-lived assets. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on the current and long-term business plans of the reporting unit or related to the long-lived assets. Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the reporting unit or long-lived assets. These assumptions require significant judgments on our part, and the conclusions that we reach could vary significantly based upon these judgments.
The results of our goodwill and long-lived assets impairment analyses conducted as of October 1, 2021 indicated that no indicators of impairment existed and no reduction in the carrying amount of goodwill and long-lived assets was required.
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted the global economy as a whole. Based on macroeconomic conditions throughout 2020, we assessed our goodwill and other intangible assets for indications of impairment as of March 31, 2020, June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020. As of June 30, 2020, we concluded there were indicators of impairment during the three months ended June 30, 2020 related to one of our smaller reporting units, which was a 50%-owned tillage and seeding equipment joint venture. We consolidated the reporting unit as we were determined to be the primary beneficiary of the joint venture. Deteriorating market conditions for the products the joint venture sold were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in the second quarter of 2020, greater than initially expected. As a result, updated strategic reviews with revised forecasts indicated an impairment of the entire goodwill balance of this reporting unit was necessary as of June 30, 2020. During the three months ended June 30, 2020, an impairment charge of approximately $20.0 million was recorded as “Goodwill impairment charge” within our Consolidated Statements of Operations, with an offsetting benefit of approximately $10.0 million included within “Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests.” The joint venture was sold during 2021.
The results of our goodwill and long-lived assets impairment analyses conducted as of October 1, 2020 indicated that no other indicators of impairment existed and no reduction in the carrying amount of goodwill and long-lived assets was required related to our other reporting units.
Our goodwill impairment analysis conducted as of October 1, 2019 indicated that the carrying value of the net assets of our grain storage and protein production systems business in Europe/Middle East was in excess of the fair value of the reporting unit, and therefore, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of approximately $173.6 million within “Impairment charges” in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. This impairment charge was a substantial portion of the reporting unit’s goodwill balance.
During the three months ended December 31, 2019, we also recorded a non-cash impairment charge of approximately $3.0 million within “Impairment charges” in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. The impairment charge related to certain long-lived intangible assets associated with our grain storage and protein production systems operations within North America due to the discontinuation of a certain brand name and related products and customers.
Numerous facts and circumstances are considered when evaluating the carrying amount of our goodwill. The fair value of a reporting unit is impacted by the reporting unit’s expected financial performance, which is dependent upon the agricultural industry and other factors that could adversely affect the agricultural industry, including but not limited to, declines in the general economy, increases in farm input costs, weather conditions, lower commodity and protein prices and changes in the availability of credit. The estimated fair value of the individual reporting units is assessed for reasonableness by reviewing a variety of indicators evaluated over a reasonable period of time.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1,280.8 million of goodwill. While our annual impairment testing in 2021 supported the carrying amount of this goodwill, we may be required to re-evaluate the carrying amount in future periods,
thus utilizing different assumptions that reflect the then current market conditions and expectations, and, therefore, we could conclude that an impairment has occurred.
Recoverable Indirect Taxes
Our Brazilian operations incur value added taxes (“VAT”) on certain purchases of raw materials, components and services. These taxes are accumulated as tax credits and create assets that are reduced by the VAT collected from our sales in the Brazilian market. We regularly assesses the recoverability of these tax credits, and establishes reserves when necessary against them, through analyses that include, amongst others, the history of realization, the transfer of tax credits to third parties as authorized by the government, anticipated changes in the supply chain and the future expectation of tax debits from our ongoing operations. We believe that these tax credits, net of established reserves are realizable. Our assessment of realization of these tax assets involves significant judgments on our part, and the conclusions that we reach could vary significantly based upon these judgments. We recorded approximately $114.4 million and $91.2 million, respectively, of VAT tax credits, net of reserves, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.