Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide information necessary to understand our audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and highlight certain other information which, in the opinion of management, will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. These historical financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risks described throughout this filing, particularly in “Risk Factors.”
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) permits an “emerging growth company” such as AgeX to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. However, we elected to comply with newly adopted or revised accounting standards when they become applicable to public companies because our financial statements were consolidated with those of Lineage, which is not an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act and is therefore not permitted to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that become applicable to public companies. This election under the JOBS Act to not delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards is irrevocable.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company focused on the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics targeting human aging and degenerative diseases. Our initial discovery and preclinical programs focus on utilizing brown adipose tissue in targeting diabetes, obesity, and heart disease; and induced tissue regeneration in utilizing the human body’s own abilities to scarlessly regenerate tissues damaged from age or trauma. We may also pursue other early-stage pre-clinical programs.
Since inception, our operations have focused on building our technology platform, identifying potential product candidates, establishing and protecting our intellectual property and raising capital. Prior to our disposition of LifeMap Sciences during March 2021, our revenues were principally derived from subscription and advertising revenue from LifeMap Sciences’ online databases based upon applicable subscription or advertising periods. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and we will need to obtain additional financing in order to continue our operations, including our research and development programs. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for a discussion of our available capital resources and our need for financing. Our operating losses from continuing operations were $8.0 million and $10.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $105.7 million. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows for the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. We have identified below our critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe require the greatest amount of judgment. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates that are subject to significant judgment including those related to going concern assessment of consolidated financial statements, allocations and adjustments necessary for carve-out basis of presentation, including the separate return method for income taxes, useful lives associated with long-lived assets, including evaluation of asset impairment, allowances for uncollectible accounts receivables, loss contingencies, deferred income taxes and tax reserves, including valuation allowances related to deferred income taxes, and assumptions used to value stock-based awards, or other equity instruments. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates compared to historical experience and trends, which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. To the extent that there are material differences between our estimates and our actual results, our future consolidated financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe the assumptions and estimates associated with the following have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Going concern assessment. We assess going concern uncertainty for our consolidated financial statements to determine if we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand and working capital to operate for a period of at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by FASB’s ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to us, we consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, and estimates, and we make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, among other factors, and our ability to delay or curtail those expenditures or programs within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU No. 2014-15, if necessary.
Principles of consolidation. AgeX’s consolidated financial statements include the accounts of its subsidiaries and certain research and development departments. AgeX consolidated its direct and indirect wholly-owned or majority-owned subsidiaries because AgeX has the ability to control their operating and financial decisions and policies through its ownership, and the noncontrolling interest is reflected as a separate element of stockholders’ deficit on AgeX’s consolidated balance sheets.
AgeX’s consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020, as reported, includes LifeMap Sciences’ consolidated assets and liabilities, after intercompany eliminations. However, LifeMap Sciences’ consolidated assets and liabilities are not included in AgeX’s consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2021, due to the deconsolidation of LifeMap Sciences on March 15, 2021. LifeMap Sciences’ consolidated financial statements and consolidated results of operations include its wholly-owned and consolidated subsidiary LifeMap Sciences, Ltd.
AgeX’s consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 include LifeMap Sciences’ consolidated results for the period through March 15, 2021 rather than the day immediately preceding the deconsolidation due to the conversion of $1,761,296 of LifeMap Sciences’ indebtedness to AgeX into shares of LifeMap Sciences common stock on March 15, 2021 followed by the completion of the cash-out merger on the same day. For the year ended December 31, 2020, AgeX’s consolidated results include LifeMap Sciences’ consolidated results for the full period presented.
Long-lived intangible assets. Long-lived intangible assets, consisting primarily of acquired patents, acquired in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) with alternative future uses, patent applications, and licenses to use certain patents, are stated at acquired cost, less accumulated amortization. Amortization expense is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, generally over 10 years.
Impairment of long-lived assets. Long-lived assets, including long-lived intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. If an impairment indicator is present, we evaluate recoverability by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the assets. If the assets are impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets. Through December 31, 2021, there have been no such impairment losses.
Accounting for warrants. We determine the accounting classification of warrants we issue, as either liability or equity, by first assessing whether the warrants meet liability classification in accordance with ASC 480-10, Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Characteristics of both Liabilities and Equity, then in accordance with ASC 815-40, Accounting for Derivative Financial Instruments Indexed to, and Potentially Settled in, a Company’s Own Stock. Under ASC 480, warrants are considered liability classified if the warrants are mandatorily redeemable, obligate us to settle the warrants or the underlying shares by paying cash or other assets, and warrants that must or may require settlement by issuing a variable number of shares. If warrants do not meet the liability classification under ASC 480-10, we assess the requirements under ASC 815-40, which states that contracts that require or may require the issuer to settle the contract for cash are liabilities recorded at fair value, irrespective of the likelihood of the transaction occurring that triggers the net cash settlement feature. If the warrants do not require liability classification under ASC 815-40, in order to conclude equity classification, we also assess whether the warrants are indexed to our common stock and whether the warrants are classified as equity under ASC 815-40 or other U.S. GAAP. After all such assessments, we conclude whether the warrants are classified as liability or equity. Liability classified warrants require fair value accounting at issuance and subsequent to initial issuance with all changes in fair value after the issuance date recorded in the statements of operations. Equity classified warrants only require fair value accounting at issuance with no changes recognized subsequent to the issuance date. We do not have any liability classified warrants as of any period presented. See Notes 5 and 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information regarding warrants.
Stock-based compensation. We recognize compensation expense related to employee stock option grants and other equity based awards, if any, in accordance with FASB ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”).
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model for estimating the fair value of options granted under our 2017 Equity Incentive Plan (the “Incentive Plan”). The fair value of each restricted stock or restricted stock unit grant, if any, is determined based on the value of the common stock granted or sold. We have elected to treat stock-based awards with time-based service conditions as a single award and recognize stock-based compensation on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
Compensation expense for non-employee stock-based awards is recognized in accordance with ASC 718. Stock option awards issued to non-employees, principally consultants or outside contractors, as applicable, are accounted for at fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Management believes that the fair value of the stock options can more reliably be measured than the fair value of services received. We record compensation expense based on the then-current fair values of the stock options at the grant date in accordance with ASU 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, which simplifies the accounting for non-employee share-based payment transactions. We adopted ASU 2018-07 on January 1, 2019. As we had one stock option grant issued to a nonemployee as of the adoption date and one additional stock option grant during 2019 to the same nonemployee, the application of the new standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Compensation expense for non-employee grants is recorded on a straight-line basis in the consolidated statements of operations.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires us to make certain assumptions including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term, the expected volatility, the risk-free interest rate and the dividend yield.
The fair value of the shares of common stock underlying the stock options has historically been determined by our Board of Directors. Because there was no public market for our common stock prior to November 29, 2018, our Board of Directors determined the fair value of the common stock at the time of the grant of options prior to that date by considering a number of objective and subjective factors including contemporaneous sales of our common stock to investors, valuation of comparable companies, operating and financial performance and general and industry-specific economic outlook, amongst other factors. The fair value was determined in accordance with applicable elements of the practice aid issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants titled Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Since our common stock began publicly trading on the NYSE American, the fair value of our common stock underlying stock options has been valued based on prevailing market prices.
The expected term of employee stock options represents the weighted-average period that the stock options are expected to remain outstanding. We estimate the expected term of options granted based upon the “simplified method” provided under Staff Accounting Bulletin, Topic 14, or SAB Topic 14.
Because our common stock had no publicly traded history prior to November 29, 2018, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we estimated the expected volatility using our own stock price volatility to the extent applicable or a combination of our stock price volatility and the stock price volatility of peer companies, for a period equal to the expected term of the options. The peer companies used include selected public companies within the biotechnology industry with comparable characteristics to AgeX, including similarity in size, lines of business, market capitalization, revenue and financial leverage.
The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates on the United States government securities appropriate for the expected term of our stock options.
The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of dividend payouts. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock, and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
All excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies from stock-based compensation awards accounted for under ASC 718 are recognized as an income tax benefit or expense, respectively, in the consolidated statements of operations. An excess income tax benefit arises when the tax deduction of a share-based award for income tax purposes exceeds the compensation cost recognized for financial reporting purposes, and a tax deficiency arises when the compensation cost exceeds the tax deduction.
Stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consists of stock-based compensation under the Incentive Plan, and stock-based compensation of AgeX’s subsidiaries that have their own stock option plans.
Our consolidated subsidiary ReCyte Therapeutics and our former subsidiary LifeMap Sciences had their own share-based compensation plans. For share-based compensation awards granted by those privately-held consolidated subsidiaries under their respective equity plans, we determined the fair value of the options granted under those plans using similar methodologies and assumptions we used for our stock options discussed above. None of our consolidated subsidiaries have granted stock options or other equity awards for the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Although the fair value of stock options is determined in accordance with FASB guidance, changes in the assumptions and allocations can materially affect the estimated value and therefore the amount of compensation expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements.
Income taxes. For Federal and California purposes, AgeX’s activity through August 30, 2018 was included in Lineage’s federal consolidated and California combined tax returns. As of December 31, 2021, the deferred tax assets and liabilities presented in Note 8 included elsewhere in this Report, including net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credits, represent the tax attributes of AgeX and its subsidiaries. However, the net operating losses and research and development credits generated before August 18, 2017 with respect to Lineage research departments that were transferred to us on that date will remain as tax attributes of Lineage.
In general, net operating losses and other tax credit carryforwards generated by legal entities in a consolidated federal tax group or a combined state tax group, collectively “the tax group”, are available to other members of the tax group depending on the nature of the transaction that a member may enter into while still in the tax group. However, under the Tax Matters Agreement between Lineage and AgeX entered into on August 17, 2017, any use of a member’s net operating loss and other tax credit carryforwards by the other member is subject to reimbursement by the benefiting member for the actual tax benefit realized. Since the August 30, 2018 deconsolidation of AgeX and to date, neither Lineage nor AgeX has used the tax attributes of the other.
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, which prescribes the use of the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax asset or liability account balances are calculated at the balance sheet date using current tax laws and enacted rates in effect. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our judgments, estimates and projections regarding future taxable income may change over time due to changes, among other factors, in market conditions, changes in tax laws, and tax planning strategies. If our assumptions and consequently our estimates change in the future, the valuation allowance may be increased or decreased, which may have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
The guidance also prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not sustainable upon examination by taxing authorities. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. No unrecognized tax benefits have been recorded and no amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. We do not expect that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will materially change over the next twelve months. We are currently unaware of any tax issues under review.
On December 22, 2017, the United States enacted major federal tax reform legislation, Public Law No. 115-97, commonly referred to as the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“2017 Tax Act”), which enacted a broad range of changes to the Internal Revenue Code. Changes to taxes on corporations impacted by the 2017 Tax Act include, but not limited to, lowering the U.S. federal tax rates to a 21 percent flat tax rate, eliminating the corporate alternative minimum tax (“AMT”), imposing additional limitations on the deductibility of interest and net operating losses, allowing any net operating loss (“NOLs”) generated in tax years ending after December 31, 2017 to be carried forward indefinitely and generally repealing carrybacks, reducing the maximum deduction for NOL carryforwards arising in tax years beginning after 2017 to a percentage of the taxpayer’s taxable income, and allowing for additional expensing of certain capital expenditures. The 2017 Tax Act also puts into effect a number of changes impacting operations outside of the United States including, but not limited to, the imposition of a one-time tax “deemed repatriation” on accumulated offshore earnings not previously subject to U.S. tax, and shifts the U.S taxation of multinational corporations from a worldwide system of taxation to a territorial system. ASC 740 requires the effects of changes in tax rates and laws on deferred tax balances (including the effects of the one-time transition tax) to be recognized in the period in which the legislation is enacted. Future guidance from the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities may affect certain aspects of the 2017 Tax Act, for example, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (“CAA”) modified certain provisions of the 2017 Tax Act. In addition, it is uncertain if and to what extent various states will conform to the 2017 Tax Act, the CARES Act or the CAA.
Revenue recognition. During the first quarter of 2018, we adopted FASB ASU 2014-09, Revenues from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which created a single, principle-based revenue recognition model that supersedes and replaces nearly all existing U.S. GAAP revenue recognition guidance. We adopted ASU 2014-09 using the modified retrospective transition method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of the adoption date. Results for reporting periods beginning on January 1, 2018 and thereafter are presented under Topic 606. Our largest source of revenue was subscription and advertising revenues generated by LifeMap Sciences prior to the LifeMap Deconsolidation.
We recognize revenue in a manner that depicts the transfer of control of a product or a service to a customer and reflects the amount of the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for such product or service. In doing so, we follow a five-step approach: (i) identify the contract with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the customer obtains control of the product or service. We consider the terms of a contract and all relevant facts and circumstances when applying the revenue recognition standard. We apply the revenue recognition standard, including the use of any practical expedients, consistently to contracts with similar characteristics and in similar circumstances.
In the applicable paragraphs below, we have summarized our revenue recognition policies for various revenue sources in accordance with Topic 606.
Subscription and advertisement revenues. LifeMap Sciences sold subscription-based products, including research databases and software tools, for biomedical, gene, and disease research. LifeMap Sciences sold these subscriptions primarily through the internet to biotech and pharmaceutical companies worldwide. LifeMap Sciences’ principal subscription product was the GeneCards® Suite, which includes the GeneCards® human gene database, and the MalaCards™ human disease database.
LifeMap Sciences’ performance obligations for subscriptions included a license of intellectual property related to its genetic information packages and premium genetic information tools. These licenses were deemed functional licenses that provide customers with a “right to access” to LifeMap Sciences’ intellectual property during the subscription period and, accordingly, revenue was recognized over a period of time, which was generally the subscription period. Payments were typically received at the beginning of a subscription period and revenue was recognized according to the type of subscription sold. For subscription contracts in which the subscription term commenced before a payment was due, LifeMap Sciences recorded an account receivable because the subscription was earned over time and billed the customer according to the contract terms. LifeMap Sciences deferred subscription revenues primarily represented subscriptions for which cash payment was received for the subscription term, but the subscription term was not completed as of the balance sheet date reported.
LifeMap Sciences’ deferred subscription revenues primarily represent subscriptions for which cash payment was received for the subscription term, but the subscription term was not completed as of the balance sheet date reported. For the year ended December 31, 2020, LifeMap Sciences recognized $1.3 million in subscription and advertisement revenues. As of December 31, 2021, there was no deferred revenues included in the consolidated balance sheets due to the LifeMap Deconsolidation.
LifeMap Sciences licensed from third parties the databases and software it commercializes and had a contractual obligation to pay royalties to the licensor on subscriptions sold. These costs were included in operating loss from discontinued operations on the consolidated statements of operations when the cash was received and the royalty obligation was incurred, as the royalty payments do not qualify for capitalization of costs to fulfill a contract under ASC 340-40, Other Assets and Deferred Costs - Contracts with Customers.
LifeMap Sciences did not generate sufficient revenues to meet its operating expenses. On March 15, 2021, LifeMap Sciences was acquired by a third party in a cash-out merger. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
Grant revenues. AgeX accounts for grants received to perform research and development services in accordance with ASC 730-20, Research and Development Arrangements. At the inception of the grant, we perform an assessment as to whether the grant is a liability or a contract to perform research and development services for others. If AgeX or a subsidiary receiving the grant is obligated to repay the grant funds to the grantor regardless of the outcome of the research and development activities, then AgeX is required to estimate and recognize that liability. Alternatively, if AgeX or a subsidiary receiving the grant is not required to repay, or if it is required to repay the grant funds only if the research and development activities are successful, then the grant agreement is accounted for as a contract to perform research and development services for others, in which case, grant revenue is recognized when the related research and development expenses are incurred.
In applying the provisions of Topic 606, we have determined that government grants are out of the scope of Topic 606 because the government entities do not meet the definition of a “customer”, as defined by Topic 606, as there is not considered to be a transfer of control of good or services to the government entities funding the grant. In the absence of applicable guidance under U.S. GAAP, our policy is to recognize grant revenue when the related costs are incurred, provided that the applicable conditions under the government contracts have been met. Only costs that are allowable under the grant award, certain government regulations and the National Institutes of Health’s supplemental policy and procedure manual may be claimed for reimbursement, and the reimbursements are subject to routine audits from governmental agencies from time to time. Costs incurred are recorded in research and development expenses on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
In September 2018, we were awarded a grant of up to approximately $225,000 from the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The NIH grant provides funding for continued development of our technologies for treating osteoporosis. Grant funds were made available by the NIH as allowable expenses were incurred. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred approximately $25,000 of allowable expenses under the NIH grant and recognized a corresponding amount of grant revenues. As of March 31, 2020, AgeX expended the full amount available under this grant.
On April 8, 2020, we were awarded a grant of up to approximately $386,000 from the NIH. The NIH grant provides funding for continued development of AgeX’s technologies for treating stroke. The grant funds will be made available by the NIH to AgeX as allowable expenses are incurred. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $104,000 of allowable expenses under the NIH grant and recognized a corresponding amount of grant revenues.
Arrangements with multiple performance obligations. Future contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we will allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine or estimate standalone selling prices based on the prices charged, or that would be charged, to customers for that product or service. As of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not have significant arrangements with multiple performance obligations.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, amortization of intangible assets, outside consultants and suppliers, and license fees paid to third parties to acquire patents or licenses to use patents and other technology. Research and development expenses incurred and reimbursed by grants from third parties or governmental agencies, including service revenues from co-development projects with customers, if any and as applicable, approximate the respective revenues recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, for executive and corporate personnel, and professional and consulting fees.
Impact of COVID-19 pandemic
The global outbreak of the coronavirus COVID-19, and the various attempts throughout the world to contain it, have created significant volatility, uncertainty and disruption. In response to government directives and guidelines, health care advisories and employee and other concerns, we have altered certain aspects of our operations. A number of our employees have had to work remotely from home and those on site have had to follow our social distance guidelines, which could impact their productivity. COVID-19 could also disrupt our operations due to absenteeism by infected or ill members of management or other employees, or absenteeism by members of management and other employees who cannot effectively work remotely but who elect not to come to work due to the illness affecting others in our office or in the laboratory facilities of third parties undertaking research work for us, or due to quarantines. COVID-19 illness could also impact members of our Board of Directors resulting in absenteeism from meetings of the directors or committees of directors and making it more difficult to convene the quorums of the full Board of Directors or its committees needed to conduct meetings for the management of our affairs.
We have a Sponsored Research Agreement with the University of California at Irvine (UCI) for the derivation of neural stem cells, with the goal of developing cellular therapies to treat neurological disorders and diseases. The pace of work on the research project was slowed by COVID-19 safety procedures, but we expect the initial work to be concluded during 2022.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and the various responses might impact our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we will not be able to accurately predict, including: the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; and the availability, effectiveness, and cost to access COVID-19 tests, vaccines and therapies. Due to the uncertain scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and uncertain timing of any recovery or normalization, we are currently unable to estimate the resulting impacts on our operations and financial results. We will continue to actively monitor the issues raised by the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions that alter our operations, as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, any customers and stockholders. It is not clear what the potential effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our financial results.
Financial Operations Overview
Up until our disposition of LifeMap Sciences, our revenues were principally derived from subscription and advertising revenues from LifeMap Sciences’ online databases based upon applicable subscription or advertising periods. LifeMap Sciences was acquired by a third party through a cash-out merger during March 2021 and as a result of that merger transaction we no longer own interest in LifeMap Sciences and will no longer recognize any post-merger revenues attributable to LifeMap Sciences’ business. We do not have any therapeutic products approved for sale and have generated insignificant revenues from commercialized product sales, and we do not expect to generate any significant revenues from product sales for the foreseeable future.
Our operating expenses consist of research and development expenses primarily from our pre-clinical programs and general and administrative expenses. As a result of the layoffs of mostly research personnel in April 2020 research and development work have been scaled back and contracted out to third party service providers within the newly imposed budgetary constraints under the 2020 Loan Agreement. Accordingly, the historical amounts of expense presented and discussed in this Report are likely not going to be indicative of expenses during future periods.
Results of Operations
The following comparisons exclude the impact of the operations of LifeMap Sciences which have been presented in our consolidated financial results as discontinued operations. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report for a discussion of discontinued operations.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues and Cost of Sales
The amounts in the table below show our consolidated revenues by source and cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands).
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized income of approximately $104,000 and $307,000, respectively, from grants awarded by the NIH. We expended the full amount available under one of the NIH grants as of March 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
We have made certain adjustments to our operating plans and budgets to reduce our cash expenditures in order to extend the period over which we can continue our operations with our available cash resources. These adjustments entailed a staff force reduction, primarily research and development personnel effective May 1, 2020. As a result of those staff reductions, we paid approximately $105,000 in accrued payroll and unused paid time off and other benefits, and we recognized approximately $194,800 in restructuring charges in connection with the reduction in staffing, consisting of contractual severance.
The following table shows our consolidated operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands).
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 have decreased due to scaled down research and development related activities following the layoff of 11 employees in May 2020 and shutdown of our lab facilities as of December 31, 2020, the date on which our office and laboratory lease agreement expired. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report for a discussion of our lease agreements.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $2.2 million to $1.5 million as compared to $3.7 million in 2020. The net decrease was primarily attributable to decreases of: $0.8 million in salaries and related costs including non-cash stock-based compensation; $0.7 million in laboratory facilities and equipment related expenses and maintenance including laboratory supplies; $0.7 million in depreciation and amortization of laboratory equipment and improvements; and $0.1 million in scientific consulting, outside research and service expenses. These decreases were offset to some extent by increase of $0.1 million in patent related professional fees allocable to research and development expenses.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 remained consistent with the same period in 2020 at $6.7 million. Changes in costs included in general and administrative expenses included decreases of $0.4 million in professional fees for legal services; $0.3 million in personnel related expenses, including non-cash stock-based compensation expense; $0.2 million in professional fees for accounting services; and $0.1 million in travel and lodging expenses. These decreases were offset to some extent by increases of $0.2 million in patent and license maintenance related fees including annual minimum royalties due under license agreement; $0.2 million in insurance expenses; $0.2 million in non-cash stock-based compensation to our independent directors; $0.1 million in investor relations related expenses; and $0.3 million in certain facilities related expenses due to termination of shared facilities and services agreements with sublessees and LifeMap Sciences. See notes 3 and 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report for discussion of disposition and deconsolidation of LifeMap Sciences and subleases.
General and administrative expenses include employee and director compensation allocated to general and administrative expenses, consulting fees other than those paid for science-related consulting, facilities and equipment rent and maintenance related expenses, insurance costs allocated to general and administrative expenses, stock exchange-related costs, depreciation expense, marketing costs, legal and accounting costs, and other miscellaneous expenses which are allocated to general and administrative expense.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net in 2021 consists primarily of approximately $437,000 gain recognized upon forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program loan indebtedness (“PPP Loan”) on February 19, 2021 offset by amortization of deferred debt costs on loans from Juvenescence. Other expense, net in 2020 consists primarily of $100,000 proceeds from the sale of intangible assets offset by amortization of deferred debt costs on loans from Juvenescence. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report for discussion of loan agreements and related debt costs.
Income taxes
Beginning in 2018, the 2017 Tax Act subjects a U.S. stockholder to tax on Global Intangible Low Tax Income “GILTI” earned by certain foreign subsidiaries. In general, GILTI is the excess of a U.S. shareholder’s total net foreign income over a deemed return on tangible assets. The provision further allows a deduction of 50% of GILTI, however this deduction is limited to the company’s pre-GILTI U.S. income. For the year ended December 31, 2020, AgeX’s foreign entity operated at a book loss. However, for GILTI purposes, US tax laws are applied to the foreign activity and as a result there was an immaterial amount included in income for 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, AgeX’s foreign entity operated at an immaterial loss; therefore, no GILTI was included in income. Current interpretations under ASC 740 state that an entity can make an accounting policy election to either recognize deferred taxes for temporary basis differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years or to provide for the tax expense related to GILTI in the year the tax is incurred as a period expense. We have elected to account for GILTI as a current period expense when incurred.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced a domestic loss from continuing operations and a foreign loss; therefore, no income tax provision was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $48.6 million for U.S. federal income tax purposes. In general, NOLs and other tax credit carryforwards generated by legal entities in a consolidated federal tax group are available to other members of the tax group depending on the nature of the transaction that a member may enter into while still in the consolidated federal tax group. However, under the Tax Matters Agreement between Lineage and AgeX, any use of a member’s NOLs and other tax credit carryforwards by the other member is subject to reimbursement by the benefiting member for the actual tax benefit realized. Since the August 30, 2018 deconsolidation of AgeX and to date, neither Lineage nor AgeX has used the tax attributes of the other.
As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating losses of approximately $20.4 million for California purposes. As we and our subsidiaries have been included in the combined California tax return with Lineage, up to the date of deconsolidation on August 30, 2018, those state net operating losses will remain with AgeX.
Federal net operating losses generated on or prior to December 31, 2017, expire in varying amounts between 2028 and 2037, while federal net operating losses generated after December 31, 2017, carryforward indefinitely. The state net operating losses expire in varying amounts between 2028 and 2041.
As of December 31, 2021, we had research and development tax credit carryforwards for federal and state tax purposes of $0.8 million and $0.6 million, respectively. The federal tax credits expire between 2028 and 2041, while the state tax credits have no expiration date.
As of December 31, 2021, we had capital loss carryforwards for federal and state tax purposes of $12.4 million and $5.9 million, respectively. The federal and California capital loss carryforwards will expire in 2026.
A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We established a full valuation allowance for all periods presented due to the uncertainty of realizing future tax benefits from its net operating loss carryforwards and other deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Losses and Going Concern Considerations
We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $105.7 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows.
We have made certain adjustments to our operating plans and budgets to reduce our projected cash expenditures in order to extend the period over which we can continue our operations with our available cash resources. These adjustments entailed down-sizing of our leased office space effective January 1, 2021, a staff force reduction during 2020, primarily impacting research and development personnel, and the elimination of our leased laboratory facility, that will require the deferral of certain work on the development of our product candidates and technologies. However, notwithstanding those adjustments, based on our most recent projected cash flows, our cash and cash equivalents and potential additional loans that may become available to us from Juvenescence under the 2022 Secured Note , and the proceeds we may receive from the sale of additional shares of our common stock in “at-the-market” transactions through a Sales Agreement with Chardan Capital Markets, LLC (“Chardan”) as a sales agent, would not be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated operating and other funding requirements for the next twelve months from the date of filing of this Report. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern. See Notes 5 and 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information about our loan agreements with Juvenescence. We will need to raise additional capital in the near term to be able to meet our operating expenses.
As of December 31, 2021, we had borrowed a total of $7.0 million under the 2019 Loan Agreement and $7.5 million under the 2020 Loan Agreement, and we borrowed the $0.5 million remaining credit available under the 2020 Loan Agreement during January 2022. The 2022 Secured Note and the 2020 Loan Agreement prohibit us and our subsidiaries ReCyte Therapeutics and Reverse Bio from borrowing funds from other lenders or engaging in certain other transactions without the consent of Juvenescence unless we repay all amounts owed to Juvenescence, except that Reverse Bio may borrow fund through convertible debt and the borrowing restrictions will lapse as to Reverse Bio if it raises more than $15 million in debt or equity capital by February 14, 2023. AgeX has granted Juvenescence a security interest and lien on substantially all of AgeX’s assets to secure AgeX’s obligations under the Secured Note. These factors and the impact of potential dilution through the issuance of shares of our common stock upon the conversion of the Juvenescence loans into AgeX common stock and the exercise of warrants issued or issuable to Juvenescence in connection with the loans made to us could make AgeX less attractive to new equity investors and could impair our ability to finance our operations or the operations of our subsidiaries unless Juvenescence agrees, in its discretion, to lend us funds.
We may sell up to $12.1 million of common shares in “at-the-market” transactions through a Sales Agreement with Chardan. We do not have any other committed sources of funds for additional financing.
The availability of financing for AgeX may be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic which could depress national and international economies and disrupt capital markets, supply chains, and aspects of our operations. The extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately impact our business, results of operations, financial condition, or cash flows is highly uncertain and difficult to predict because it will depend on many factors that are outside our control. The unavailability or inadequacy of financing to meet future capital needs could force us to modify, curtail, delay, or suspend some or all aspects of planned operations.
To the extent that we are able to raise additional capital through the sale of AgeX equity or convertible debt securities or the sale of equity or convertible debt securities of any of our subsidiaries, the ownership interest of our present stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of any securities we or our subsidiaries issue may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, and may involve the issuance of convertible debt or stock purchase warrants that would dilute the equity interests of our stockholders. If we raise funds through additional strategic partnerships or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Cash used in operating activities
Continuing operations: During the year ended December 31, 2021, our total research and development expenses were $1.5 million and our general and administrative expenditures were $6.7 million. Net loss attributable to us for the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to $8.6 million. Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations during this period amounted to $7.8 million. The difference between the net loss attributable to us and net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the following: $0.9 million payment of financed insurance premium liability; $0.4 million gain on the forgiveness of PPP Loan indebtedness; and $0.1 million gain on the LifeMap Deconsolidation (see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report). These amounts were offset to some extent by $1.2 million in amortization of intangible assets and deferred debt issuance costs and $1.0 million in stock-based compensation expense.
Discontinued operations: Net loss attributable to us for the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to $0.1 million. Net cash used in operating activities from discontinued operations during this period amounted to $0.1 million. The net zero difference between the net loss attributable to us and net cash used in operating activities from discontinued operations during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to decreased amortization expenses by $0.1 million offset by $0.1 million as a result of deconsolidation of discontinued operations. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information regarding the disposition and deconsolidation of LifeMap Sciences.
Cash provided by investing activities
Continuing operations: During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities from continuing operations amounted to $0.7 million, which consisted of $0.5 million we received in cash as our pro rata share of the Merger Consideration for the disposition of our interest in LifeMap Sciences and the collection of $250,000 as a partial payment of LifeMap Sciences’ indebtedness to us as a pre-requisite to the disposition of our interest in LifeMap Sciences during March 2021.
Discontinued operations: Net cash used in investing activities from discontinued operations of $50,000 results from the deconsolidation of LifeMap Sciences cash and cash equivalents. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Cash provided by financing activities
Continuing operations: During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations amounted to $7.5 million, which was attributable to the $2.0 million drawn against the 2020 Loan Agreement entered into with Juvenescence in March 2020 and $5.0 million drawn against the 2019 Loan Agreement as amended in February and November 2021, and approximately $0.5 million gross proceeds raised from the sale of AgeX common shares through at-the-market offerings.
Discontinued operations: Net cash used in financing activities from discontinued operations of $250,000 relates to the partial payment of LifeMap Sciences’ indebtedness to us as discussed further above. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a) (4) (ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.