Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Agenus Inc. (including its subsidiaries, collectively referred to as “Agenus,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our”) is a clinical-stage immuno-oncology (“I-O”) company advancing an extensive pipeline of immune checkpoint antibodies, adoptive cell therapies and neoantigen vaccines, to fight cancer and infections. Our business is designed to drive success in I-O through speed, innovation and effective combination therapies. We believe that combination therapies and a deep understanding of each patient’s cancer will drive substantial expansion of the patient population benefiting from current I-O therapies. In addition to a diverse pipeline, we have assembled fully integrated end-to-end capabilities including novel target discovery, antibody generation, cell line development and current good manufacturing practice manufacturing. We believe that these fully integrated capabilities enable us to produce novel candidates on timelines that are shorter than the industry standard. Leveraging our science and capabilities, we have forged important partnerships to advance our innovation.
We are developing a comprehensive I-O portfolio driven by the following platforms and programs, which we intend to utilize individually and in combination:
•
our multiple antibody discovery platforms, including our proprietary display technologies, designed to drive the discovery of future CPM antibody candidates;
•
our antibody candidate programs, including our CPM programs;
•
our saponin-based vaccine adjuvant platform under our subsidiary, SaponiQx, Inc. (“SaponiQx”), principally including our QS-21 Stimulon™ adjuvant (“QS-21 Stimulon”); and
•
our subsidiary, MiNK Therapeutics, Inc. (“MiNK Therapeutics”), which has a pipeline of novel allogeneic invariant natural killer T cell (“iNKT”) therapies to treat cancer and other immune-mediated diseases.
We assess development, commercialization and partnering strategies for each of our product candidates periodically based on several factors, including pre-clinical and clinical trial results, competitive positioning and funding requirements and resources. Our lead program, botensilimab (AGEN1181), is advancing in multiple clinical programs which we have designed to support regulatory pathways for accelerated development with botensilimab as a monotherapy and in combination with balstilimab.
In October 2021, we announced the withdrawal of our biologics license application (“BLA”) for balstilimab monotherapy to treat second-line cervical cancer. Our decision came at the recommendation of the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) following the full approval of pembrolizumab, four months earlier than the FDA goal date. The BLA submission for balstilimab received Fast Track and Priority Review designation from the FDA, with a target action date of December 16, 2021. As part of the BLA review process, we successfully completed three FDA inspections, with no cited issues, concerns, or Form-483s. Based on this change to the treatment landscape, we are no longer pursuing U.S. registration for the combination of balstilimab and zalifrelimab in second-line cervical cancer.
We have formed collaborations with companies such as Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (“BMS”), Betta Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. (“Betta”), Gilead Sciences, Inc. (“Gilead”), Incyte Corporation (“Incyte”), Merck Sharpe & Dohme (“Merck”) and Recepta Biopharma SA (“Recepta”). Through these alliances, as well as our own internal programs, we currently have more than a dozen antibody programs in pre-clinical or clinical development.
Pursuant to our collaboration agreement with Incyte, we have exclusively licensed to Incyte monospecific antibodies targeting GITR, OX40, TIM-3 and LAG-3, which Incyte is currently advancing in various clinical trials, as well as an additional undisclosed target that Incyte is advancing in preclinical studies. Under the terms of our agreement, Incyte is responsible for all future development expenses, and we are eligible to receive up to an additional $500.0 million in potential milestone payments plus royalties on any future sales. Pursuant to our collaboration and license agreement with Merck, we exclusively licensed to Merck a monospecific antibody targeting ILT4, which Merck is advancing in a Phase 2 clinical trial. Under the terms of our agreement, Merck is responsible for all future development expenses, and we are eligible to receive up to an additional $85.0 million in potential milestone payments plus royalties on any future sales. In September 2018, we, through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Agenus Royalty Fund, LLC, entered into a royalty purchase agreement (the “XOMA Royalty Purchase Agreement”) with XOMA (US) LLC (“XOMA”). Pursuant to the terms of the XOMA Royalty Purchase Agreement, XOMA purchased 33% of all future royalties and 10% of all future milestone payments that we are entitled to receive from Incyte and Merck, net of certain of our obligations to a third party. After taking into account our obligations under the XOMA Royalty Purchase Agreement, as of December 31, 2021, we remain eligible to receive up to $450.0 million and $76.5 million in potential development, regulatory and commercial milestones from Incyte and Merck, respectively.
In December 2018, we entered into a series of agreements with Gilead to collaborate on the development and commercialization of up to five novel I-O therapies (the “Gilead Collaboration Agreements”). Pursuant to the Gilead Collaboration Agreements, Gilead received worldwide exclusive rights to our bispecific antibody, AGEN1423, as well as the exclusive option to exclusively license AGEN1223, a bispecific antibody, and AGEN2373, a monospecific antibody. All three assets have entered clinical development. In November 2020, Gilead elected to return AGEN1423 to us and to voluntarily terminate the license agreement effective as of February 4, 2021. In the third quarter of 2021, we ceased development of AGEN1223 and in October 2021 the AGEN1223 option and license agreement was formally terminated. The AGEN2373 option agreement remains in place, and we are responsible for developing the program up to the option decision point, at which time Gilead may acquire exclusive rights to the program on option exercise. We have the right to opt-in to share Gilead’s development and commercialization costs in the United States in exchange for a profit (loss) share on a 50:50 basis and revised milestone payments. Pursuant to the terms of the AGEN2373 option agreement, we remain eligible to receive up to $10.0 million in aggregate milestone payments prior to option exercise, a $50.0 million option exercise fee and, if exercised, up to an additional $520.0 million in aggregate milestone payments, as well as royalties on any future sales.
In June 2020, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement (the “Betta License Agreement”) with Betta, pursuant to which we granted Betta an exclusive license to develop, manufacture and commercialize balstilimab and zalifrelimab in Republic of China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan (“Greater China”). Under the terms of the Betta License Agreement, we received $15.0 million upfront and are eligible to receive up to $100.0 million in milestone payments plus royalties on any future sales in Greater China.
In May 2021, we entered into a License, Development and Commercialization Agreement (“BMS License Agreement”) with BMS to collaborate on the development and commercialization of our pre-clinical proprietary anti-TIGIT bispecific antibody program AGEN1777. Under the BMS License Agreement, we granted BMS an exclusive worldwide license under certain of our intellectual property rights to develop, manufacture and commercialize AGEN1777 and its derivatives in all fields; provided, we retained an option to access the licensed antibodies for use in clinical studies in combination with certain of our other pipeline assets subject to certain restrictions. Pursuant to the BMS License Agreement, we received a non-refundable upfront cash payment of $200.0 million in July 2021 and are eligible to receive up to $1.36 billion in aggregate development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments plus tiered royalties. In exchange, BMS is responsible for all of the development, regulatory approval, manufacturing and commercialization costs with respect to products containing AGEN1777. We have the option, but not the obligation, to co-fund a minority of the global development costs of products containing AGEN1777 or its derivatives, in exchange for increased tiered royalties. Finally, we also have the option to co-promote AGEN1777 in the U.S. In October 2021, we announced that the first patient was dosed in the AGEN1777 Phase 1 clinical trial, triggering the achievement of a $20.0 million milestone.
In September 2021, we announced the launch of SaponiQx to spearhead innovation in novel adjuvant discovery and vaccine design, including in relation to our saponin-based adjuvants. We also announced our partnership with Ginkgo Bioworks, Inc. to develop SaponiQx’s novel saponin products from sustainably sourced raw materials, with a goal to meet the current demands placed on the vaccine industry for pandemic vaccines. Our QS-21 Stimulon adjuvant is partnered with GlaxoSmithKline (“GSK”) and is a key component in multiple GSK vaccine programs. These programs are in various stages, with the most advanced being GSK’s shingles vaccine, Shingrix. In October 2017, GSK’s shingles vaccine was approved in the United States by the FDA. In January 2018, we entered into a Royalty Purchase Agreement with Healthcare Royalty Partners III, L.P. and certain of its affiliates (together, “HCR”), pursuant to which HCR purchased 100% of our worldwide rights to receive royalties from GSK on GSK’s sales of vaccines containing our QS-21 Stimulon adjuvant. We do not incur clinical development costs for products partnered with GSK. We were also entitled to receive up to $40.35 million in milestone payments from HCR based on sales of GSK’s vaccines as follows: (i) $15.1 million upon reaching $2.0 billion last-twelve-months net sales any time prior to 2024 (the “First HCR Milestone”) and (ii) $25.25 million upon reaching $2.75 billion last-twelve-months net sales any time prior to 2026 (the “Second HCR Milestone”). We received the First HCR Milestone after GSK’s net sales of Shingrix for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 exceeded $2.0 billion, and we remain eligible to receive the Second HCR Milestone.
Our business activities include product research and development, intellectual property prosecution, manufacturing, regulatory and clinical affairs, corporate finance and development activities, and support of our collaborations. Our product candidates require clinical trials and approvals from regulatory agencies, as well as acceptance in the marketplace. Part of our strategy is to develop and commercialize some of our product candidates by continuing our existing arrangements with academic and corporate collaborators and licensees and by entering into new collaborations.
MiNK Therapeutics is focused on the development of unmodified iNKT cell therapies for the treatment of cancer and other life-threatening immune-mediated diseases. In October 2021, the FDA cleared the Investigational New Drug application (IND) for AGENT-797, an allogeneic iNKT therapy, for the treatment of patients with solid tumor cancers with AGENT-797 alone and in combination with approved checkpoint antibodies. AGENT-797 is in ongoing clinical trials in hematological malignancies, including multiple myeloma and B cell lymphoma, and viral Acute Respiratory Distress (ARDS) secondary to COVID-19 and influenza with early data readouts in 2021. In October 2021, MiNK Therapeutics completed an initial public offering of 3,333,334 shares of its common stock, trading on the Nasdaq Global Market under the ticker symbol “INKT”, at a public offering price of $12.00 per share.
The gross proceeds from the offering, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, were approximately $40.0 million. Subsequently, the underwriters in the initial public offering exercised their option to acquire an additional 500,000 shares at the public offering price and such shares were delivered on November 3, 2021. MiNK Therapeutics has licensed the INKT technology from Agenus and retains the rights to develop and expand a proprietary pipeline of engineered CAR-INKTs, TCRs, and INKT bispecific engagers. MiNK has a dedicated leadership and operational team and independent operating governance.
Our common stock is currently listed on The Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “AGEN.”
Our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, were $178.6 million, $142.6 million, and $168.3 million, respectively. We have incurred significant losses since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.49 billion. We are likely to continue to incur losses until we become a commercial company generating profits.
During the past five years, we have successfully financed our operations through income and revenues generated from corporate partnerships, advance royalty sales and issuance of equity. Based on our current plans and projections, we believe our year end cash resources of $306.9 million as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements for more than one year from when these financial statements were issued. Management continues to address the Company’s liquidity position and has the flexibility to adjust spending as needed in order to preserve liquidity. In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we streamlined our organization, which included a headcount reduction, and our CEO, Dr. Garo Armen, elected to receive his base salary in stock rather than cash through the end of 2020 and the first half of 2021. We continuously evaluate the likelihood of success of our programs. As such, our decisions to continue to fund or eliminate funding of each of our programs are predicated on these determinations, on an ongoing basis. We are prepared to discontinue funding of any activities that do not impact our core priorities if they do not prove to be feasible, and to restrict capital expenditures and/or reduce the scale of our operations. We expect our potential sources of funding to include: (1) collaborations, out-licensing and/or partnering opportunities for our portfolio programs and product candidates with multiple parties, (2) milestone payments from our existing partnerships, (3) consummating additional third-party agreements, (4) selling assets, (5) securing project financing and/or (6) selling equity securities.
Historical Results of Operations
The comparison of 2020 to 2019 results has been omitted from this Form 10-K but can be found in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 - “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” filed on March 16, 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Research and development revenue
We recognized research and development (“R&D”) revenue of approximately $244.4 million and $35.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. R&D revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisted of $220.0 million related to a non-refundable upfront license fee and milestone earned under our BMS License Agreement and $22.4 million related to the recognition of deferred revenue earned under our Gilead Collaboration Agreements. R&D revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of $12.3 million related to the recognition of deferred revenue earned under our Gilead Collaboration Agreements, $13.9 million related to the recognition of an upfront fee under our Betta License Agreement and $9.0 million related to the recognition of a milestone under the Merck Agreement.
Non-cash royalty revenue related to the sale of future royalties
In January 2018, we sold 100% of our worldwide rights to receive royalties from GSK on sales of GSK’s vaccines containing our QS-21 Stimulon adjuvant to HCR. As described in Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, this transaction has been recorded as a liability that amortizes over the estimated life of our Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR. As a result of this liability accounting, even though the royalties are remitted directly to HCR, we record these royalties from GSK as revenue. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized approximately $44.4 million and $46.5 million in non-cash royalty revenue, respectively, related to our agreement with GSK.
Research and development expense
R&D expense include the costs associated with our internal research and development activities, including compensation and benefits, occupancy costs, clinical manufacturing costs, contract research organization costs, costs of consultants, and related
administrative costs. R&D expense increased 25% to $178.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $142.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Increased expenses in the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily relate to a $21.9 million increase in third-party services and other expenses related to the advancement of our antibody programs, a $5.5 million increase in personnel related expenses, primarily due to increased headcount, and a $9.1 million increase in expenses attributable to the activities of our subsidiaries. These increases were partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in other research and development expenses.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative (“G&A”) expense consists primarily of personnel costs, facility expenses, and professional fees. G&A expense increased 29% to $76.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $59.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Increased general and administrative expense expenses in the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily relate to a $5.3 million increase in professional fees, primarily due to increased expenses related to commercial readiness activities, a $11.3 million increase in personnel related expenses, primarily due to both increased share-based compensation expense and increased headcount, and a $0.7 million increase in other general and administrative expenses.
Contingent purchase price consideration fair value adjustment
Contingent purchase price consideration fair value adjustment represents the change in the fair value of our contingent purchase price consideration during the year ended December 31, 2021, which mainly resulted from changes in our market capitalization and share price and changes in the credit spread since each reporting period end. The fair value of our contingent purchase price considerations is mainly based on estimates from a Monte Carlo simulation of our market capitalization and share price.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, the two remaining contingent milestones were achieved pursuant to the terms of the Share Exchange Agreement dated January 10, 2014, by and among us, 4-Antibody AG (“4-AB”), the former shareholders of 4-AB and Vischer AG, as Representative (the "Share Exchange Agreement"), triggering a $20.0 million payment.
Non-operating income (expense)
Non-operating income increased $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from expense of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to income of $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to the recognition of a $3.3 million gain on the sale of property, plant and equipment in the year ended December 31, 2021, and our increased foreign currency exchange gains in 2021 compared to losses in 2020.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net increased to $65.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $61.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to increased non-cash interest recorded in connection with our Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR.
Inflation
We believe that inflation has not had a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, or financial condition to date.
Research and Development Programs
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our R&D programs consisted largely of our CPM antibody programs as indicated in the following table (in thousands).
*
Prior to 2014, costs were incurred by 4-AB, which we acquired in February 2014.
Research and development program costs include compensation and other direct costs plus an allocation of indirect costs, based on certain assumptions and our review of the status of each program. Our product candidates are in various stages of development and significant additional expenditures will be required if we start new clinical trials, encounter delays in our programs, apply for regulatory approvals, continue development of our technologies, expand our operations, and/or bring our product candidates to market. The total cost of any particular clinical trial is dependent on a number of factors such as trial design, length of the trial, number of clinical sites, number of patients, and trial sponsorship. The process of obtaining and maintaining regulatory approvals for new therapeutic products is lengthy, expensive, and uncertain. Because of the current stage of our product candidates, among other factors, we are unable to reliably estimate the cost of completing our research and development programs or the timing for bringing such programs to various markets or substantial partnering or out-licensing arrangements, and, therefore, when, if ever, material cash inflows are likely to commence.
Product Development Portfolio
Antibody Discovery Platforms and CPM Programs
Checkpoint antibodies regulate immune response against pathogens that invade the body and are achieving positive outcomes in a number of cancers that were untreatable only a few years ago. Two classes of checkpoint targets include:
1.
inhibitory checkpoints that help suppress an immune response in order to prevent excessive immune reaction resulting in undesired inflammation and/or auto-immunity, and
2.
stimulatory checkpoints that can enhance or amplify an antigen-specific immune response.
We possess a suite of antibody discovery platforms that are designed to drive the discovery of future CPM antibody candidates. We are planning to employ a variety of techniques to identify and optimize monospecific and multispecific antibody candidates, internally.
We and our partners currently have more than fifteen antibody programs in pre-clinical or clinical development, which include our next generation anti-CTLA-4 antibody, botensilimab, an IgG1 anti-CTLA-4 antagonist, our anti-CTLA-4, zalifrelimab, and anti-PD-1, balstilimab, programs (both partnered with Recepta for certain South America territories and Betta in Greater China), our anti-CD137 (AGEN2373), which Gilead has an exclusive option to license exclusively, an anti-TIGIT bispecific antibody, AGEN1777, exclusively licensed to BMS and the following antibody programs all partnered with Incyte: anti-GITR (INCAGN1876), anti-OX40 (INCAGN1949), anti-LAG3 (INCAGN2385) and anti-TIM3 (INCAGN2390). For additional information regarding our antibody discovery platforms and checkpoint antibody program, please read Part I-Item 1. “Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
QS-21 Stimulon Adjuvant
QS-21 Stimulon is an adjuvant, which is a substance added to a vaccine or other immunotherapy that is intended to enhance an immune response to the target antigens. QS-21 Stimulon is a natural product, a triterpene glycoside, or saponin, purified from the bark of the Chilean soapbark tree, Quillaja saponaria. QS-21 Stimulon has the ability to stimulate an antibody-mediated immune response and has also been shown to activate cellular immunity. It has become a key component in the development of investigational preventive vaccine formulations across a wide variety of diseases. These studies have been carried out by academic institutions and pharmaceutical companies in the United States and internationally. A number of these studies have shown QS-21 Stimulon to be significantly more effective in stimulating immune responses than aluminum hydroxide or aluminum phosphate, the adjuvants most commonly used in approved vaccines in the United States today. In January 2019, we announced that the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation awarded us a grant to develop an alternative, plant cell culture-based manufacturing process to ensure the continuous future supply of QS-21 Stimulon adjuvant, which we are pursuing in partnership with Phyton Biotech and Ginkgo Bioworks. For additional information regarding QS-21 Stimulon, please read Part I-Item 1. “Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cell Therapies
Our majority owned subsidiary, MiNK, is a focused on developing allogeneic invariant natural killer T (“iNKT”) cell therapies to treat cancer and other life-threatening immune diseases. iNKTs have a dual-mechanism of action with an internal targeting and homing device that modulates both arms of immunity, innate and adaptive. iNKTs combine the killing features of natural killer cells with the durable memory response of T cells. iNKT cells have been demonstrated to be highly effective in treating solid tumor cancers in their native form and MiNK has demonstrated that these cells can be further engineered or edited for super-targeting. For additional information regarding iNKT cell therapies, please read Part I-Item 1. “Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred annual operating losses since inception, and we had an accumulated deficit of $1.49 billion as of December 31, 2021. We expect to incur significant losses over the next several years as we continue development of our technologies and product candidates, manage our regulatory processes, initiate and continue clinical trials, and prepare for potential commercialization of products. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through corporate partnerships, advance royalty sales and the issuance of equity. From our inception through December 31, 2021, we have raised aggregate net proceeds of approximately $1.64 billion through the sale of common and preferred stock, the exercise of stock options and warrants, proceeds from our Employee Stock Purchase Plan, royalty monetization transactions, and the issuance of convertible and other notes.
We maintain an effective registration statement (the “Registration Statement”), covering an unlimited amount of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, debt securities and units. The Registration Statement includes prospectuses covering the offer, issuance and sale of up to 100 million shares of our common stock from time to time in “at-the-market offerings” pursuant to an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley FBR, Inc. as our sales agent. We sold approximately 44.2 million shares of our common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021 and received aggregate net proceeds of $197.6 million. As of January 31, 2022, approximately 38.1 million shares remained available for sale under the Sales Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had debt outstanding of $13.8 million in principal. In February 2020, we amended $13.5 million of the 2015 Subordinated Notes, extending the due date by three years to February 2023. The remaining $0.5 million of the 2015 Subordinated Notes were repaid in February 2020. In April 2020, we repaid an additional $0.5 million of the 2015 Subordinated Notes, leaving $13.0 million outstanding.
Our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments at December 31, 2021 were $306.9 million, an increase of $207.1 million from December 31, 2020.
During the past five years, we have successfully financed our operations through income and revenues generated from corporate partnerships, advance royalty sales and issuance of equity. Based on our current plans and projections, we believe our year end cash resources of $306.9 million as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements for more than one year from when the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K were issued.
Management continues to address the Company’s liquidity position and has the flexibility to adjust spending as needed in order to preserve liquidity. In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we streamlined our organization, which included a headcount reduction, and our CEO, Dr. Garo Armen, elected to receive his base salary in stock rather than cash through the end of 2020 and the first half of 2021. We continuously evaluate the likelihood of success of our programs. As such, our decisions to continue to fund or eliminate funding of each of our programs are predicated on these determinations, on an ongoing basis. We are prepared to discontinue funding of any activities that do not impact our core priorities if they do not prove to be feasible, and to restrict capital expenditures and/or reduce the scale of our operations. We expect our potential sources of funding to include: (1) collaborations, out-licensing and/or partnering opportunities for our portfolio programs and product candidates with multiple parties, (2) milestone payments from our existing partnerships, (3) consummating additional third-party agreements, (4) selling assets, (5) securing project financing and/or (6) selling equity securities.
Our future cash requirements include, but are not limited to, supporting clinical trial and regulatory efforts and continuing our other research and development programs. Since inception, we have entered into various agreements with contract manufacturers, institutions, and clinical research organizations (collectively "third party providers") to perform pre-clinical activities and to conduct and monitor our clinical studies. Under these agreements, subject to the enrollment of patients and performance by the applicable third-party provider, we have estimated our total payments to be $486.8 million over the term of the related activities. Through December 31, 2021, we have expensed $391.5 million as research and development expenses and $372.5 million has been paid under these agreements. The timing of expense recognition and future payments related to these agreements is subject to the enrollment of patients and performance by the applicable third-party provider. We plan to enter into additional agreements with third party providers and we anticipate significant additional expenditures will be required to initiate and advance our various programs.
Part of our strategy is to develop and commercialize some of our product candidates by continuing our existing collaboration arrangements with academic and collaboration partners and licensees and by entering into new collaborations. As a result of our collaboration agreements, we will not completely control the efforts to attempt to bring those product candidates to market. For example, our collaboration with Incyte for the development, manufacture and commercialization of CPM antibodies against certain targets is managed by a joint steering committee, which is controlled by Incyte.
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $10.1 million and ($139.1) million, respectively. Our future ability to generate cash from operations will depend on achieving regulatory approval and market acceptance of our product candidates, achieving benchmarks as defined in existing collaboration agreements, and our ability to enter into new collaborations. Please see the “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the risks highlighted under Part I-Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The table below summarizes our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands).
(1)
Includes fixed interest payments. See Note 18 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further description of our debt.
(2)
The leases and subleases for our properties expire at various times between 2023 and 2036.
(3)
The amounts include payments for a lease that was signed but had not yet commenced as of December 31, 2021. See Note 17 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further description of our leases.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The SEC defines “critical accounting policies” as those that require the application of management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods.
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base those estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
The following listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is dictated by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, with no need for our judgment in its application. There are also areas in which our judgment in selecting an available alternative would not produce a materially different result. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods and services. Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a more detailed description of our application of ASC 606.
Non-cash Interest Expense on Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalties
In January 2018 we entered into the HCR Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR. Pursuant to the terms of the HCR Royalty Purchase Agreement, we sold to HCR 100% of our worldwide rights to receive royalties from GSK on sales of GSK’s vaccines containing our QS-21 Stimulon adjuvant. Although we sold all of our rights to receive royalties on sales of GSK’s vaccines containing QS-21, as a result of our obligation to HCR, we recorded the proceeds from this transaction as a liability on our consolidated balance sheet that will be amortized using the interest method over the estimated life of the HCR Royalty Purchase Agreement. As a result, we impute interest on the transaction and record non-cash interest expense at the estimated interest rate. Our estimate of the interest rate under the agreement is based on the amount of royalty payments to be received by HCR over the life of the arrangement. We
periodically assess the expected royalty payments to HCR from GSK using a combination of historical results and forecasts from market data sources. To the extent such payments are greater or less than our initial estimates or the timing of such payments is materially different than our original estimates, we will prospectively adjust the amortization of the liability. There are a number of factors that could materially affect the amount and timing of royalty payments from GSK, all of which are not within our control. Such factors include, but are not limited to, changing standards of care, the introduction of competing products, manufacturing or other delays, biosimilar competition, patent protection, adverse events that result in governmental health authority imposed restrictions on the use of the drug products, significant changes in foreign exchange rates, and other events or circumstances that could result in reduced royalty payments from GSK, all of which would result in a reduction of non-cash royalty revenues and the non-cash interest expense over the life of the HCR Royalty Purchase Agreement. Conversely, if sales of GSK’s vaccines containing QS-21 are more than expected, the non-cash royalty revenues and the non-cash interest expense recorded by us would be greater over the life of the HCR Royalty Purchase Agreement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.