Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties about our business and operations. Our actual results and the timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly under the captions “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
For purposes of this item only “AgileThought”,“the Company,” “we,” “us” or “our” refer to AgileThought, Inc. and its subsidiaries, unless the context otherwise requires.
Overview
We are a leading provider of agile-first, end-to-end digital transformation services in the North American market using onshore and nearshore delivery. We offer client-centric, onshore and nearshore agile-first digital transformation services that help our clients transform by building, improving and running new solutions at scale. Our services enable our clients to leverage technology more effectively to focus on better business outcomes. From consulting to application development and cloud services to data management and automation, we strive to create a transparent, collaborative, and responsive experience for our clients.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had 191 active clients, and for the year ended December 31, 2020, we had 250 active clients.
As of December 31, 2021, we had delivery centers across the United States, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and Costa Rica from which we deliver services to our clients. As of December 31, 2021, we had 2,258 billable employees providing services remotely, from our talent centers or directly at client locations in the United States and Latin America. The breakdown of our employees by geography is as follows for the dates presented:
Total headcount increased by 388 people from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. The increase is related mainly to the hiring of 298 billable employees as a result of the increasing demand observed during 2021. Our Latin America based headcount increased by 442 people from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 whereas our United States based headcount decreased by 54 people from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, mainly as a result of our strategy to hire nearshore resources to staff new sold contracts during 2021.
The following table presents our revenue by geography for the periods presented:
For the year ended December 31 2021, our revenue was $158.7 million, as compared to $164.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We generated 65.2% and 69.0% of our revenue from clients located in the United States and 34.8% and 31.0% of our revenue from clients located in Latin America for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table presents our loss before income taxes for the periods presented:
Our loss before income taxes was $19.6 million and $24.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, and, for the same periods, our loss as a percentage of revenue was 12.3% and 14.6%, respectively.
Impact of COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus COVID-19 was reported in China, and in March 2020, the World Health Organization declared it a pandemic. This contagious disease has continued to spread across the globe, including extensively within the United States, and is impacting worldwide economic activity and financial markets, significantly increasing economic volatility and uncertainty. In response to this global pandemic, several local, state, and federal governments have been prompted to take unprecedented steps that include, but are not limited to, travel restrictions, closure of businesses, social distancing, and quarantines.
Starting in March 2020, headwinds to our business related to the pandemic were largely centered around our U.S. customers operating in the professional services industry, as two of our largest customers reduced their IT spending as a result of the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. After witnessing a low point in December 2020, our business with these two customers started to recover, although recovery to pre-COVID levels is still uncertain. We continue to take precautionary measures intended to minimize the health risk to our employees, customers, and the communities in which we operate. A significant proportion of our employees continue to work remotely while a few are serving customers directly at their locations. Even as certain local governments in the countries in which we operate are beginning to lift restrictions, we have not yet declared a generalized return to our facilities as the safety and health of our team is our top priority. As vaccines and therapeutics become available, we will evaluate a gradual return to our U.S. and Latin America facilities. We continue to deliver services to our customers in this hybrid model and this has resulted in minimal disruption in our operational and delivery capabilities.
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to cause substantial global public health and economic challenges during 2021 and our employees, communities and business operations, as well as the global economy and financial markets continue to be affected. We cannot accurately predict the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to directly and indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. Future developments and actions to contain the public health and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the markets we serve are rapidly evolving and highly uncertain.
To the extent that the remainder of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, refers to a financial or performance metric that has been affected by a trend or activity, that reference is in addition to any impact of the COVID-19 pandemic disclosed in and supplemented by this section. The information contained in this section is accurate as of the date hereof but may become outdated due to changing circumstances beyond our present awareness or control.
Our COVID-19 Pandemic Response
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have made the safety and well-being of our employees our top priority. As governments lift and re-impose restrictions on group gatherings, commercial operations, and travel, and as vaccines and therapeutics become available, we have applied those changing requirements to our business to maintain the health and safety of our employees and serve our customers in a manner consistent with appropriate public health considerations.
Our Employees
The vast majority of our employees can productively and securely work from a remote location. Our remaining personnel are providing services from our offices or our customers’ facilities. We therefore do not expect that COVID-19 related restrictions on group gatherings and non-essential businesses will have a material adverse effect on our ability to operate our business or productively deliver services to our customers, nor on our financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, or disclosure controls and procedures. In addition, with the increase in remote access to our systems and networks, we have accelerated some ongoing security initiatives and programs.
Many countries where our personnel regularly conduct business have extended or expanded restrictions on travel and immigration from other countries, including a suspension of most immigration and non-immigration visas issued by the United States. Further extensions or tightening of these travel and immigration restrictions may continue to impact our operations. However, we do not believe that the current travel and immigration restrictions will have a material adverse effect on our business or financial condition.
Our Customers
Our adaptive global delivery model enables us to deliver our services and solutions to our customers from remote locations. We continue to provide our customers with the products, services, and solutions they seek to deliver their business results. In addition, we continually assess our customers’ current and future needs for our personnel to work at their facilities and our global delivery centers so that we can deploy resources safely and in accordance with COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
The prolonged deterioration of economic conditions for some of our customers could materially reduce our revenue and profitability. Reduced demand from our customers, persistent financial distress in our customer base, and the continued volatility in macroeconomic conditions have and could continue to adversely impact revenues and decrease the collectability of our trade receivables. Any or all of these factors could negatively impact our results of operations. Depending on the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the timing and speed of economic recovery, reduced revenue growth relative to prior years could extend beyond 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not recognize any material allowances to doubtful accounts due to risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers’ ability to make payments. We continue to be engaged with all our customers regarding their ability to fulfill their payment obligations. A non-significant number of customers requested extended payment terms during the second and third quarters of 2020, however they have already reverted to their original payment terms. We continue to review our accounts receivable on a regular basis and established processes to ensure payments from our customers
We expect continued uncertainty around the pandemic's impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. We actively monitor our business and the needs of our employees, customers, and communities to determine the appropriate actions to protect their health and safety and our ongoing operations. This includes actions informed by the requirements and recommendations of public health authorities. Economic and demand uncertainty in the current environment may impact our future results. We continue to monitor the demand for our services including the duration and degree to which we see declines or delays in new customer projects and payment for services performed. Although signs of recovery are starting to be observed during 2021, the demand for our services mainly in our U.S. operations, our ability to staff such demand and build capacity are key factors that continue to impact our business and results of operations.
We continue to assess how the effects of COVID-19 on the economy may impact human capital allocation, revenues, profitability, and operating expenses.
Acquisitions
We have historically pursued acquisitions that expanded our services capabilities, industry-specific expertise and onshore and nearshore footprint. We plan to selectively pursue “tuck-in” transactions in the future that will help us augment our capabilities, establish new and deeper client relationships and expand our cross-selling opportunities.
In November 2018, we acquired 4th Source, Inc., or 4th Source, headquartered in Tampa, Florida, for a total consideration of $52.8 million. In connection with the acquisition, we agreed to pay certain continuing employees of 4th Source, Inc., up to an aggregate of 8,394 shares of our common stock based on the achievement of certain EBITDA-based performance metrics during each of the following fiscal years: up to 3,222 shares for 2018, up to 4,528 shares for 2019, and up to 644 shares for 2020. The EBITDA-based performance metric was not met in 2020 and the related PSUs were cancelled. The grant date fair value of these performance stock units was approximately $2.9 million. The acquisition of 4th Source enhanced our offerings for our healthcare and retail clients and supported our transition into the U.S. market. The acquisition of 4th Source also provided us with more than 500 highly trained bi-lingual consultants located in Merida, Colima, and Mexico City, Mexico, who provide nearshore services to clients in the U.S.
In July 2019, we acquired AgileThought, LLC, headquartered in Tampa, Florida. The fair value of the aggregate consideration on the acquisition date was $60.8 million. In addition, in connection with the acquisition, we have agreed to pay certain continuing employees of AgileThought, LLC up to an aggregate of 3,150 shares of our common stock based on the achievement of certain EBITDA-based performance metrics during each of the following fiscal years: up to 1,050 shares for 2020, up to 1,050 shares for 2021, and up to 1,050 shares for 2022. The EBITDA-based performance metric was not met in 2020 and the related awards were cancelled. The grant date fair value of these performance stock units was approximately $1.2 million. The acquisition of AgileThought, LLC enhanced our delivery capabilities to clients in the professional services industry and further supported our transition into the U.S. market. The acquisition of AgileThought, LLC also provided us with approximately 330 employees based primarily across Florida. Following the acquisition, we changed our name from AN Global Inc. to AgileThought, Inc.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that the key factors affecting our performance and results of operations include our ability to:
Expand Our Client Footprint in the United States
We are focused on growing our client footprint in the United States and furthering the application of our proven business capabilities in the U.S. market. We acquired 4th Source in 2018 and AgileThought, LLC in 2019, both of which are U.S. headquartered and operated companies. These acquisitions have strengthen our presence in the U.S. market. For the year ended December 31, 2021 we had 80 active clients in the United States as compared to 92 active clients in the United States for the year ended December 31, 2020. We define an active client at a specific date as a client with whom we have recognized revenue for our services during the preceding 12-month period. As of December 31, 2021, we had 355 employees located in the United States. We believe we have a significant opportunity to penetrate the U.S. market further and expand our U.S. client base. Our ability to expand our footprint in the United States will depend on several factors, including the U.S. market perception of our services, our ability to increase nearshore delivery successfully, our ability to successfully integrate acquisitions, as well as pricing, competition and overall economic conditions, and to a lesser extent our ability to complete future complementary acquisitions.
Penetrate Existing Clients via Cross-Selling
We seek to strengthen our relationships with existing clients by cross-selling additional services. We have a proven track record of expanding our relationship with clients by offering a wide range of complementary services. Our ten largest active clients based on revenue accounted for $103.3 million, or 65.1%, and $109.9 million, or 67.0%, of our total revenue during the years ended December, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The following table shows the active clients concentration from the top client to the top twenty clients, for the periods presented:
The following table shows the number of our active clients by revenue for the periods presented:
The decrease in the total number of active clients from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 is mainly related to the completion of smaller customer projects and maintenance engagements in 2020 that were not subsequently renewed as a result of COVID-19 pandemic effects.
We believe we have the opportunity to further cross-sell our clients with additional services that we have enhanced through recent acquisitions. However, our ability to increase sales to existing clients will depend on several factors, including the level of client satisfaction with our services, changes in clients’ strategic priorities and changes in key client personnel or strategic transactions involving clients, as well as pricing, competition and overall economic conditions.
Attract, Develop, Retain and Utilize Highly Skilled Employees
We believe that attracting, training, retaining and utilizing highly skilled employees with capabilities in next-generation technologies will be key to our success. As of December 31, 2021, we had 2,670 employees. From December
31, 2018 to December 31, 2020, our number of employees decreased from 2,743 to 2,282. The decline is related to COVID-19 pandemic effects on our business, as two of our largest customers in the U.S. reduced their IT spending, combined with the contract transition with our largest client in Latin America that prompted certain cost-saving actions such as a headcount reduction. We continuously invest in training our employees and offer regular technical and language training, as well as other professional advancement programs. These programs not only help ensure our employees are well trained and knowledgeable, but also help enhance employee retention.
Strengthen Onshore and Nearshore Delivery with Diversification in Regions
In order to drive digital transformation initiatives for our clients, we believe that we need to be near the regions in which our clients are located and in similar time zones. We have established a strong base for our onshore and nearshore delivery model across Mexico. We also have offices in Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica and the United States to source diverse talent and be responsive to clients in our core markets. Since January 1, 2020, we have added 4 new delivery centers including one in the United States (Tampa, Florida) and three in Mexico (one in Mexico City and the other two in Merida and Colima as a result of the acquisitions). From December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2020, our delivery headcount decreased by 319 employees, or 14.0%. The decrease is mainly explained by the headcount reductions implemented as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic impacts on our business. However, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, our delivery headcount increased by 298 employees, driven by the demand recovery observed during 2021. As we continue to grow our relationships, we will expand our delivery centers in other cities in Mexico and other countries in similar time zones, such as Argentina and Costa Rica. While we believe that we currently have sufficient delivery center capacity to address our near-term needs and opportunities, as the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic continues to materialize, and as we continue to expand our relationships with existing clients, attract new clients and expand our footprint in the United States, we will need to expand our teams through remote work opportunities and at existing and new delivery centers in nearshore locations with an abundance of technical talent. As we do so, we compete for talented individuals with other companies in our industry and companies in other industries.
Key Business Metrics
We regularly monitor several financial and operating metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. Our key non-GAAP and business metrics may be calculated in a different manner than similarly titled metrics used by other companies. See “ Non-GAAP Measures” for additional information on non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation to the most comparable GAAP measures.
Gross Margin
We monitor gross margin to understand the profitability of the services we provide to our clients. Gross margin is calculated as net revenues for the period minus cost of revenue for the period, divided by net revenues.
Adjusted EBITDA
We monitor Adjusted EBITDA to understand the overall operating profitability of our business. We define and calculate EBITDA as net loss plus income tax expense, plus interest expense, net, plus depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA further adjusted to exclude the change in fair value of contingent consideration obligations, plus change in fair value of embedded derivative liability, plus the change in fair value of warrant liability, plus equity-based compensation expense, plus impairment charges, plus restructuring expenses, plus foreign exchange loss (gain), plus (gain) loss on business dispositions, plus gain on debt extinguishment or debt forgiveness, plus certain transaction costs, plus certain other expense, net. These adjustments also include certain costs and transaction related items that are not reflective of the underlying operating performance of the Company.
See “Non-GAAP Measures” for additional information and a reconciliation of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
Number of Large Active Clients
We monitor our number of large active clients to better understand our progress in winning large contracts on a period-over-period basis. We define the number of large active clients as the number of active clients from whom we generated more than $1.0 million of revenue in the prior 12-month period. For comparability purposes, we include the clients of the acquired businesses that meet these criteria to properly evaluate total client spending evolution.
Revenue Concentration with Top 10 clients
We monitor our revenue concentration with top 10 clients to understand our dependence on large clients on a period-over-period basis and to monitor our success in diversifying our revenue base. We define revenue concentration as the percent of our total revenue derived from our ten largest active clients.
Components of Results of Operations
Our business is organized into a single reportable segment. The Company's chief operating decision maker is the CEO, who reviews financial information presented on a consolidated basis for purposes of making operating decisions, assessing financial performance and allocating resources.
Net Revenues
Revenue is derived from the several types of integrated solutions we provide to our clients. Revenue is organized by contract type and geographic location. The type of revenue we generate from customers is classified based on: (i) time and materials, and (ii) fixed price contracts. Time and materials are transaction-based, or volume-based contracts based on input method such as labor hours incurred. Fixed price contracts are contracts where price is contractually predetermined. Revenue by geographic location is derived from revenue generated in the United States and Latin America, which includes Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Costa Rica.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of employee-related costs associated with our personnel and fees from third-party vendors engaged in the delivery of our services, including: salaries, bonuses, benefits, project related travel costs, software licenses and any other costs that relate directly to the delivery of our services.
Gross Profit
Gross profit represents net revenues less cost of revenue.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consists primarily of employee-related costs associated with our sales, marketing, legal, accounting and administrative personnel. Selling, general and administrative expenses also includes legal costs, external professional fees, brand marketing, provision for doubtful accounts, as well as expenses associated with our back-office facilities and office infrastructure, information technology, and other administrative expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization consist of depreciation and amortization expenses related to customer relationships, computer equipment, leasehold improvements, furniture and equipment, and other assets.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration Obligations
Changes in fair value of contingent consideration obligations consists of changes in estimated fair value of earnout arrangements entered into as part of our business acquisition process.
Change in Fair Value of Embedded Derivative Liabilities
Changes in fair value of embedded derivative liabilities consists of changes in the fair value of redemption and conversion features embedded within our preferred stock.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
Changes in fair value of warrant liability consist of changes to the outstanding public and private placement warrants assumed upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Equity-based Compensation Expense
Equity-based compensation expense consists of compensation expenses recognized in connection with performance incentive awards granted to our employees and board members.
Impairment Charges
Impairment charges relate to losses on impairment of goodwill and intangible assets.
Restructuring Expenses
Restructuring expenses consists of costs associated with business realignment efforts and strategic transformation costs resulting from value creation initiatives following business acquisitions, which primarily relate to severance costs from back-office headcount reductions.
Other Operating Expenses, Net
Other operating expenses, net consists primarily of acquisition related costs and transaction costs related, including legal, accounting, valuation and investor relations advisors, and compensation consultant fees, as well as other operating expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest incurred in connection with our long-term debt obligations, and amortization of debt issuance costs.
Other (Expense) Income
Other (expense) income consists of interest income on invested funds, impacts from foreign exchange transactions, gain on disposition of business, gain on loan forgiveness and other expenses.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense represents expenses or benefits associated with our operations based on the tax laws of the jurisdictions in which we operate. Our calculation of income tax expense is based on tax rates and tax laws at the end of each applicable reporting period.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the presented periods:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations information expressed as a percentage of net revenues for 2021:
Selected Quarterly Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our unaudited consolidated quarterly results of operations for each of the 8 quarters within the period from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2021. Our quarterly results of operations have been prepared on the same basis as our consolidated financial statements, and we believe they reflect all normal recurring adjustments necessary for the fair presentation of our results of operations for these periods. This information should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These quarterly results of operations are not necessarily indicative of our results of operations for a full year or any future period.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, to the most directly comparable financial measure prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net revenues
Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $5.3 million, or 3.2%, to $158.7 million from $164.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was mainly related to the suspension or scope reductions in major projects with existing clients driven by the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with the effects of attrition and reduced billing rates on certain contract negotiations.
Net Revenues by Geographic Location
Net revenues from our United States operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $9.7 million, or 8.5%, to $103.4 million from $113.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was mainly driven by a $24 million decrease in information technology spending from two customers in the professional services industry and service volume reduction with other smaller clients due to the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by a $14.4 million increase related mainly to extended scope of work with other existing customers, as well as new customers.
Net revenues from our Latin America operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $4.3 million, or 8.5%, to $55.2 million from $50.9 million for the year ended December, 2020. The change was driven by an increase of $10.9 million related to increased volume in retail and financial services clients, offset by a $4.8 million decrease in revenues from other customers as a result of project scope reductions and terminations due to COVID-19 and a decrease of $1.8 million in smaller scope projects.
Revenues by Contract Type
The following table sets forth net revenues by contract type and as a percentage of our revenues for the periods indicated:
Net revenues from our time and materials contracts for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased approximately $14.1 million, or 9.7%, to $130.6 million from $144.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The main driver of the net variation is related to the project scope reductions and suspensions with our US clients within the professional services industry due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the shift from time and material services to fixed price Agile pods with one of our clients within the financial services industry in Latin America. Net revenues from our fixed price contracts for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $8.8 million, or 45.2%, to $28.1 million from $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The main drivers of the net increase were related to the shift to fixed price Agile pods with one of our clients from the financial services industry and increased services with clients within the retail industry in Latin America under a fixed-price modality.
Cost of revenue
Year Ended December 31, % Change
2021 2020 2021 vs. 2020
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $1.2 million, or 1.0%, to $112.3 million from $113.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the scope reductions in major projects that had a corresponding decline in net revenues. Cost as a percentage of net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 1.6%, to 70.8% from 69.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the costs of non-billable onboarding time of new hires and lower utilization due to preparation for new bookings and the effects of the new labor law in Mexico, that came to effect during the third quarter, and increased the payroll cost of the Mexican workforce.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $11.5 million, or 36.3%, to $43.5 million from $32.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $6.0 million increase in employee costs mostly driven by increased sales headcount and the effect of a new variable compensation plan for the sales and delivery teams, $1.9 million increase in external professional services related to legal, accounting, audit, tax advisory and headhunting services, $1.3 million of bad debt expense due to the increase in our allowance for doubtful accounts, $1.2 million credit recorded in the second quarter of 2020 related to a Tennessee sales tax matter, $0.9 million increase in D&O insurance costs, and $0.2 million in increased cost related to IT infrastructure improvement costs.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization for year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $7.0 million, respectively.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration obligations
Change in fair value of contingent consideration obligations for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $4.4 million, or 66.7%, to $(2.2) million from $(6.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change is due to the AgileThought LLC business not meeting some of the 2020 and 2021 performance metrics established as part of contingent consideration associated with the acquisition, thus adjusting the fair value of the earnouts of subsequent periods.
Change in fair value of embedded derivative liabilities
Change in fair value of embedded derivative liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted in a gain of $4.4 million. The gain was primarily driven by the settlement of embedded derivative liabilities that occurred as a result of the Business Combination.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted in a gain of $4.7 million. The gain was primarily driven by a decrease in the market price of our public warrants, increase in risk-free rate of return and increased volatility used to estimate the fair value of our warrant liability from August 23, 2021 to December 31, 2021.
Equity-based compensation expense
Equity-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $6.3 million, or over 1,000.0%, to $6.5 million from $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In connection with the Business Combination, the Company granted stock awards covering shares of Class A common stock and accelerated previously granted restricted stock units, which resulted in $6.5 million equity-based compensation expense that was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, equity-based compensation expense was recognized in connection with board members’ restricted stock units.
Impairment charges
Impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $16.7 million, or 100.0%. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $11.6 million of goodwill impairment, $3.5 million of customer relationships impairment and $1.6 million of indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment, resulting from negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the disposition of a business within our Latin America reporting unit.
Restructuring expenses
Restructuring expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $4.6 million, or 83.5%, to $0.9 million from $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 associated with the restructuring implemented in the first quarter 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred severance costs in the fourth quarter 2021 due to the Company’s efforts to streamline its operating model and reduce layers of management.
Other operating expenses, net
Other operating expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $5.2 million, or 74.5%, to $1.8 million from $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was mainly driven by a decline in transaction expenses in connection with preparation to become a public company that was expensed in 2020 but capitalized and netted against equity in 2021.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $0.8 million, or 4.8%, to $16.5 million from $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the creditors exercising their option to convert the combined $38.1 million of debt outstanding into shares of the Company's common stock that occurred in connection with the Business Combination. In addition, the additional principal payments reduced the outstanding balance of term loans.
Other (expense) income
Other (expense) income for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $5.6 million, or 124.0%, to $(1.1) million from $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily due to a $5.5 million decrease in net foreign currency exchange gains derived mainly from exchange rate fluctuations offset by a $1.3 million increase in gain on forgiveness of a Paycheck Protection Program loan recorded in 2021.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $1.9 million, or 80.4%, to $0.5 million from $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to discrete tax items recorded in the third quarter of 2020.
Non-GAAP Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial data presented on a basis consistent with U.S. GAAP, we present certain non-GAAP financial measures, including EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. We have included the non-GAAP financial measures because they are financial measures used by our management to evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital and new investments and are among the factors analyzed in making performance-based compensation decisions for key personnel. The measures exclude certain expenses that are required under U.S. GAAP. We exclude certain non-cash expenses and certain items that are not part of our core operations.
We believe this supplemental performance measurement is useful in evaluating operating performance, as they are similar to measures reported by our public industry peers and those regularly used by security analysts, investors and other interested parties in analyzing operating performance and prospects. The non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to be a substitute for any GAAP financial measures and, as calculated, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of performance of other companies in other industries or within the same industry.
There are significant limitations associated with the use of non-GAAP financial measures. Further, these measures may differ from the non-GAAP information, even where similarly titled, used by other companies and therefore should not be used to compare our performance to that of other companies. We compensate for these limitations by providing investors and other users of our financial information a reconciliation of our non-GAAP measures to the related GAAP financial measure. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view our non-GAAP measures in conjunction with GAAP financial measures.
We define and calculate our non-GAAP financial measures as follows:
•EBITDA: Net loss plus income tax expense, plus interest expense, net, and plus depreciation and amortization.
•Adjusted EBITDA: EBITDA further adjusted to exclude the change in fair value of contingent consideration obligations, plus the change in fair value of embedded derivative liability, plus the change in fair value of warrant liability, plus equity-based compensation expense, plus impairment charges, plus restructuring expenses, plus foreign exchange loss (gain), plus (gain) loss on business dispositions, plus gain on debt extinguishment or debt forgiveness, plus certain transaction costs, plus certain other expense, net.
The following table presents the reconciliation of our EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to our net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the annual periods indicated:
1 - Represents restructuring expenses associated with the ongoing reorganization of our business operations and realignment efforts. Refer to Note 14, Restructuring, within our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
2 - Represents foreign exchange loss (gain) due to foreign currency transactions.
3 - Represents a gain on disposition of eProcure during 2020. Refer to Note 10, Other Income (Expense), within our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
4 - Represents a $1.3 million gain on forgiveness of PPP loans during the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to Note 10, Other Income (Expense), within our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
5 - Represents professional service fees primarily comprised of consulting, transaction services, accounting and legal fees
in connection with the merger transaction with LIVK and preparation for becoming and being a public company.
6 - Includes a $1.4 million non operational expense associated with consolidating legal entities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our main sources of liquidity have been our cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, and proceeds from issuances of stock and debt. Our main uses of cash are funds to operate our business, make principal and interest payments on our outstanding debt, capital expenditures, and business acquisitions.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate. Over the past several years, operating expenses have increased as we have invested in growing our business. Payments of principal and interest on our debt and earnout cash payments following our acquisitions have also been cash outflows. Our operating cash requirements may increase in the future as we continue to invest in the growth of our Company.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $8.5 million of available cash and cash equivalents, a decrease of $0.8 million from December 31, 2020. We believe that we will have sufficient financial resources to fund our operations for the next 12 months. We are continuously looking to implement strategies to improve our profitability and reduce expenses, along with evaluating alternatives such as refinancing our debt.
First Lien Facility
In 2018, we entered into a revolving credit agreement (the “Revolving Credit Agreement”) with Monroe Capital Management Advisors LLC for a revolving credit facility that permits us to borrow up to $1.5 million through November 10, 2023. In 2019, we amended the Revolving Credit Agreement to increase the borrowing limit to $5.0 million. Interest is paid monthly and calculated as LIBOR plus a margin of 8.0% to 9.0%, based on the Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in the
Revolving Credit Agreement) as calculated in the most recent compliance certificate. An additional 2.0% interest may be incurred during periods of loan covenant default.
As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate was 10.0%. We are required to pay an annual commitment fee of 0.5% on the unused portion of the commitment. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had no availability under the revolving credit facility.
In 2018, we entered into the term loan credit agreement with Monroe Capital Management Advisors LLC pursuant to which we were permitted to borrow up to $75.0 million through November 10, 2023. On July 18, 2019, we entered into an amended and restated credit agreement for the First Lien Facility to increase the borrowing amount to $98.0 million. Interest is paid monthly and calculated as LIBOR plus a margin of 8.0% to 9.0%, based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the First Lien Facility) as calculated in the most recent compliance certificate (as defined in the First Lien Facility) delivered quarterly. An additional 2.0% interest may be incurred during periods of loan covenant default. Principal payments of $0.6 million are due quarterly until maturity, at which time the remaining outstanding balance is due. The amended and restated credit agreement for the First Lien Facility was further amended on February 2, 2021, pursuant to which we agreed to pay in lieu of the first two regular quarterly principal installments in 2021 (February 2021 through and including July 2021), six monthly principal payments of $1.0 million from February 2021 through and including July 2021. Further, the Total Leverage Ratio covenant was modified for the periods ending from December 31, 2020 to March 31, 2022.
On March 22, 2021, the Company used $20.0 million from proceeds of issuance of preferred stock to partially pay the Monroe term loan. Refer to Note 16, Stockholders’ Equity, for additional information on issuance of preferred stock.
The amended and restated credit agreement for the First Lien Facility was further amended on April 30, 2021, pursuant to which we were permitted to defer, at our election, the $1.0 million monthly installment payments for April and May 2021, and in the event of such election, we would incur a fee of $0.5 million for each such deferred payment that would be payable to the lender upon the maturity date. We elected to defer the April and May 2021 payments and incurred a total of $1.0 million fee payable to the lender. Additionally, the Total Leverage Ratio and Fixed Charges Coverage Ratio (as defined in the First Lien Facility) covenants were modified for the period ended December 31, 2020 and thereafter.
On June 24, 2021, the amended and restated credit agreement for the First Lien Facility was amended to permit the incurrence of indebtedness (the “June Subordinated Debt”) of up to $8.0 million aggregate principal amount (the “Fifth Amendment to First Lien Facility”). Pursuant to the terms of the amendment and a related subordination agreement, the Subordinated Promissory Note will be subordinated in right of payment to the First Lien Facility. In addition, the amendment modifies our Total Leverage Ratio covenant and Fixed Charges Coverage Ratio covenant to accommodate the incurrence of the Subordinated Promissory Note. In consideration therefor and for the option to defer the $1.0 million monthly installment payment for April, May, June and July until September, we agreed to pay a fee of $4.0 million that is payable to the lender on the maturity date, which includes the $1.0 million fee payable to the lender pursuant to the April 30, 2021 amendment. Additionally, the $0.5 million fee per deferral that was previously established as part of the April 30, 2021 amendment was removed.
The amended and restated credit agreement for the First Lien Facility was further amended on July 26, 2021 to permit the incurrence of the Exitus Credit Facility.
On September 30, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to extend the due date of the $4.0 million in principal payments previously due for April, May, June and July, from September 30, 2021 to October 15, 2021. On October 14, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to extend the due date from October 15, 2021 to October 29, 2021. On October 29, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to further extend the due date from October 29, 2021 to November 19, 2021.
On November 15, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to reset the First Lien Facility’s Total Leverage Ratio for the quarterly periods of September 30, 2021 to June 30, 2022 and Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio covenants for the quarterly periods of September 30, 2021 to December 31, 2022. For purposes of calculating compliance with the Company’s maximum Total Leverage Ratio for the quarters ended December 31, 2021, March 31, 2022 and June 30, 2022 (but not for any quarter thereafter), the amount of the Company’s debt will be deemed to be reduced by the market value of the First Lien Shares at the applicable quarter-end. The Company may issue additional First Lien Shares from time to time
to reduce the amount of debt for purposes of the maximum Total Leverage Ratio to the extent necessary to comply with such financial ratio; however, such issuance may not be possible due to regulatory restrictions.
On November 29, 2021, the Company made a $20.0 million principal prepayment, which included the $4.0 million principal payment that was originally due September 30, 2021. The Company made this payment with proceeds from the New Second Lien Facility. Furthermore, on December 29, 2021, the Company issued 4,439,333 shares of Class A Common Stock to the administrative agent for the First Lien Facility (the “First Lien Shares”), which subject to certain terms and regulatory restrictions, may sell the First Lien Shares upon the earlier of August 29, 2022 and an event of default and apply the proceeds to the outstanding balance of the loan. Subject to regulatory restrictions, the Company may issue additional First Lien Shares from time to time to reduce the amount of debt for purposes of the Total Leverage Ratio to the extent necessary to comply with such financial ratio. In addition, the Company agreed to issue warrants to the administrative agent to purchase $7 million worth of the Company’s Class A Common Stock for nominal consideration. The warrants will be issued on the date that all amounts under the First Lien Facility have been paid in full. In addition, the Company may be required to pay Monroe cash to the extent that we cannot issue some or all of the warrants due to regulatory restrictions. The First Lien lenders charged an additional $2.9 million fee paid upon the end of the term loan in exchange for the amended terms. As of December 31, 2021, total fees payable at the end of the term loan, including fees recognized from prior amendments, totaled $6.9 million.
On November 22, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment that requires sixty percent (60%) of proceeds from future equity issuances be used to repay the outstanding balance on the First Lien Facility. On December 27, 2021, the Company closed a follow on stock offering resulting in $21.8 million of net proceeds, of which $13.7 million was used as payment of the outstanding principal and interest balances for the First Lien Facility.
On March 30, 2022, the Company entered into an amendment with the First Lien and New Second Lien Facility Lenders to waive the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for March 31, 2022. In addition, the Total Leverage Ratio covenant for the quarterly period of March 31, 2022 was reset. As consideration for entering into this amendment, the Company agrees to pay the First Lien Facility’s administrative agent a fee equal to $500,000. The fee shall be fully earned as of March 30, 2022 and shall be due and payable upon the end of the term loan. However, the fee shall be waived in its entirety if final payment in full occurs prior to or on May 30, 2022.
Second Lien Facility
On July 18, 2019, we entered into the Second Lien Facility which permitted us to borrow $25.0 million at 13.73% interest. On January 30, 2020, the Second Lien Facility was amended to increase the borrowing amount by $4.1 million. Interest is capitalized every six months and is payable at termination or conversion. The Second Lien Lenders had the option at their election to convert the loan into common shares of Legacy AgileThought (a) before January 31, 2022 if we filed for an initial public offering or entered into a merger agreement or (b) on or after January 31, 2022.
Concurrently with the execution of the merger agreement, we entered into the conversion agreement with the Second Lien Lenders, pursuant to which all of the outstanding total obligations due to each Second Lien Lender under that the Second Lien Facility were converted into shares of common stock of Legacy AgileThought immediately prior to the Business Combination. Subsequently, at the effective time of the Business Combination, such shares of common stock of Legacy AgileThought were automatically converted into the applicable portion of the common merger consideration and each Second Lien Lender was entitled to receive their proportionate interest of the common merger consideration as a holder of Legacy AgileThought common stock. At close of the Business Combination, the Second Lien Lenders received 115,923 shares of Legacy AgileThought common stock immediately prior to the Business Combination.
New Second Lien Facility
On November 22, 2021, the Company entered into a new Second Lien Facility (the “New Second Lien Facility”) Nexxus Capital and Credit Suisse (both of which are existing AgileThought shareholders and have representation on AgileThought’s Board of Directors), Manuel Senderos, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors, and Kevin Johnston, Chief Operating Officer. The New Second Lien Facility provides for a term loan facility in an initial aggregate principal amount of approximately $20.7 million, accruing interest at a rate per annum from 11% and 17%. The New Second Lien Facility has an original maturity date of March 15, 2023. If the Credit Facility remains outstanding on December 15, 2022, the maturity date of the New Second Lien Facility will be extended to May 10, 2024.
Each lender under the New Second Lien Facility has the option to convert all or any portion of its outstanding loans into AgileThought Class A Common Stock on or after December 15, 2022 or earlier, upon our request. Unless we receive shareholder approval pursuant to applicable Nasdaq rules, the amounts under the New Second Lien Facility will only
convert into up to 2,098,545 shares of Class A Common Stock and will only convert at a price per share equal to the greater of $10.19 or the then-current market value. On December 27, 2022, Manuel Senderos and Kevin Johnston exercised the conversion options for their respective loan amounts of $4.5 million and $0.2 million respectively.
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
On April 30, 2020, and May 1, 2020, the Company received, through four of its subsidiaries, Paycheck Protection Program loans, or the PPP loans, for a total amount of $9.3 million. The PPP loans bear a fixed interest rate of 1.0% over a two-year term, are guaranteed by the United States federal government, and do not require collateral from the Company. The loans may be forgiven, in part or in full, if the proceeds were used to retain and pay employees and for other qualifying expenditures. The Company submitted its forgiveness applications to the Small Business Administration between November 2020 and January 2021. On December 25, 2020, $0.1 million of a $0.2 million PPP loan was forgiven. On March 9, 2021, $0.1 million of a $0.3 million PPP loan was forgiven. On June 13, 2021, $1.2 million of a $1.2 million PPP loan was forgiven. On January 19, 2022, $7.3 million of a $7.6 million PPP loan was forgiven resulting in a remaining PPP Loan balance of $0.3 million of which $0.1 million is due within the next year. The remaining payments will be made monthly until May 2, 2025.
Subordinated Promissory Note
On June 24, 2021, the Company entered into a credit agreement with AGS Group LLC (“AGS Group”) for a principal amount of $0.7 million. The principal amount outstanding under this agreement matured on December 20, 2021 (“Original Maturity Date”) but was extended until May 19, 2022 (“Extended Maturity Date.”) Interest is due and payable in arrears on the Original Maturity Date at a 14.0% per annum until and including December 20, 2021 and at 20% per annum from the Original Maturity Date to the Extended Maturity Date calculated on the actual number of days elapsed.
Exitus Capital Subordinated Debt
On July 26, 2021, the Company agreed with existing lenders and Exitus Capital (“Subordinated Creditor”) to enter into a zero-coupon subordinated loan agreement with Exitus Capital in an aggregate principal amount equal to $3.7 million (“Subordinated Debt”). No periodic interest payments are made and the loan is due on January 26, 2022, with an option to extend up to two additional six month terms. Net loan proceeds totaled $3.2 million, net of $0.5 million in debt discount. Payment of any and all of the Subordinated Debt shall be subordinate of all existing senior debt. In the event of any liquidation, dissolution, or bankruptcy proceedings, all senior debt shall first be paid in full before any distribution shall be made to the Subordinated Creditor. The loan is subject to a 36% annual interest moratorium if full payment is not made upon the maturity date. On January 25, 2022, the Company exercised the option to extend the loan an additional six months to July 26, 2022. The Company recognized an additional $0.5 million debt issuance costs related to the loan extension. The Company has the right to further extend maturity of this facility for an additional six month period. The loan is secured by a pledge by Diego Zavala of certain of his real property located in Mexico City and is subordinated in right of payment to the First Lien Facility.
For additional information, see Note 9, Long-term Debt, to our consolidated financial statements appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Earnout Obligations
The Company records its obligations for contingent purchase price at fair value, based on the likelihood of making contingent earnout payments and stock issuances based on the underlying agreement terms. The earnout payments and value of stock issuances are subsequently remeasured to fair value each reporting date using an income approach determined based on the present value of future cash flows using internal models. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company does not have any outstanding stock issuance based earnout obligations.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, outstanding cash earnouts were $8.8 million and $10.3 million, respectively. Outstanding balance accrues interest at an annual interest rate of 12%. The balance shown at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 includes the related accrued interest. In order for the Company to make payments for its contingent purchase price obligations, in addition to having sufficient cash resources to make the payments themselves, the Company must be in compliance with liquidity and other financial and other covenants included in the First Lien Facility. The Company has not been able to satisfy those covenants to date. Whether the Company is able to satisfy those covenants will depend on the Company’s overall operating and financial performance. There can be no assurance that we will have sufficient cash flows from operating activities, cash on hand or access to borrowed funds to be able to make any contingent
purchase price payments when required to do so, and any failure to do so at such time could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by approximately $22.1 million to ($23.2) million from $(1.1) million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was mainly driven by changes in our operating assets and liabilities which decreased $20.5 million on a year over year basis, a decrease of $7.9 million in non-cash items, offset by an increase of $6.3 million in net loss.
The decrease of $20.5 million resulting from changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by (i) an increase of $27.1 million in accounts receivable, (ii) an increase $3.3 million in prepaid expenses and guarantee deposits, (iii) a decrease of approximately $1.4 million in accrued liabilities, and (iv) a $0.3 million change in lease liability partially offset by (i) an increase of $7.0 million in accounts payable and (ii) an increase of $0.8 million of deferred revenue, (iii) an increase of $3.7 million in income tax payable, and (iv) a decrease of $0.1 million in other tax assets.
The decrease of $7.9 million in non-cash items was driven by (i) the decrease of $16.7 million in impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets, (ii) the decrease of $4.4 million from the fair value of embedded derivative liabilities, (iii) the decrease of $1.2 million gain on forgiveness of debt, (iv) the decrease of $4.7 million of changes in fair value of warrant liability, and (v) the decrease of $1.6 million in deferred income tax provision, and partially offset by (i) the increase of $6.3 million of share-based compensation, (ii) the increase of $4.8 million in obligations for contingent purchase price, (iii) the increase of $0.2 million in amortization of right-of-use assets, (iv) the increase of $5.5 million in foreign currency remeasurement, (v) the decrease on the recognition of $1.3 million in gain on divestiture of eProcure (a non-strategic business), and (vi) the increase of $2.6 million in amortization of debt issuance costs.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 decreased $0.7 million to $0.9 million from $1.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as a result of a decrease in capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 increased $17.0 million to $23.6 million from $6.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash provided was primarily driven by (i) proceeds from $27.6 million of PIPE financing, (ii) an increase of $20.0 million in share capital due to the issuance of preferred stock, which was subsequently converted into Class A common stock, (iii) an increase of $5.7 million in share capital as a result of the Business Combination, (iv) a $4.3 million decrease in the payment of contingent consideration, (v) an increase in proceeds from loans of $11.2 million primarily related to the New Second Lien Facility, and (vi) proceeds of $24.9 million from the follow on issuance offset by (i) an increase of $59.2 million in repayment of borrowings mainly on the First Lien Facility (ii) the repayment of deferred issuance costs as a result of the Business Combination and transaction costs of $13.0 million, (iii) the payment of $1.4 million of debt issuance costs, and (iv) paid $3.1 million in transaction costs for the follow on share issuance.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
1 - Debt obligations includes the $7.3 million PPP loan forgiveness received in January 2022, see Note 21 - Subsequent events for further information.
The commitment amounts in the table above are associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts. The table does not include obligations under agreements that we can cancel without a significant penalty.
For additional information on our debt and lease obligations, see Note 9, Long-term Debt and Note 8, Leases in our audited consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe that the following accounting policies involve a high degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of our operations. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of our other significant accounting policies. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those financial statements and accompanying notes. Although we believe that the estimates we use are reasonable, due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making those estimates, actual results reported in future periods could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Account Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Revenue is recognized when or as control of promised products or services are transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for those products or services. In instances where revenue is recognized over time, the Company uses an appropriate input or output measurement method, typically based on the contract or labor volume.
The Company applies judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intention to pay based on a variety of factors, including the customer’s historical payment experience. If there is uncertainty about the receipt of payment for the services, revenue recognition is deferred until the uncertainty is sufficiently resolved. Our payment terms are based on customary business practices and can vary by region and customer type, but are generally 30-90 days. Since the term between invoicing and expected payment is less than a year, we do not adjust the transaction price for the effects of a financing component.
The Company may enter into arrangements that consist of any combination of our deliverables. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised deliverables, the Company determines whether promised deliverables are distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, the promised deliverables are accounted for as a single performance obligation. For arrangements with multiple distinct performance obligations, we allocate consideration among the performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling price. The standalone selling price is the price at which we would sell a promised good or service on an individual basis to a customer. When not directly observable, the Company generally estimates standalone selling price by using the expected cost plus a margin approach. The Company reassesses these estimates on a periodic basis or when facts and circumstances change.
Revenues related to software maintenance services are recognized over the period the services are provided using an output method that is consistent with the way in which value is delivered to the customer.
Revenues related to cloud hosting solutions, which include a combination of services including hosting and support services, and do not convey a license to the customer, are recognized over the period as the services are provided. These arrangements represent a single performance obligation.
For software license agreements that require significant customization of third-party software, the software license and related customization services are not distinct as the customization services may be complex in nature or significantly modify or customize the software license. Therefore, revenue is recognized as the services are performed in accordance with an output method which measures progress towards satisfaction of the performance obligation.
Revenues related to our non-hosted third-party software license arrangements that do not require significant modification or customization of the underlying software are recognized when the software is delivered as control is transferred at a point in time.
Revenues related to consulting services (time-and-materials), transaction-based or volume-based contracts are recognized over the period the services are provided using an input method such as labor hours incurred.
The Company may enter into arrangements with third party suppliers to resell products or services, such as software licenses and hosting services. In such cases, the Company evaluates whether the Company is the principal (i.e., report revenues on a gross basis) or agent (i.e., report revenues on a net basis). In doing so, the Company first evaluates whether it controls the good or service before it is transferred to the customer. In instances where the Company controls the good or service before it is transferred to the customer, the Company is the principal; otherwise, the Company is the agent. Determining whether we control the good or service before it is transferred to the customer may require judgment.
Some of our service arrangements are subject to customer acceptance clauses. In these instances, the Company must determine whether the customer acceptance clause is substantive. This determination depends on whether the Company can independently confirm the product meets the contractually agreed-upon specifications or if the contract requires customer review and approval. When a customer acceptance is considered substantive, the Company does not recognize revenue until customer acceptance is obtained.
Client contracts sometimes include incentive payments received for discrete benefits delivered to clients or service level agreements and volume rebates that could result in credits or refunds to the client. Such amounts are estimated at contract inception and are adjusted at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for its business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations, by recognizing the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquired business, measured at their acquisition date fair values. Contingent consideration is included within the acquisition cost and is recognized at its fair value on the acquisition date. A liability resulting from contingent consideration is re-measured to fair value as of each reporting date until the contingency is resolved, and subsequent changes in fair value are recognized in earnings. Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred within other operating expenses, net.
Equity-Based Compensation
We recognize and measure compensation expense for all equity-based awards based on the grant date fair value.
For performance share units (“PSUs”), we are required to estimate the probable outcome of the performance conditions in order to determine the equity-based compensation cost to be recorded over the vesting period. Vesting is tied to performance conditions that include the achievement of EBITDA-based metrics and/or the occurrence of a liquidity event.
The grant date fair value is determined based on the fair market value of the Company’s shares on the grant date of such awards. Because there is no public market for the Company’s equity prior to the Business Combination, the Company determines the fair value of shares by using an income approach, specifically a discounted cash flow method, and in consideration of a number of objective and subjective factors, including the Company’s actual operating and financial performance, expectations of future performance, market conditions and liquidation events, among other factors.
Prior to the Business Combination, since the Company’s shares were not publicly traded and its shares were rarely traded privately, expected volatility is estimated based on the average historical volatility of similar entities with publicly traded shares. We periodically assess the reasonableness of our assumptions and update our estimates as required. If actual results differ significantly from our estimates, equity-based compensation expense and our results of operations could be materially affected. The Company’s accounting policy is to account for forfeitures of employee awards as they occur.
Warrants
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging.
For warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are recorded as liabilities. At the end of each reporting period, changes in fair value during the period are recognized as a component of results of operations. The Company will continue to adjust the warrant liability for changes in the fair value until the earlier of a) the exercise or expiration of the warrants or b) the redemption of the warrants.
Our public warrants meet the criteria for equity classification and accordingly, are reported as a component of stockholders’ equity while our private warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and are thus classified as a liability.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations.