Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review "Item 1A, Risk Factors" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company committed to transforming patients’ lives through scientific leadership in the field of cellular metabolism and adjacent areas of biology, with the goal of creating differentiated, small molecule medicines for genetically defined diseases. We take a systems biology approach to deeply understand disease states, drive the discovery and validation of novel therapeutic targets, and define patient selection strategies, thereby increasing the probability that our experimental medicines will have the desired therapeutic effect, while cultivating connections with patient communities, healthcare professionals, partners and colleagues to discover, develop and deliver potential therapies for genetically defined diseases, or GDDs.
The lead product in our genetically defined disease, or GDD, portfolio, PYRUKYND® (mitapivat), is an activator of both wild-type and a variety of mutant pyruvate kinase, or PK, enzymes, for the potential treatment of hemolytic anemias. In February 2022, the FDA approved PYRUKYND® for the treatment of hemolytic anemia in adults with pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency in the United States and we expect to commercially launch PYRUKYND® in the first quarter of 2022. In June 2021, we submitted a marketing authorization application, or MAA, to the EMA for PYRUKYND® for the treatment of adults with PK deficiency in the European Union. The MAA has passed validation, and the regulatory review process is ongoing. In addition, we are currently evaluating PYRUKYND® for the treatment of α- and β-thalassemia and sickle cell disease, or SCD, in the ongoing clinical trials described below and we intend to evaluate PYRUKYND® in pediatric patients with PK deficiency in the planned clinical trials described below. We are also developing AG-946, a novel, next-generation PK activator, for the potential treatment of hemolytic anemias and other indications, including SCD and anemia associated with low- to intermediate-risk myelodysplastic syndrome, or L-IR MDS.
In addition to the aforementioned development programs, we foster a productive research engine and are seeking to advance multiple novel, investigational therapies in clinical and preclinical development in our focus area of GDDs, based on our scientific leadership in the field of cellular metabolism and adjacent areas of biology.
Sale of Oncology Business to Servier Pharmaceuticals, LLC (Servier)
On March 31, 2021, we completed the sale of our oncology business to Servier Pharmaceuticals LLC, or Servier. The transaction included the sale of our oncology business, including TIBSOVO®, our clinical-stage product candidates vorasidenib, AG-270 and AG-636, and our oncology research programs for a payment of approximately $1.8 billion in cash at the closing, subject to certain adjustments, and a payment of $200 million in cash, if, prior to January 1, 2027, vorasidenib is granted new drug application, or NDA, approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, with an approved label that permits vorasidenib’s use as a single agent for the adjuvant treatment of patients with Grade 2 glioma that have an isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 or 2 mutation (and, to the extent required by such approval, the vorasidenib companion diagnostic test is granted an FDA premarket approval), as well as a royalty of 5% of U.S. net sales of TIBSOVO® from the close of the transaction through loss of exclusivity, and a royalty of 15% of U.S. net sales of vorasidenib from the first commercial sale of vorasidenib through loss of exclusivity. Servier also acquired our co-commercialization rights for Bristol Myers Squibb’s IDHIFA® and the right to receive a $25.0 million potential milestone payment under our prior collaboration agreement with Celgene Corporation, or Celgene, and following the sale Servier is responsible for conducting certain clinical development activities within the IDHIFA® development program.
The oncology business met the criteria within Accounting Standards Codification 205-20 to be reported as discontinued operations because the transaction was a strategic shift in business that had a major effect on our operations and financial results. Therefore, we have reported the historical results of the oncology business including the results of operations and cash flows as discontinued operations, and related assets and liabilities were retrospectively reclassified as assets and liabilities of discontinued operations for all periods presented herein. Unless otherwise noted, applicable amounts in the prior year have been recast to conform to this discontinued operations presentation. Refer to Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. A more complete description of our business prior to the consummation of the transaction is included in Item 1. “Business”, in Part I of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2020 that was previously filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, on February 25, 2021.
Financial Operations Overview
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
As of December 31, 2021, we have not experienced a significant financial or supply chain impact directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic but have experienced some disruptions to clinical operations, including timelines to complete patient enrollment in some of our clinical trials, as further described below. We are continuing to serve third parties while taking precautions to provide a safe work environment for our employees and third parties. Our lab-based employees who need to be onsite to fulfill their job responsibilities have been onsite since late May 2020, and we have opened our Cambridge office to employees who prefer to work onsite. Our field-based employees engage with healthcare providers and other third parties remotely and, where local regulations allow, on a limited in-person basis. We are conducting our return to work program under strict guidelines as required by federal, state, and local authorities. Effective November 8, 2021, we will require all employees, regardless of role or work location, to be fully vaccinated against COVID-19, as defined by the Center of Disease Control and Prevention's guidelines, subject to limited exceptions. We have been monitoring our supply chain network for disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and our third-party manufacturers remain largely unaffected, with any campaign delays experienced to date being limited to a few days in duration. Although global shipping continues to be disrupted due to the pandemic, we have not experienced a supply impact.
The extent of the pandemic’s effect on our operational and financial performance will depend in large part on future developments, which cannot be predicted with confidence at this time. Future developments include changes in the duration, scope and severity of the pandemic, including any variant strains of the COVID-19 virus, the actions taken to contain or mitigate its impact, the impact on governmental programs and budgets, the supply, distribution and efficacy of vaccines, and the resumption of widespread economic activity. Any prolonged material disruption of our employees, suppliers, manufacturing, or third parties could negatively impact our consolidated financial position, consolidated results of operations and consolidated cash flows. As a result, we may have to take further actions that we determine are in the best interests of our employees or as required by federal, state, or local authorities.
General
Since inception, our operations have primarily focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, assembling our core capabilities in cellular metabolism, identifying potential product candidates, undertaking preclinical studies, conducting clinical trials, establishing a commercial infrastructure, preparing for the commercial launch of PYRUKYND® and, prior to the sale of our oncology business to Servier on March 31, 2021, marketing TIBSOVO® and IDHIFA®. Through March 31, 2021, we have financed our operations primarily through proceeds from the sale of our royalty rights, commercial sales of TIBSOVO®, funding received from our collaboration agreements, private placements of our preferred stock, our initial public offering of our common stock and concurrent private placement of common stock to an affiliate of Celgene, and our follow-on public offerings. Following the sale of our oncology business to Servier on March 31, 2021, we expect to finance our operations primarily through cash on hand, royalty payments from Servier with respect to U.S. net sales of TIBSOVO®, the potential milestone payment from Servier if vorasidenib is approved by the FDA, and potential sales of PYRUKYND® if successfully launched by us and, potentially, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and other nondilutive strategic transactions.
Additionally, since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1,604.7 million and our net losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $327.4 million and $411.5 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $238.8 million. The net income we generated in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the sale of our oncology business to Servier, which was consummated on March 31, 2021. Following the consummation of the sale of our oncology business, we expect to incur significant expenses and net losses until such time we are able to report profitable results. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from year to year. We expect that we will continue to incur significant expenses as we continue to advance and expand clinical development activities for our lead programs: PYRUKYND®, and AG-946; continue to discover and validate novel targets and drug product candidates; expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and hire additional commercial, development and scientific personnel.
Research and development expenses
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs related to our GDD portfolio to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our product candidate development programs progress. However, the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or
know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development and to commercialize these product candidates. While PYRUKYND® was only recently approved by the FDA, we are unable to predict when future net cash inflows will commence from PYRUKYND® or any of our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing medicines, including the uncertainty of:
•establishing an appropriate safety profile with an investigational new drug application, or IND, and/or NDA-enabling toxicology and clinical trials;
•the successful enrollment in, and completion of, clinical trials;
•the receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•establishing compliant commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
•launching commercial sales of the products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
•maintaining an acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
•expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations, or CROs, that conduct research and development and both preclinical and clinical activities on our behalf, and the cost of consultants;
•the cost of lab supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical and clinical study materials; and
•facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and the maintenance of facilities, insurance and other operating costs.
The following summarizes our most advanced programs:
PYRUKYND® (mitapivat): First-in-Class PK Activator
We are developing PYRUKYND® for the treatment of PK deficiency and other hemolytic anemias such as thalassemia and SCD. PYRUKYND® is an orally available small molecule and a potent activator of the wild-type and mutated PKR enzymes. To date, we have demonstrated in clinical trials that treatment with PYRUKYND® can lead to durable sustained increases in hemoglobin in patients with amenable mutations in the PKR gene and a statistically significant and clinically meaningful reduction in transfusion burden in regularly transfused patients with PK deficiency, and we have observed in clinical trials of PYRUKYND® durable improvements in hemoglobin concentration and markers of hemolysis and ineffective erythropoeiesis in both α- and β- halassemia patients and reductions in 2,3-DPG and increases in ATP in SCD patients.
In February 2022, the FDA approved PYRUKYND® for the treatment of hemolytic anemia in adults with pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency in the United States. In June 2021, we submitted a marketing authorization application, or MAA, to the EMA for the treatment of adults with PK deficiency the European Union. The MAA has passed validation, and the regulatory review process is ongoing. We have worldwide development and commercial rights to PYRUKYND® and expect to fund the future development and commercialization costs related to this program. PYRUKYND® has been granted orphan drug designation for the treatment of PK deficiency by the FDA and the EMA. Additionally, PYRUKYND® has received orphan drug designation from the FDA for the treatment of thalassemia and sickle cell disease. We have built our US commercial infrastructure to support the commercial launch of PYRUKYND in the US and continue to evaluate all options for the commercialization and continued development of PYRUKYND® outside of the United States in order to maximize the benefit to patients and value to our shareholders, including through exploring potential partnership opportunities.
We are evaluating PYRUKYND® in the following clinical trials:
•ENERGIZE, a phase 3, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled multicenter study evaluating the efficacy and safety of PYRUKYND® as a potential treatment for adults with non-transfusion-dependent α- or β-thalassemia, defined as ≤5 RBC units during the 24-week period before randomization and no RBC transfusions ≤8 weeks before providing informed consent or during the screening period. The primary endpoint of the trial is percentage of patients with hemoglobin response, defined as a ≥1.0 g/dL increase in average hemoglobin concentration from Week 12 through Week 24 compared with baseline. Secondary endpoints include markers of hemolysis and ineffective erythropoiesis, as well as patient-reported outcome measures. This trial is enrolling patients, and we expect to enroll a meaningful portion of the patients by the end of 2022.
•ENERGIZE-T, a phase 3, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled multicenter study evaluating the efficacy and safety of PYRUKYND® as a potential treatment for adults with transfusion-dependent α- or β-thalassemia, defined as 6 to 20 RBC units transfused and ≤6-week transfusion-free period during the 24-week period before randomization. The primary endpoint of the trial is percentage of patients with transfusion reduction response, defined as a ≥50% reduction in transfused RBC units with a reduction of ≥2 units of transfused RBCs in any consecutive 12-week period through Week 48 compared with baseline. Secondary endpoints include additional transfusion reduction measures and percentage of participants with transfusion-independence. This trial is enrolling patients, and we expect to enroll a meaningful portion of the patients by the end of 2022.
•RISE UP, a phase 2/3 study evaluating the efficacy and safety of PYRUKYND® in SCD patients who are 16 years of age or older, have had between two and 10 sickle cell pain crises in the past 12 months, and have hemoglobin within the range of 5.5 to 10.5 g/dL during screening. The phase 2 portion of the trial, which has initiated, includes a 12-week randomized, placebo-controlled period in which participants will be randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive 50 mg PYRUKYND® twice daily, 100 mg PYRUKYND® twice daily or matched placebo. The primary endpoints are hemoglobin response, defined as ≥1 g/dL increase in average hemoglobin concentration from Week 10 through Week 12 compared to baseline, and safety. These data will be used to establish a clear dosing paradigm for the phase 3 portion. The phase 3 portion includes a 52-week randomized, placebo-controlled period in which participants will be randomized in a 2:1 ratio to receive the recommended PYRUKYND® dose level or placebo. The primary endpoints are hemoglobin response, defined as ≥1 g/dL increase in average hemoglobin from baseline to Week 52, and annualized rate of sickle cell pain crises. Participants who complete either the phase 2 or phase 3 portion will have the option to move into a 216-week open-label extension period to continue to receive PYRUKYND®. The phase 2 portion of this trial is enrolling patients, and we expect to complete enrollment in the phase 2 portion of the trial by the end of 2022.
•An extension study evaluating the long-term safety, tolerability and efficacy of treatment with PYRUKYND® in patients from ACTIVATE and ACTIVATE-T, our completed pivotal trials of PYRUKYND® in not regularly transfused and regularly transfused patients with PK deficiency.
•An extension study evaluating the long-term safety, tolerability and efficacy of treatment with PYRUKYND® in patients from DRIVE PK, our completed global phase 2, first-in-patient, open-label safety and efficacy clinical trial of PYRUKYND® in adult, not regularly transfused patients with PK deficiency.
•An extension study evaluating the safety, tolerability and efficacy of treatment with PYRUKYND® in patients from our completed phase 2, open-label safety and efficacy clinical trial of PYRUKYND® in adults with not-transfusion-dependent α- and β-thalassemia.
•In collaboration with the National Institutes of Health, or NIH, we are evaluating PYRUKYND® in a phase 1 trial in patients with SCD pursuant to a cooperative research and development agreement. The core trial period has completed. The long-term extension study is ongoing. In June 2020, clinical proof of concept was established based on a preliminary analysis of the data from this trial.
•In collaboration with UMC Utrecht, or UMC, we are evaluating PYRUKYND® in patients with SCD pursuant to an investigator sponsored trial agreement. The trial is ongoing and enrolling patients, although UMC experienced disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect to initiate two phase 3 trials of PYRUKYND®, ACTIVATE-kids and ACTIVATE-kidsT, in not regularly transfused and regularly transfused pediatric patients with PK deficiency in mid-2022.
AG-946: Novel, Next-generation PKR Activator
We are developing AG-946, a novel, next-generation PKR activator, for the potential treatment of hemolytic anemias. We are evaluating AG-946, in a phase 1 trial of AG-946 in healthy volunteers and in patients with SCD. The trial is currently enrolling healthy volunteers, and we expect to initiate the SCD patient cohort of this trial in the first half of 2022. We expect to initiate a phase 2a study of AG-946 in adults with L-IR MDS by year-end 2022.
Other research and platform programs
Other research and platform programs include activities related to exploratory efforts, target validation and lead optimization for our discovery and follow-on programs, and our proprietary metabolomics platform.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, business development, commercial, legal and human resources functions. Other significant costs include facility-related costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued research and development activities and ongoing and future commercialization activities related to our GDD portfolio, including the commercialization of PYRUKYND® and any of our other product candidates. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, among other expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations and are policies that require a significant level of judgment and estimates.
Accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. Certain service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to: (i) CROs and other third parties in connection with clinical studies and preclinical development activities; (ii) investigative sites in connection with clinical studies; and (iii) third parties related to product manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to CROs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation awards in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation -Stock Compensation. For stock-based awards granted to employees, non-employees and members of the board of directors for their services and for participation in our employee stock purchase plan, we estimate the grant date fair value of each option award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires us to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the common stock consistent with the expected life of the option, risk-free interest rates and expected dividend yields of the common stock.
Expected term. We use the “simplified method” as prescribed by the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share Based Payments, to estimate the expected term of stock option grants. Under this approach, the weighted-average expected life is presumed to be the average of the contractual term of ten years and the weighted-average vesting term of the stock options, taking into consideration multiple vesting tranches. We utilize this method due to lack of historical data and the plain-vanilla nature of our share-based awards.
Volatility. The expected volatility has been determined using Agios' historical volatilities for a period equal to the expected term of the option grant.
Risk-free rate. The risk-free rate is based on the yield curve of U.S. Treasury securities with periods commensurate with the expected term of the options being valued.
Dividends. We have never paid, and do not anticipate paying, any cash dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, use an expected dividend yield of zero in the option-pricing model.
Forfeitures. We account for forfeitures as they occur and, therefore, do not estimate forfeitures.
For awards subject to service-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense equal to the grant date fair value of stock options on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. For awards subject to both performance and service-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense over the remaining service period if the performance condition is considered probable of achievement using management’s best estimates.
Discontinued Operations
We accounted for the sale of our oncology business in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, ASC, 205 Discontinued Operations and Accounting Standards Update, ASU, No. 2014-08, Reporting of Discontinued Operations and Disclosures of Disposals of Components of an Entity. We followed the held-for-sale criteria as defined in ASC 360 and ASC 205. ASC 205 requires that a component of an entity that has been disposed of or is classified as held for sale and has operations and cash flows that can be clearly distinguished from the rest of the entity be reported as assets held for sale and discontinued operations. In the period a component of an entity has been disposed of or classified as held for sale, the results of operations for the periods presented are reclassified into separate line items in the consolidated statements of operations. Assets and liabilities are also reclassified into separate line items on the related consolidated balance sheets for the periods presented. The statements of cash flows for the periods presented are also reclassified to reflect the results of discontinued operations as separate line items. ASU 2014-08 requires that only a disposal of a component of an entity, or a group of components of an entity, that represents a strategic shift that has, or will have, a major effect on the reporting entity’s operations and financial results be reported in the financial statements as discontinued operations. ASU 2014-08 also provides guidance on the financial statement presentations and disclosures of discontinued operations.
Due to the sale of our oncology business during the first quarter of 2021, in accordance with ASC 205, we have classified the results of the oncology business as discontinued operations in our consolidated statements of operations and cash flows for all periods presented, see Note 3, Discontinued Operations. All assets and liabilities associated with our oncology business were therefore classified as assets and liabilities of discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheets for the periods presented. All amounts included in the notes to the consolidated financial statements relate to continuing operations unless otherwise noted.
Results of Operations
Certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform with current presentation.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Total Operating Expenses
Total Operating Expenses - 2021 vs 2020 - The increase in total operating expenses of $42.5 million in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to an increase of $36.2 million in research and development expenses, which is described below under Research and Development Expenses, and an increase of $6.3 million in selling, general and administrative expense due to higher personnel costs related to additional hiring for our sales workforce and commercial launch preparation activities in anticipation of the FDA approval of PYRUKYND®. Included in selling, general and administrative expenses is approximately $4.4 million of reimbursable transition related services we provided to Servier related to the sale of the oncology business.
Total Operating Expenses - 2020 vs 2019 - The increase in total operating expenses of $19.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase of $13.1 million in selling, general and administrative expense due to higher personnel costs, including stock-based compensation expense, related to additional hiring for our workforce. Included in selling, general and administrative expense is approximately $5.0 million in professional fees related to entering into the sale transaction with
Servier. The increase of $6.5 million in research and development expenses is described below under Research and Development Expenses.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses, by major program, are outlined in the table below:
Total Research and Development Expenses - 2021 vs 2020 - The increase in research and development expenses of $36.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to a $36.8 million increase in our direct expenses. The increase in direct expenses was primarily due to a $25.3 million increase in PYRUKYND® costs and a $9.2 million increase in other research and platform programs. The increase in PYRUKYND® costs was primarily due to startup costs for the initiated phase 3 trials of PYRUKYND®, ENERGIZE and ENERGIZE-T, and the phase 2/3 trial of PYRUKYND® in patients with SCD, RISE UP, offset by closeouts of ACTIVATE & ACTIVATE-T studies, and commercial launch preparation activities. The increase in other research and platform programs costs was primarily driven by planned increased activity on various exploratory activities. Included in total indirect research and development expenses was $9.4 million of reimbursable transition related services we provided to Servier related to the sale of the oncology business for discovery, clinical development, technical operations, and related activities which will continue for periods ranging from one month to approximately one year after March 31, 2021.
Total Research and Development Expenses - 2020 vs 2019 - The increase in research and development expenses of $6.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a $3.9 million increase in our direct expenses and a $2.7 million increase in our indirect expenses. The increase in direct expenses was primarily due to a $2.5 million increase for AG-946 driven by the phase 1 trial start.
Other Income and Expense
Other Income and Expense- 2021 vs 2020 - The increase in other income, net in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily relates to approximately $13.8 million of reimbursable transition related services and fees for the sale of the oncology business for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in gain on sale of oncology business primarily relates to income from royalties on U.S. net sales of TIBSOVO® by Servier of approximately $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in interest income, net is primarily attributable to a decrease in interest rates.
Other Income and Expense - 2020 vs 2019 - The decrease in interest income, net in 2020 compared to 2019, is primarily attributable to the decrease in interest rates at the end of the first quarter of 2020, which reduced the interest rates earned by 0.50% to 1.50% from prior periods and the decrease in our outstanding marketable securities balance for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss from Operations and Net Income (Loss)
Loss from Operations and Net Income (Loss) - 2021 vs 2020 - The increase in net loss from continuing operations in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by higher research and development expenses discussed above under Research and Development Expenses, partially offset by $13.9 million of reimbursable transition related services and fees related to the sale of the oncology business and a $6.6 million gain on sale of oncology business related to income from royalties on U.S. net sales of TIBSOVO® by Servier. The change in net income (loss) from discontinued operations and net income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the sale of our oncology business to Servier for approximately $1.8 billion in cash in the first quarter of 2021, which is included within net income from discontinued operations.
Loss from Operations and Net Income (Loss) - 2020 vs 2019 - The increase in net loss from continuing operations in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by higher operating expenses as described above in Total Operating Expenses. The decrease in net loss in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by net income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the sale of the oncology business discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
Since our inception, and through March 31, 2021, we financed our operations primarily through proceeds from the sale of our royalty rights, commercial sales of TIBSOVO®, funding received from our collaboration agreements, private placements of our preferred stock, our initial public offering of our common stock and concurrent private placement of common stock to an affiliate of Celgene, and our follow-on public offerings. Following the sale of our oncology business to Servier on March 31, 2021, we have financed and expect to continue to finance our operations primarily through cash on hand, royalty payments from Servier with respect to U.S. net sales of TIBSOVO®, the potential milestone payment from Servier if vorasidenib is approved by the FDA, potential sales of PYRUKYND®, if successfully launched by us and, potentially, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and other nondilutive strategic transactions.
On March 31, 2021, we completed the sale of our oncology business to Servier Pharmaceuticals LLC, or Servier. The transaction included the sale of our oncology business, including TIBSOVO®, our clinical-stage product candidates vorasidenib, AG-270 and AG-636, and our oncology research programs for a payment of approximately $1.8 billion in cash at the closing, subject to certain adjustments, and a payment of $200 million in cash, if, prior to January 1, 2027, vorasidenib is granted new drug application, or NDA, approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, with an approved label that permits vorasidenib’s use as a single agent for the adjuvant treatment of patients with Grade 2 glioma that have an isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 or 2 mutation (and, to the extent required by such approval, the vorasidenib companion diagnostic test is granted an FDA premarket approval), as well as a royalty of 5% of U.S. net sales of TIBSOVO® from the close of the transaction through loss of exclusivity, and a royalty of 15% of U.S. net sales of vorasidenib from the first commercial sale of vorasidenib through loss of exclusivity. Servier also acquired our co-commercialization rights for Bristol Myers Squibb’s IDHIFA® and the right to receive a $25.0 million potential milestone payment under our prior collaboration agreement with Celgene Corporation, or Celgene, and following the sale Servier is responsible for conducting certain clinical development activities within the IDHIFA® development program.
On March 25, 2021, we announced that our board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $1.2 billion of our outstanding shares of common stock, or the Repurchase Program, using the proceeds from the sale of our oncology business to Servier. On March 31, 2021, in connection with the Repurchase Program, we entered into a definitive share repurchase agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, or BMS, to repurchase 7.1 million shares of our common stock held by certain subsidiaries of BMS for an aggregate purchase price of $344.5 million, or $48.38 per share. This repurchase was completed on April 5, 2021. Further, on April 2, 2021, in connection with the Repurchase Program, we entered into a Rule 10b5-1 repurchase plan pursuant to which we may repurchase up to $600 million of shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we have repurchased approximately 9.1 million shares of common stock for $458.0 million, or $50.35 per share, under the Rule 10b5-1 repurchase plan. On October 5, 2021, we terminated our Rule 10b5-1 share repurchase program and on October 13, 2021 entered into a Rule 10b-18 repurchase plan that allows us to conduct open market repurchases over time up to our remaining authorization under the Repurchase Program. In total, as of December 31, 2021, we have repurchased 16.2 million shares of common stock for $802.5 million, or $49.49 per share, under the Repurchase Program. We have paused our share repurchases
and for the foreseeable future, we expect that our capital allocation will be prioritized towards opportunities to accelerate programs in our development pipeline and/or pursue potential complementary business development opportunities.
On April 30, 2020, we entered into an at-the-market sales agreement, or the 2020 sales agreement, with Cowen & Company LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $250.0 million through Cowen pursuant to a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC on April 30, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, $250.0 million in common stock remained available for future issuance under the 2020 sales agreement.
In November 2019, we completed a public offering of 9,487,500 shares of common stock at an offering price of $31.00 per share. We received net proceeds from this offering of $277.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions paid by us, certain of which are subject to reimbursement.
In addition to our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, we are eligible to earn a $200 million milestone payment, and royalty payments under our transaction agreement with Servier. Our right to payments under our transaction agreement with Servier is our only committed potential external source of funds. Whether the regulatory approval milestone for vorasidenib will be achieved is subject to various risks and uncertainties, many of which are outside our control, including adverse clinical developments with respect to vorasidenib. Furthermore, we cannot predict what success, if any, Servier may have in the United States with respect to sales of TIBSOVO® and, if approved, vorasidenib, and consequently we cannot estimate the amount of royalty payments that we can expect to receive from Servier under the purchase agreement prior to the loss of exclusivity of these products.
Cash flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash used in operating activities
Cash used in operating activities of $407.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, of which $314.1 million was used by continuing operations and $93.2 million was used by discontinued operations, was primarily due to operating expenses driven by research and development costs described above in Research and Development Expenses, offset by cash received of $39.5 million from sales of TIBSOVO®, and $1.2 million in cost reimbursements related to our collaboration agreements with Celgene.
Cash used in operating activities of $290.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $243.9 million was used by continuing operations and $46.8 million was used by discontinued operations, was primarily due to operating expenses driven by research and development costs described above in Research and Development Expenses, offset by cash received of $123.8 million from sales of TIBSOVO®, $7.9 million in royalty payments and $6.1 million in cost reimbursements related to our Collaboration Agreements with Celgene, $7.0 million in interest received, and $3.6 million in cost reimbursements related to our agreement with CStone Pharmaceuticals.
Cash used in operating activities of $370.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $236.2 million was used by continuing operations and $134.5 million was used by discontinued operations, was primarily due to operating expenses driven by research and development costs described above in Research and Development Expenses, offset by cash received of $60.7 million from product sales of TIBSOVO®, $19.1 million in cost reimbursements and royalty payments under our Collaboration Agreements with Celgene, and a $5.0 million milestone payment under our agreement with CStone Pharmaceuticals.
Net cash provided by investing activities
The cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, of which $1,802.9 million was provided by discontinued operations and $554.2 million was used by continuing operations was primarily due to the approximately $1.8 billion in cash proceeds received from the sale of our oncology business to Servier that was completed on March 31, 2021, and the result of higher purchases of marketable securities than proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities.
The cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $76.5 million was provided by continuing operations and $0.8 million was used by discontinued operations was primarily the result of lower purchases of
marketable securities than proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities, offset by $14.9 million in purchases of property and equipment.
The cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $91.6 million was provided by continuing operations and $0.1 million was used by discontinued operations was primarily the result of lower purchases of marketable securities than proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities, offset by $12.0 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities
The cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily the due to the repurchase of common stock under our Repurchase Program of $802.5 million, partially offset by $37.3 million of proceeds received from stock option exercises and purchases made pursuant to our employee stock purchase plan.
The cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of net proceeds of $250.5 million from the sale of our tiered, sales-based royalty rights on worldwide net sales of IDHIFA® (enasidenib) and our ex-US regulatory milestones to RPI in June 2020, and the $11.3 million of proceeds received from stock option exercises and purchases made pursuant to our employee stock purchase plan.
The cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of proceeds of $277.2 million from the November 2019 follow-on public offering, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, as well as proceeds of $12.5 million received from stock option exercises and purchases made pursuant to our employee stock purchase plan.
Funding requirements
Although our expenses decreased following the completion of the sale of our oncology business to Servier on March 31, 2021, we anticipated that this decrease will be offset as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, seek marketing approvals for, and commercialize our product candidates in our GDD portfolio, including as we commercialize PYRUKYND®. If we obtain marketing approval for PYRUKYND® in other indications our outside of the united states or for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
We expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, will enable us to execute our operating plan through major catalysts and to cash-flow positivity without the need to raise additional equity. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the amount of contingent consideration we ultimately receive in connection with the sale of our oncology business to Servier;
•the amount and timing of revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of PYRUKYND® or any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•the costs and timing of commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, sales, marketing and distribution for PYRUKYND®;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of drug discovery, preclinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, sales, marketing and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we may receive marketing approval;
•our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•our ability to successfully execute on our strategic plans;
•operational delays due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic; and
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license, or monitor or out-license, other medicines and technologies.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs primarily through cash on hand, royalty payments from Servier with respect to U.S. net sales of TIBSOVO®, a potential milestone payment from Servier if vorasidenib is approved by the FDA and, potentially, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and other nondilutive strategic transactions. In addition, in connection with potential future strategic transactions, we may pursue opportunistic debt offerings, and equity or equity-linked offerings. We do not have any committed external source of funds other than the potential milestone and royalty payments that we are eligible to receive under our purchase agreement with Servier. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership
interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed or on attractive terms, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of the payment due date by period at December 31, 2021:
(1) Relates payment obligations under lease agreements covering approximately 146,000 square feet at 88 Sidney Street, 43,000 square feet at 64 Sidney Street, and 13,000 square feet at 38 Sidney Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts. All leases, as amended, expire on February 29, 2028. At the end of the initial lease period, we have the option to extend the leases at all facilities for two consecutive five year periods at the fair market rent at the time of the extension.
(2) Relates to payment obligations under a packaging and supply agreement for drug product.
(3) Relates to payment obligations under a development and manufacturing services agreement for drug product.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, for supply manufacturing and with vendors for preclinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contractual obligations are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon prior written notice to the vendor, and are thus not included in the contractual obligations table. The service arrangement included in the table above is for a contractual term of five years, however, the total funds can be allocated in any manner to meet the agreement terms. Amounts included assume equal payments each year.