ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The information set forth in this Item 7 is intended to provide readers with an understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. We will discuss and provide our analysis in the following order:
•Overview and Key Developments
•COVID-19 Update
•Key Financial and Operating Metrics
•Key Components of Our Results of Operations
•Results of Operations
•Non-GAAP Financial Measures
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Estimates
•Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Overview and Key Developments
Our business is transforming healthcare by empowering the primary care physician (“PCP”) to be the agent for change in the communities they serve. We believe that PCPs, with their intimate patient-physician relationships, are best positioned to drive meaningful change in quality, cost, and patient experience when provided with the right infrastructure and payment model. Through our combination of the agilon platform, a long-term partnership model with existing physician groups and a growing network of like-minded physicians, we are poised to revolutionize healthcare for seniors across communities throughout the United States. Our purpose-built model provides the necessary capabilities, capital and business model for existing physician groups to create a Medicare-centric, globally capitated line of business. Our model operates by forming RBEs within local geographies, that enter into arrangements with payors providing for monthly payments to manage the total healthcare needs of our physician partners’ attributed patients (or, global capitation arrangements), contract with agilon to perform certain functions and enter into long-term professional service agreements with one or more anchor physician groups pursuant to which the anchor physician groups receive a base compensation rate and share in the savings from successfully improving quality of care and reducing costs.
Our business model is differentiated by its focus on existing community-based physician groups and is built around three key elements: (1) agilon’s platform; (2) agilon’s long-term physician partnership approach; and (3) agilon’s network. With our model, our goal is to remove the barriers that prevent community-based physicians from evolving to a Total Care Model, where the physician is empowered to manage health outcomes and the total healthcare needs of their attributed Medicare patients.
2021 Results:
•Medicare Advantage members of approximately 186,300 as of December 31, 2021 increased 42% from 2020.
•DCE attributed beneficiaries of approximately 51,700 as of December 31, 2021.
•Total revenue of $1.83 billion increased 50% from 2020.
•Net loss of $407 million, compared to $60 million in 2020. The year-over-year change reflects the impact of a $286 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expense in 2021, substantially all of which relates to shares issued under partner physician group equity agreements in connection with our IPO in April 2021.
•Medical Margin of $182 million, compared to $192 million in 2020. The year-over-year change in part reflects the impact of lower healthcare utilization in the prior year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Adjusted EBITDA of negative $39 million, compared to positive $6 million in 2020.
Platform Membership Details
Medicare Advantage members increased 42% during 2021, which includes contributions from new geographies and growth within geographies existing prior to 2021. Total members live on the agilon platform include 186,300 Medicare Advantage members and 51,700 attributed Direct Contracting beneficiaries. Average Medicare Advantage membership during 2021 was approximately 181,800, an increase of 44% from 2020.
Direct Contracting
In collaboration with seven of our physician group partners, we launched five DCEs on April 1, 2021. The CMS Innovation Center created the Direct Contracting Model to allow a variety of DCEs to negotiate directly with the government to manage traditional Medicare beneficiaries and share in the savings and risks generated from managing the health services provided to such beneficiaries. As of December 31, 2021, the DCEs provided coordinated care for approximately 51,700 attributed beneficiaries covered under traditional Medicare.
On February 24, 2022, the CMS Innovation Center announced that it is redesigning the GPDC model and renaming it the Accountable Care Organization Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (ACO REACH). The CMS Innovation Center concurrently introduced a Request for Applications (RFA) for a new cohort to begin the model on January 1, 2023, and it announced that all current GPDC model participants that meet ACO REACH requirements would be permitted to continue participating in the ACO REACH model as ACOs. The ACO REACH requirements outlined thus far include: 1) The development and implementation of a robust health equity plan to identify and better serve underserved communities; 2) the requirement that at least 75% control of each ACO's governing body be held by participating providers or their designated representatives (compared to 25% during the first two Performance Years of the GPDC model); and 3) the requirement that there be at least two beneficiary advocates on the governing board (at least one Medicare beneficiary and at least one consumer advocate), both of whom must hold voting rights. We do not anticipate that these new requirements will have a material impact on agilon’s current or future participation in this program, or inhibit our ability to continue and grow our participation in the model. In addition, The CMS Innovation Center announced that ACO REACH would include technical adjustments to the model’s parameters, including changes to benchmark calculations. The overall effect of these changes is not yet known.
Initial Public Offering and Debt Refinancing
On April 19, 2021, we completed the initial public offering ("IPO") of 53,590,000 shares of common stock at a price of $23.00 per share. The net proceeds of the offering were approximately $1.2 billion, after underwriting fees and other offering expenses. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Upon the completion of the IPO, we issued 11.7 million shares of common stock under partner physician group equity agreements and recognized stock-based compensation expense of $268.5 million in April 2021.
On February 18, 2021, we executed a new credit facility agreement. The Credit Facilities included an initial $100.0 million senior secured term loan and a $100.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility. Subsequent to the end of the first quarter and in connection with our IPO, we repaid $50.0 million of the senior secured term loan. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
California Operations
In February 2021, we completed the divesture of our California operations by selling the remaining disposal group for a gross sales price of $1.0 million. Our California operations are reflected in the consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the Company's investigative interrogatories from the California Department of Managed Health Care.
Secondary Public Offering
On September 14, 2021, the CD&R Investor and certain of our officers and directors completed a secondary offering of 19,550,000 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $30.00 per share. We did not receive any proceeds from the secondary offering.
COVID-19 Update
Since March 2020, we have implemented precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, physicians and members in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. Because COVID-19 infections have been reported throughout the United States, certain national, provincial, state, and local governmental authorities have issued proclamations and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of COVID-19. Additionally, more restrictive proclamations and/or directives may be issued in the future.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or we, may direct, which may result in an extended period of continued business disruption. The ultimate impact of these matters to us and our financial condition cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and the ultimate impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows remains uncertain. During 2021, overall care activity continued to increase, including a mix of temporary deferral of care activity and COVID-19 related care costs. These costs may be incurred at future points in time, and it is possible that the deferral of healthcare services, or the impact of our members (who are seniors typically with chronic conditions) being diagnosed with COVID-19, could cause additional health problems in our existing members, which could increase costs in the future. In future periods, care patterns may moderately exceed normal baselines as previously deferred care is obtained and acuity temporarily rises due to missed regular care. From time to time, health system capacity may be subject to possible increased volatility due to the pandemic. We cannot accurately estimate the net ultimate impact, positive or negative, to medical services expense at this time.
Given the disruption caused by COVID-19, it is unclear whether our contracted physicians will be able to document the health conditions of our members as comprehensively as they did in historical periods. Because risk adjustment factors in the current period are based on the preceding year’s diagnosed disease conditions, our revenue in future periods may be adversely impacted.
Key Financial and Operating Metrics
All of our key metrics exclude historical results from our California operations (which are included as discontinued operations in our consolidated financial statements).
We monitor the following key financial and operating metrics to help us evaluate our business, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions. We believe the following key metrics are useful in evaluating our business (dollars in thousands):
(1)Network contribution and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for additional information, including reconciliations to the most directly comparable measures under generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
Medicare Advantage Members
Our MA members include all individuals enrolled in an MA plan that are attributed to the PCPs on our platform at the end of a given period.
Medical Services Revenue
Our medical services revenue consists of capitation revenue under contracts with various payors. Under the typical capitation arrangement, we are entitled to PMPM fees to provide a defined range of healthcare services for MA health plan members through our contracted physician partners and affiliated PCPs. Such fees are typically based on a defined percentage of corresponding premium that payors receive from CMS. We recognize capitation revenue over the period eligible members are entitled to receive healthcare services.
Medical Margin
Medical margin represents the amount earned from medical services revenue after medical services expenses are deducted. Medical services expense represents costs incurred for medical services provided to our members. As our platform matures over time, we expect medical margin to increase in absolute dollars. However, medical margin PMPM may vary as the percentage of new members brought onto our platform fluctuates. New membership added to the platform is typically dilutive to medical margin PMPM. Furthermore, in light of COVID-19, we continue to evaluate the ultimate impact of the pandemic on medical margin.
The following table presents our medical margin (dollars in thousands):
Network Contribution
We define network contribution as medical services revenue less the sum of: (i) medical services expense and (ii) other medical expenses excluding costs incurred in implementing geographies. Other medical expenses consist of physician compensation expense related to surplus sharing and other direct medical expenses incurred to improve care for our members. We believe this metric provides insight into the economics of our Total Care Model, as it includes all medical services expense associated with our members’ care as well as partner compensation and additional medical costs we incur as part of our aligned partnership model. Other medical expenses are largely variable and proportionate to the level of surplus in each respective geography.
The following table presents our network contribution (dollars in thousands):
(1)Represents physician compensation expense related to surplus sharing and other direct medical expenses incurred to improve care for our members in our live geographies. Excludes costs in geographies that are in implementation and are not yet generating revenue. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, costs incurred in implementing geographies were $12.0 million, $8.9 million and $2.9 million, respectively.
See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for information regarding our use of network contribution and a reconciliation of income (loss) from operations to network contribution.
Platform Support Costs
Our platform support costs, which include regionally-based support personnel and other operating costs to support our geographies, are expected to decrease over time as a percentage of revenue as our physician partners add members and our revenue grows. Our operating expenses at the enterprise level include resources and technology to support payor contracting, clinical program development, quality, data management, finance and legal functions.
The table below represents costs to support our live geographies and enterprise functions, which are included in general and administrative expenses (dollars in thousands):
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude: (i) income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes, (ii) interest expense, (iii) income tax expense (benefit), (iv) depreciation and amortization, (v) geography entry costs, (vi) stock-based compensation expense, (vii) severance and related costs, and (viii) certain other items that are not considered by us in the evaluation of ongoing operating performance. We reflect our share of Adjusted EBITDA for equity method investments by applying our actual ownership percentage for the period to the applicable reconciling items on an entity-by-entity basis. Net income (loss) is the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Adjusted EBITDA.
See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for information regarding our use of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
Medical Services Revenue
Our medical services revenue consists of capitation revenue under contracts with various payors. Under the typical capitation arrangement, we are entitled to PMPM fees to provide a defined range of healthcare services for MA health plan members through our contracted physician partners and affiliated PCPs. Such fees are typically based on a defined percentage of corresponding premium that payors receive from CMS. We recognize capitation revenue over the period eligible members are entitled to receive healthcare services.
Medical services revenue constitutes substantially all of our total revenue, accounting for nearly 100%, 100%, and 99% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
For additional discussion related to our revenue, see “-Critical Accounting Policies” and Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Operating Expenses
Medical Services Expense
In each of our geographies, a network of physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers provide care to our members. Medical services expense represents costs incurred for medical services provided to our members. Our medical services expense trends primarily relate to changes in per visit costs incurred by our members, along with changes in health system and provider utilization of services. Medical services expenses are recognized in the period in which services are provided and include estimates of our obligations for medical services that have been rendered by third parties, but for which claims have either not yet been received, processed or paid.
For additional discussion related to our medical services expense, see “-Critical Accounting Policies” and Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other Medical Expenses
Other medical expenses include: (i) partner physician compensation expense and (ii) other provider costs. Partner physician compensation expense represents obligations to our physician partners corresponding to a portion of the surplus generated in our geographies, which is a function of medical services revenues less the sum of medical services expenses, other provider costs and market operating costs, for the respective geography. Physician payment obligations are reconciled quarterly, and settlement payments are typically issued to providers on an annual basis in arrears, with interim payments issued periodically. Other provider costs include payments to support physician-patient engagement, certain other medical costs, and other care management expenses that help to create medical cost efficiency. Other provider costs include costs incurred for geographies that are in implementation and are not yet generating revenue.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of market-based support personnel and other operating costs to support our geographies, personnel and other operating costs to support our enterprise functions, and investments to support development and expansion of our physician partners. Our enterprise functions include salaries and related expenses, stock-based compensation (including shares issued under partner physician group equity agreements in connection with our IPO), operational support expenses, technology infrastructure, finance, legal, as well as other costs associated with the continued growth of our platform. For the purposes of calculating physician partner incentive expense, we allocate a portion of our enterprise general and administrative expenses to our geographies.
General and administrative expenses also include severance, management fees paid to our majority shareholder prior to our IPO and accruals for unasserted claims.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses are associated with our property and equipment and acquired intangible assets. Depreciation includes expenses associated with buildings, computer and network equipment, furniture and fixtures, and leasehold improvements. Amortization primarily includes expenses associated with acquired intangible assets.
Other Income (Expense)
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net includes the following items:
•Equity income (loss) from unconsolidated joint ventures; and
•Interest income, which consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense associated with our outstanding debt, including amortization of debt issuance costs.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
We are subject to corporate U.S. federal, state, and local income taxation. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management believes it is not more likely than not to be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income. Management makes estimates and judgments about future taxable income based on assumptions that are consistent with our plans and estimates.
Total Discontinued Operations
Total discontinued operations consist of the results of our California operations, which include the entirety of our Medicaid line of business. For certain of our California divestiture transactions, we continue to be responsible for any liabilities arising from the business that were incurred prior to the closing date of such transaction, including any fines, penalties, and other sanctions relating to the DMHC matter, the payment of claims for medical services incurred prior to the effective date of each transaction, a liability for unrecognized tax benefits for which we are indemnified, and other contingent liabilities that we currently believe are remote. For additional discussion, see Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations (dollars in thousands):
The following table summarizes our results of operations as a percentage of total revenues:
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Medical Services Revenue
Medical services revenue increased by 51%, due primarily to growth in average membership of 44% that was attributable to three new geographies that became operational in 2021 and growth in our existing geographies. The increase in medical services revenue was also driven, to a lesser extent, by a 5% increase in PMPM capitation rates.
Medical Services Expense
Medical services expense increased by 61% due primarily to average membership growth of 44%, which was attributable to three new geographies that became operational in 2021 and growth in our existing geographies. The increase in medical services expense was also driven, to a lesser extent, by an increase in average medical services expense per member of 12%. The increase in average medical services expense reflects, in part, the impact of lower healthcare utilization experienced in the prior year due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Medical Expenses
Other medical expenses increased by $7.2 million, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Partner physician compensation expense declined by $13.1 million to $52.2 million in 2021 compared to $65.3 million in 2020. Other provider costs increased by $20.3 million to $57.3 million in 2021 compared to $37.0 million in 2020, as the number of geographies and members on our platform increased in 2021. Other provider costs in 2021 include $12.0 million related to geographies that became operational in January 2022, while other provider costs in 2020 include $8.9 million of costs related to geographies that became operational in 2021.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $318.5 million, or 232%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. About 90% of the year-over-year increase in general and administrative expenses is attributable to a $285.9 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expense, substantially all of which relates to shares issued under partner physician group equity agreements in connection with our IPO in April 2021 and the satisfaction of a performance condition associated with certain employee stock options in the third quarter of 2021.
Platform support costs, which are operating costs to support our live geographies and enterprise functions, increased by $23.5 million to $123.5 million in 2021 compared to $100.0 million in 2020 due primarily to growth in operating costs incurred to support geographies that became operational in 2021, along with additional costs related to our operations as a public company. Platform support costs as a percentage of revenue decreased to 7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 8% for the same period in 2020. Investments to support geography entry increased to $20.6 million in 2021, compared to $17.9 million in 2020 due to increased costs associated with our geographies that become operational in the following calendar year.
In aggregate, (i) costs incurred for severance, which include taxes and related costs on stock option exercises for departed executives, (ii) fees paid to our majority shareholder, and (iii) accruals for unasserted claims and contingent liabilities increased to $19.3 million in 2021, compared to $12.9 million in 2020.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net generated expenses of $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to income of $2.5 million in 2020. Substantially all of the expense increase relates to equity losses of $7.1 million in connection our DCE investments, which became operational in April 2021.
Total Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations generated losses of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to income of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As we completed the dispositions of our Southern California, Fresno and remaining California operations in August 2020, October 2020, and February 2021, respectively, medical margin and general and administrative expenses related to discontinued operations declined during 2021. Additionally, gains on sales of assets related to the dispositions declined by $19.9 million in 2021. For additional discussion related to discontinued operations, see Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Medical Services Revenue
Medical services revenue increased by 54%, due primarily to growth in average membership of 46% that was attributable to four new geographies that began to generate revenue in 2020 and growth in our existing geographies. The increase in medical services revenue was also driven, to a lesser extent, by a 6% increase in PMPM capitation rates.
Medical Services Expense
Medical services expense increased by 41% due to average membership growth of 46%, partially offset by a decrease in average medical services expense per member of 3%, which was impacted by the temporary deferral of non-essential care amid the COVID-19 pandemic and improved medical cost management.
Other Medical Expenses
Other medical expenses increased by $61.8 million, or 152%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Partner physician compensation expense increased by $45.9 million to $65.3 million in 2020 compared to $19.4 million in 2019, which is a result of improvements in medical margin and expenses incurred for geographies that became operational in 2020. Other provider costs increased by $16.0 million to $37.0 million in 2020 compared to $21.0 million in 2019, resulting from the increase in the number of geographies and members on our platform. Other provider costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 include $8.9 million of costs related to geographies that became operational in January 2021. In addition, for a geography in which we commenced implementation and became operational in 2020 we incurred $2.1 million of other provider costs. Other provider costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 include $2.9 million of costs related to geographies that became operational in 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $14.5 million, or 12%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Operating costs to support our live geographies and enterprise functions increased by $10.9 million to $100.0 million in 2020 compared to $89.1 million in 2019 due primarily to growth in operating costs incurred to support geographies that became operational in 2020, including $1.4 million of cost to support a geography in which we commenced implementation and became operational in 2020. Operating costs to support our live geographies and enterprise functions as a percentage of revenue decreased from 11% to 8% during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. Investments to support geography entry increased to $17.9 million in 2020, compared to $6.9 million in 2019 due to increased costs associated with our geographies that become operational in the following calendar year. In aggregate, costs incurred for severance, stock-based compensation and fees paid to our majority shareholder increased to $12.0 million in 2020, compared to $10.0 million in 2019, while accruals for unasserted claims decreased by $9.4 million to $7.4 million in 2020 compared to $16.8 million in 2019.
Total Discontinued Operations
Total discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 generated income of $3.2 million compared to losses of $168.3 million in 2019. During 2020, we completed the dispositions of our Southern California and Fresno operations, recognizing aggregate gain on sales of $20.4 million. The year ended December 31, 2019 included: (i) intangible asset impairments of $98.3 million and (ii) $21.4 million of accelerated amortization expense on an abandoned intangible asset. Additionally, medical margin and general and administrative expenses related to discontinued operations declined during 2020 as a result of our planned disposition of California operations. For additional discussion related to discontinued operations, see Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to providing results that are determined in accordance with GAAP, we present network contribution and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures.
We define network contribution as medical services revenue less the sum of: (i) medical services expense and (ii) other medical expenses excluding costs incurred in implementing geographies. Other medical expenses consist of physician compensation expense related to surplus sharing and other direct medical expenses incurred to improve care for our members. We believe this metric provides insight into the economics of our Total Care Model as it includes all medical services expense associated with our members’ care as well as partner incentive and additional medical costs we incur as part of our aligned partnership model. Other medical expenses are largely variable and proportionate to the level of surplus in each respective geography.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude: (i) income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes, (ii) interest expense, (iii) income tax expense (benefit), (iv) depreciation and amortization, (v) geography entry costs, (vi) stock-based compensation expense, (vii) severance and related costs, and (viii) certain other items that are not considered by us in the evaluation of ongoing operating performance. We reflect our share of Adjusted EBITDA for equity method investments by applying our actual ownership percentage for the period to the applicable reconciling items on an entity-by-entity basis.
Income (loss) from operations is the most directly comparable GAAP measure to network contribution. Net income (loss) is the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Adjusted EBITDA.
We believe network contribution and Adjusted EBITDA help identify underlying trends in our business and facilitate evaluation of period-to-period operating performance of our live geographies by eliminating items that are variable in nature and not considered by us in the evaluation of ongoing operating performance, allowing comparison of our recurring core business operating results over multiple periods. We also believe network contribution and Adjusted EBITDA provide useful information about our operating results, enhance the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics we use for financial and operational decision-making. We believe network contribution and Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled non-GAAP measures are widely used by investors, securities analysts, ratings agencies, and other parties in evaluating companies in our industry as a measure of financial performance. Other companies may calculate network contribution and Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled non-GAAP measures differently from the way we calculate these metrics. As a result, our presentation of network contribution and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Adjusted EBITDA is not considered a measure of financial performance under GAAP, and the items excluded therefrom are significant components in understanding and assessing our financial performance. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to such GAAP measures as net income (loss), cash flows provided by or used in operating, investing or financing activities or other financial statement data presented in our consolidated financial statements as an indicator of financial performance or liquidity. Some of these limitations are:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense, or the requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on debt;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect income tax expense (benefit) or the cash requirements to pay taxes;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•Although depreciation and amortization charges are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
•The expenses and other items that we exclude in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may differ from the expenses and other items, if any, that other companies may exclude from similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of income (loss) from operations to network contribution using data derived from the consolidated financial statements for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
(1)Represents physician compensation expense related to surplus sharing and other direct medical expenses incurred to improve care for our members in our live geographies. Excludes costs in geographies that are in implementation and are not yet generating revenue. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, costs incurred in implementing geographies were $12.0 million, $8.9 million, and $2.9 million, respectively.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA using data derived from the consolidated financial statements for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
(1)Represents direct geography entry costs, including investments to develop and expand our platform and costs in geographies that are in implementation and are not yet generating revenue. For the years ended December 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, (i) $12.0 million, $8.9 million, and $2.9 million, respectively, are included in other medical expenses and (ii) $20.6 million, $17.9 million, and $6.9 million respectively, are included in general and administrative expenses.
(2)For the year ended December 31, 2021, includes taxes and related costs on stock option exercises for departed executives of $5.4 million.
(3)Represents management fees and other expenses paid to Clayton Dubilier & Rice, LLC (“CD&R”). In connection with our initial public offering, we terminated our consulting agreement with CD&R, effective April 16, 2021. We were not charged a fee in connection with the termination of this agreement.
(4)Includes direct geography entry costs of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(5)Includes changes in non-cash accruals for unasserted claims and contingent liabilities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically financed our operations primarily through funds generated from our capitation arrangements with payors, issuances of equity securities, and borrowings under credit agreements. We generally invest any excess cash in money market accounts, which are classified as cash equivalents. Our investment strategies are designed to provide safety and preservation of capital, sufficient liquidity to meet the cash flow needs of our business operations and attainment of a competitive return.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $1.0 billion.
On April 19, 2021, we completed the initial public offering of 53,590,000 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $23.00. The net proceeds of the offering were approximately $1.2 billion, after underwriting fees and other offering expenses.
We expect to continue to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments we intend to continue to make in expanding our business and additional general and administrative costs we expect to incur related to our operation as a public company. As a result, we may require additional capital resources in the future to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business.
Our primary uses of cash include payments for medical claims and other medical expenses, general and administrative expenses, costs associated with the development of new geographies and expansion of existing geographies, debt service and capital expenditures. Final reconciliation and receipt of amounts due from payors are typically settled in arrears, following completion of the contractual program year.
Based on our planned operations, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, as well as available borrowing capacity under the Credit Facilities, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months, though we may require additional capital resources in the future. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
We may require additional financing in the future to fund working capital and pay our obligations. We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through a combination of public or private equity offerings and/or debt financings. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us, if at all. If adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms when needed, we may be required to significantly reduce operating expenses, which may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, cash flows, and results of operations. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
Our ability to pay dividends to holders of our common stock is significantly limited as a practical matter by our growth plans as well as the Credit Facilities insofar as we may seek to pay dividends out of funds made available to us by agilon management or its subsidiaries because the Credit Facilities restrict agilon management’s ability to pay dividends or make loans to us. The borrower on the Credit Facilities is agilon management, our wholly-owned subsidiary. The Credit Facilities are guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries, including those identified as VIEs, and contain customary covenants including, among other things, limitations on restricted payments such as: (i) dividends and distributions from restricted subsidiaries, (ii) requirements of minimum financial ratios, and (iii) limitation on additional borrowings based on certain financial ratios.
Cash Flows
The following summary discussion of our cash flows is based on the consolidated statements of cash flows. The following table sets forth changes in cash flows for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $148.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $53.2 million and $103.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in net cash used in operating activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily a result of: (i) the transition of claims payment services back to the health plan for one of our capitation contracts effective January 1, 2021, (ii) higher geography entry costs, (iii) accelerated timing of claims payments in certain markets, and (iv) an increase in general and administrative expenses, including prepayments related to public company insurance, partially offset by lower cash used in our California operations. Additionally, 2020 benefitted from lower claims payments due to reduced utilization as a result of the impact of COVID-19. The improvement in net cash used in operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily a result of an increase in medical margin, partially offset by higher physician compensation payments.
Our cash flow from operations is dependent upon the number of members on our platform, the timing of settlements with payors and the level of operating and general and administrative expenses necessary to operate and grow our business, among other factors.
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $90.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $22.1 million for the year ended and December 31, 2020 and net cash used in investing activities of $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net cash used in investing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was due primarily to $76.8 million, net in loans we provided to our physician partner groups in connection with taxes payable on shares distributed to them upon completion of the IPO under the partner physician group equity agreements and a $13.4 million increase in investments in property and equipment and intangible assets. The increase in net cash from investing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily a result of proceeds received of: (i) $26.2 million from the disposition of our Southern California and Fresno operations; and (ii) $2.0 million from the partial repayment of a loan receivable.
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $24.6 million and $176.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In February 2021, we refinanced our existing debt with a $100.0 million term loan, receiving net proceeds of $30.1 million. In April 2021, we received net proceeds of approximately $1.2 billion upon the completion of our IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs. Upon completion of our IPO in April 2021, we repaid $50.0 million of the term loan as required under the terms of our credit facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised net proceeds of $33.6 million from private sales of our common stock and repurchased $6.7 million of common stock. The decline in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily a result of higher capital raised from private sales of our common stock in 2019 compared to 2020, as well as the repurchase of common stock in 2020.
Debt Obligations
On February 18, 2021, we executed a credit facility agreement (as amended by the First Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated as of March 1, 2021). The Credit Facilities include: (i) a $100.0 million senior secured term loan (the “2021 Secured Term Loan Facility”) and (ii) a $100.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (the “2021 Secured Revolving Facility”) with a capacity to issue standby letters of credit in certain circumstances up to a maximum of $80.0 million. Subject to specified conditions and receipt of commitments, the 2021 Secured Term Loan Facility may be expanded (or a new term loan facility, revolving credit facility or letter of credit facility added) by up to (i) $50.0 million plus (ii) an additional amount determined in accordance with a formula tied to repayment of certain of our indebtedness. The 2021 Secured Term Loan Facility requires, among other things, a mandatory prepayment of $50.0 million if gross proceeds from the IPO exceed $1.0 billion. On April 26, 2021, we repaid $50.0 million of the 2021 Secured Term Loan Facility. The maturity date of the Credit Facilities was extended to February 18, 2026, with mandatory periodic payments.
The proceeds from the 2021 Secured Term Loan Facility were used to refinance our outstanding indebtedness under the prior term loan and unsecured debt, with the remaining $30.1 million used for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
At our option, borrowings under the Credit Facilities, as defined in the credit agreement, can be either: (i) LIBO Rate Loans or (ii) Base Rate Loans. LIBO Rate Loans bear interest at a rate equal to the sum of 4.00% (stepping down to 3.50% on and following October 1, 2023) and the higher of (a) LIBO, as defined in the credit agreement, and (b) 0%. Base Rate Loans bear interest at a rate equal to the sum of 3.00% (stepping down to 2.50% on and following October 1, 2023) and the highest of: (a) 0.50% in excess of the overnight federal funds rate, (b) the prime rate established by the administrative agent from time to time, (c) the one-month LIBO rate (adjusted for maximum reserves) plus 1.00% and (d) 0%. Additionally, we pay a commitment fee on the unfunded 2021 Revolving Credit Facility amount of 0.50% (stepping down to 0.375% on and following October 1, 2023). We must also pay customary letter of credit fees.
The Credit Facilities contain customary covenants including, among other things, limitations on restricted payments including: (i) dividends and distributions from restricted subsidiaries, (ii) requirements of minimum financial ratios, and (iii) limitation on additional borrowings based on certain financial ratios.
For additional discussion on our debt obligations, see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our outstanding debt.
Equity
As of December 31, 2021, we had 400.1 million shares of common stock outstanding. On April 19, 2021, we completed the initial public offering of 53,590,000 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $23.00. The net proceeds of the offering were approximately $1.2 billion, after underwriting fees and other offering expenses. On September 14, 2021, the CD&R Investor and certain of our officers and directors completed a secondary offering of 19,550,000 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $30.00 per share. We did not receive any proceeds from the secondary offering. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our equity transactions.
Future Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes certain estimated future cash requirements under the Company’s various contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021, in total and disaggregated into current and long-term obligations (dollars in thousands):
(1)See Note 10 for additional information regarding the maturities of debt principal. Interest payments on debt are calculated using outstanding balances and interest rates in effect on December 31, 2021.
(2)See Note 5 for additional information regarding the maturity of lease liabilities under operating leases.
(3)See Note 11 for additional information regarding capital commitments to physician partners to support physician partner expansion and related purposes.
The table above does not include future payments of claims to healthcare providers because certain terms of these payments are not determinable at December 31, 2021 (for example, the timing and volume of future medical services provided under capitation contracts).
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to use judgment in the application of accounting policies, including making estimates and assumptions. We base estimates on the best information available to us at the time, our historical experience, known trends and events and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. If our judgment or interpretation of the facts and circumstances relating to various transactions or other matters had been different, it is possible that different accounting would have been applied, resulting in a different presentation of our consolidated financial statements. From time to time, we re-evaluate our estimates and assumptions. In the event estimates or assumptions prove to be different from actual results, adjustments are made in subsequent periods to reflect more current estimates and assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain. For a more detailed discussion of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Below is a discussion of accounting policies that we consider critical in that they may require complex judgment in their application or require estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASC 606”), which we adopted as of January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective transition method. The adoption of ASC 606 had no impact on our revenue recognition, as revenue from our contracts with customers continues to be recognized over time as services are rendered, and therefore, no cumulative effect adjustment was recorded. Medical services revenue consists of capitation fees under contracts with various payors. Under the typical capitation arrangement, we are entitled to monthly PMPM fees to provide a defined range of healthcare services for MA health plan members attributed to our contracted physicians. PMPM fees are determined as a percent of the premium payors receive from CMS for these members. We generally accept full financial risk for members attributed to our contracted physicians, which means we are responsible for the cost of all healthcare services required by them. Contracts with payors are generally multi-year arrangements and have a single performance obligation that constitutes a series, as defined by ASC 606, to stand ready on a monthly basis to provide all aspects of necessary medical care to members for the contracted period. We recognize revenue in the month in which eligible members are entitled to receive healthcare benefits during the contract term.
The transaction price for our MA capitation contracts is variable as the PMPM fees to which we are entitled are subject to periodic adjustment under CMS’s risk adjustment payment methodology. CMS deploys a risk adjustment model that determines premiums paid to all payors according to each member’s health status and certain demographic factors. Under this risk adjustment methodology, CMS calculates the risk adjusted premium payment using diagnosis data from various settings. We and our healthcare providers collect and submit the necessary and available diagnosis data to payors and we utilize such data to estimate risk adjustment payments to be received in subsequent periods. Risk adjustment-related revenues are estimated using the most likely amount methodology and amounts are only included in revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur once any uncertainty is resolved. PMPM fees are also subject to adjustment for incentives or penalties based on the achievement of certain quality metrics defined in our contracts with payors. We recognize incentive revenue as earned using the most likely amount methodology and only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur once any uncertainty is resolved.
The determination of these estimates is subject to significant judgment. If these assessments were to change, the timing and amount of our revenue recognized would be impacted, which may be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Medical Services Expense and Related Payables
Medical services expense represents costs incurred for medical services provided to members by physicians, hospitals and other ancillary providers for which we are financially responsible, and which are paid either directly by us or by payors with whom we have contracted. Medical services expenses are recognized in the period in which services are provided and include estimates of our obligations for medical services that have been rendered by third parties, but for which claims have either not yet been received, processed or paid.
Such estimates are based on many variables, including utilization trends and historical and statistical lag analysis, among other factors. The assumptions for making such estimates and establishing liabilities are continually reviewed and updated, and any adjustments resulting therein are reflected in current period earnings. These estimates may differ from actual results, which could be material to our consolidated financial statements. The difference between the estimated liability and the related actual settlement of claims is recognized in the period the claims are settled.
If it is determined that our assumptions in estimating such liabilities are significantly different than actual results, our results of operations and financial position could be impacted in future periods. Adjustments of prior period estimates may result in additional medical care expense or a reduction of medical care expense in the period an adjustment is made. Further, due to the considerable variability of healthcare costs, adjustments to claim liabilities occur each period and may be significant as compared to the net income (loss) recorded in that period.
The estimate of medical costs payable represents our best estimate of our liability for unpaid medical costs.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Amortizable intangible assets include health plan contracts, trade names, provider networks, developed software, physician rosters and noncompete enforcement agreements. Amortization expense is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of these assets. We consider the period of expected cash flows and related underlying data used to measure the fair value of the intangible assets (or the length of time for a noncompete agreement) when selecting a useful life.
Intangible assets are subject to impairment tests when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset, or related group of assets, may not be recoverable. In such circumstances, we compare the carrying value of an amortizable intangible asset to the estimated future undiscounted cash flows generated by the asset or asset group. The estimated future undiscounted cash flows are calculated using the lowest level of identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities.
The impairment tests are based on financial projections prepared by us that incorporate anticipated results from programs and initiatives being implemented. If projections are not met, or if negative trends occur that impact the outlook, the value of the intangible assets may be impaired.
Goodwill represents the acquired fair value of a business in excess of the fair values of tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired. We test goodwill for impairment annually and on an interim basis if an event occurs or if circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. When testing goodwill for impairment, we may first assess qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value. If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, we perform the quantitative assessment. In the quantitative assessment, an estimate of the fair value of the reporting unit is determined primarily by an income approach, utilizing discounted cash flows and a market approach which considers comparable public companies and related transactions.
Due to the continued deterioration in the performance of our reporting unit, in the fourth quarter of 2019, we initiated a process to evaluate strategic alternatives for our California operations, including a sale or abandonment of all or substantially all of such operations. We therefore performed an assessment of the long-lived assets in the California reporting unit for impairment and determined that the carrying value of certain of those assets was not recoverable. Accordingly, we wrote-down such assets to fair value, resulting in the recognition of a $98.3 million impairment charge in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our California operations, including the impairment charge, are presented as discontinued operations.
The determination of the fair value of intangible assets and goodwill involves significant judgment. This judgment is based on our analysis and estimates of fair value of intangible assets and goodwill, future operating results and resulting cash flows, and the period over which we will hold each asset. Our ability to accurately predict future operating results and resulting cash flows, and estimate fair values, impacts the timing and recognition of impairments. While we believe our assumptions are reasonable, changes in these assumptions may have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized (i) on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for awards subject only to service-based vesting conditions or (ii) upon the achievement of the underlying performance condition for awards subject to such conditions. We determine the fair value of stock-based option awards subject to a service condition on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, unless the awards are also subject to a market condition, in which case we use a Monte Carlo simulation valuation model. Assumptions for volatility, expected option life and risk free interest rate are used in our models.
Certain of our arrangements provided for the vesting of share-based awards to third parties at the time of an initial public offering or sale of a controlling interest (“Change of Control Event”). Such share-based instruments granted to third parties are accounted for as non-employee awards for which compensation cost is recognized upon
the achievement of the underlying performance condition of a Change of Control Event. As the instruments were liability-classified, the amount of shares ultimately issued and related compensation cost were measured at the vesting date in April 2021, as a Change of Control Event was not deemed probable until consummated. Upon our initial public offering, we recognized stock-based compensation cost relating to these share-based instruments of $268.5 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the impact of new accounting standards.