Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is designed to provide a reader of AGNC Investment Corp.'s consolidated financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our MD&A is presented in six sections:
•Executive Overview
•Financial Condition
•Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Forward-Looking Statements
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
We are a leading provider of private capital to the U.S. housing market, enhancing liquidity in the residential real estate mortgage markets and, in turn, facilitating home ownership in the U.S. We invest primarily in Agency RMBS on a leveraged basis. These investments consist of residential mortgage pass-through securities and collateralized mortgage obligations for which the principal and interest payments are guaranteed by a U.S. Government-sponsored enterprise, such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, or by a U.S. Government agency, such as Ginnie Mae. We may also invest in other assets related to the housing, mortgage or real estate markets that are not guaranteed by a GSE or U.S. Government agency.
We are internally managed with the principal objective of providing our stockholders with attractive risk-adjusted returns through a combination of monthly dividends and tangible net book value accretion. We generate income from the interest earned on our investments, net of associated borrowing and hedging costs, and net realized gains and losses on our investment and hedging activities. We fund our investments primarily through collateralized borrowings structured as repurchase agreements. We operate in a manner to qualify to be taxed as a REIT under the Internal Revenue Code.
The size and composition of our investment portfolio depends on the investment strategies we implement, availability of attractively priced investments, suitable financing to appropriately leverage our investment portfolio and overall market conditions. Market conditions are influenced by a variety of factors, including interest rates, prepayment expectations, liquidity, housing prices, unemployment rates, general economic conditions, government participation in the mortgage market, regulations and relative returns on other assets.
Trends and Recent Market Impacts
Since the onset of the COVID-19 financial crisis in March 2020, the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Government have provided unprecedented amounts of monetary and fiscal stimulus in support of sustained economic growth. In response, the U.S. economy, as measured by gross domestic product, grew 5.7% in 2021, the fastest full-year pace in nearly 40 years. U.S. equity markets also benefited, with the S&P 500 index reaching a series of record highs throughout 2021.
As part of its monetary policy response, the Fed doubled the size of its balance sheet from the start of the crisis to nearly $9 trillion as of December 31, 2021, through the acquisition of U.S. Treasuries and Agency RMBS. The Fed’s holdings of Agency RMBS totaled $2.6 trillion as of December 31, 2021, representing almost a third of all outstanding Agency RMBS, as compared to approximately 20% at the start of the crisis.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, however, with annual inflation measures running well above its 2% target and the labor market showing signs of full employment, the Fed communicated that it would soon end its incremental monthly asset purchases and begin tightening monetary policy conditions. Accordingly, the Fed is expected to begin raising the Federal Funds rate in March 2022 and has signaled that these rate hikes could occur at an aggressive pace. The Fed is also expected to reduce its holdings of U.S. Treasury securities and Agency RMBS by a predetermined monthly amount soon after raising the Federal Funds rate.
This shift by the Fed led to a notable increase in short and intermediate-term rates, with the two and five-year Treasury rates increasing 61 and 90 basis points over the year, respectively, while the longer end of the yield curve, despite material intra-year volatility, experienced more modest increases, with the 10 and 30-year Treasury rates rising 59 and 25 basis points, respectively. Against the backdrop of the anticipated reduction in the Fed’s balance sheet coupled with the expectation of greater mortgage supply in 2022, Agency RMBS spreads to benchmark interest rates widened over the course of 2021, particularly in the second and fourth quarters. As a result, our economic return on tangible common equity for fiscal year 2021
was 2.9%, comprised of $1.44 in dividends declared per common share and a $0.96 decline in tangible net book value per common share.
We expect Agency RMBS spreads to continue to widen and for challenging market conditions to persist in 2022, as the Fed increases short term rates and reduces its holdings of Agency RMBS. Given this outlook, we expect to continue to maintain a more defensive portfolio position characterized by lower leverage and significant interest rate hedge protection. As of December 31, 2021, our "at risk" leverage was 7.7x our tangible equity, below our normal historical operating levels. Our hedge ratio was 101%, indicating that the notional amount of our interest rate hedges exceeded our mortgage borrowings. Our duration gap, which is a measure of the difference between the interest rate sensitivity of our assets and liabilities, inclusive of our interest rate hedges, was 0.1 years. Additionally, our unencumbered cash and Agency RMBS totaled $4.9 billion, or 50% of our tangible equity, as of December 31, 2021, which excludes unencumbered credit assets and assets held at our captive broker-dealer subsidiary, BES.
Wider spreads cause a decline in our tangible net book value, and we may experience increased volatility in our tangible net book value over the near term as the Agency RMBS market reprices to expectations regarding the normalization of Fed monetary policy. Over the longer run, however, wider Agency RMBS spreads improve the expected return on new investments and are beneficial to our business. We believe we are well positioned for the current environment and have the capacity and flexibility to take advantage of more attractive investment opportunities as they arise.
For fiscal year 2021, AGNC’s comprehensive income available to common stockholders totaled $231 million, or $0.44 per common share, compared to $260 million, or $0.47 per common share, for fiscal year 2020. Our average "at risk" leverage, which includes our net TBA position, declined to 7.7x tangible equity for the year, compared to 8.5x for the prior year.
Despite the decline in our "at risk" leverage, our net spread and dollar roll income, excluding estimated catch-up premium amortization, a non-GAAP measure, increased to $3.02 per common share for the year, compared to $2.70 per common share for 2020, due primarily to favorable funding and stable hedge costs throughout the year. Net spread and dollar roll income also benefited from attractive TBA dollar roll opportunities, with TBA dollar roll implied funding rates remaining well below comparable repo funding during the year. As a result, we increased our average dollar roll position to approximately 35% of our investment portfolio for the year, compared to 23% for the prior year and well above typical levels prior to the start of the crisis. As the Fed ends its monthly incremental asset purchases and begins to reduce the size of its balance sheet, we expect a corresponding decline in implied dollar roll financing to levels more consistent with historical averages. Additionally, with the Fed set to begin raising the Federal Funds rate in March 2022, we anticipate similar increases in repo rates. However, given our large hedge position, with interest rate swaps covering nearly 70% of our repo and TBA funding liabilities, we anticipate that these rate increases will have a more muted impact on our total cost of funds.
Lastly, during fiscal year 2021, our portfolio experienced elevated rates of prepayment as compared to pre-crisis levels driven by historically low mortgage rates. For 2021, our Agency RMBS, which excludes our lower coupon holdings held in TBA form, repaid at 23.1% CPR, compared to 19.9% for 2020 and 11.4% for 2019. Quantitative tightening measures by the Fed typically lead to higher mortgage rates and slower rates of prepayments, which should be beneficial to returns on our higher coupon RMBS holdings and new investments. However, multiple factors can impact longer-term rates, as a consequence, this may not be case during the forthcoming quantitative tightening cycle.
For information regarding non-GAAP financial measures, including reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measure, and information regarding our average implied TBA dollar roll financing for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, please refer to Results of Operations included in this MD&A below. For further discussion regarding the sensitivity of our tangible net book value to changes in interest rates and mortgage spreads, please refer to