Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is provided to enhance the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, Part I, Item 1, “Business” and Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” For information on risks and uncertainties related to our business that may make past performance not indicative of future results or cause actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements, see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” Dollars in tabular format are presented in thousands, except per share data, or as otherwise indicated.
Overview
We are a women’s healthcare company dedicated to fulfilling the unmet health needs of today’s women. We have remained steadfast in our commitment to innovate in women’s healthcare where there continues to be unmet needs - not only in contraception - but also in other meaningful women’s health therapeutic areas.
Our first product, Twirla, which was approved in February 2020 and launched in early December 2020, is a once-weekly prescription combination hormonal contraceptive patch. It delivers a dose of estrogen consistent with commonly prescribed combined hormonal contraceptives, or CHCs, and lower than the estrogen dose found in other marketed contraceptive patches. We believe there is a market need for a contraceptive patch that is designed to deliver approximately 30 mcg of estrogen and 120 mcg of progestin in a convenient dosage form that may support compliance in a noninvasive fashion. Twirla leverages our proprietary transdermal patch technology called Skinfusion®. Skinfusion is designed to allow drug delivery through the skin while optimizing patch adhesion and patient comfort and wearability, which may help support compliance.
With the approval of Twirla we are now focused on our advancement as a commercial company. During 2022, we plan to continue implementing our commercialization plan for Twirla, with the goal of becoming a contraceptive market leader, and ultimately, pursuing opportunities to broaden our portfolio to address areas of unmet medical need in women’s health.
Our Strategy
Our near-term goal is to establish an initial franchise in the multi-billion dollar U.S. hormonal contraceptive market built on approval of Twirla in the U.S. Our resources are currently focused on the commercialization of Twirla. We also expect to explore possible expansion through business development activities, such as acquiring access to new products through in-licensing, co-promotion or other collaborative arrangements.
Our current priorities are as follows:
●Continue to implement our commercialization plans for Twirla to increase uptake of Twirla in the United States, including increasing targeted digital direct to consumer advertising;
●Expand coverage and reimbursement for Twirla in the United States from private and public third-party payors;
●Continue to expand access to Twirla through multiple business channels including third-party payor contracts, retail and specialty pharmacies, telemedicine, government contracting, and public health centers;
●Maintain and manage the supply chain for Twirla to support increased commercialization of Twirla across the United States and working through existing and future inventory prior to product becoming short-dated;
●Reduce our operating loss and continue to progress towards generating positive cash flows;
●Evaluate the advancement of our existing pipeline and its possible expansion through business development activities; and
●Complete and submit the final study report for a post-marketing commitment study and continue to implement our obligations for the post-marketing requirement study.
It should be noted that current public health threats could adversely affect our ongoing or planned business operations. In particular, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic resulted in federal, state and local governments and private entities mandating various restrictions, including travel restrictions, access restrictions, restrictions on public gatherings, and stay at home orders. The effect of these orders, government imposed quarantines and measures we have taken, such as implementing work-at-home policies, may negatively impact productivity, disrupt our business and/or could adversely affect our commercialization plans and results. We cannot presently predict the scope and severity of any potential business shutdowns or disruptions, but if we or any of the third parties with whom we engage, including personnel at third-party manufacturing facilities and other third parties with whom we conduct business, were to experience shutdowns or other business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timeline presently planned could be materially and adversely impacted. It is unknown how long these conditions will last and what the complete effect will be on us. During the pandemic, some of our business activities have been slowed and taken longer to complete and we continue to adjust to the challenges of operating in a largely remote setting with our employees. We launched our commercial activities for Twirla and began engaging with healthcare providers to promote Twirla in December 2020. In some instances our sales force has encountered challenges engaging with healthcare providers during this on-going pandemic. Although many areas of the United States have begun to re-open access to offices and other commercial facilities, there continue to be areas where restrictions remain in place, which may have the potential to affect our ability to conduct our business. Further, new variants, including those which are more easily transmissible or resistant to existing vaccines, may lead to new shutdowns or business disruptions in the future. Overall, we recognize the challenges of launching in a pandemic, will continue to closely monitor events as they develop and plan for alternative and mitigating measures that we can implement if needed.
For more information about Twirla, please see Part 1, Item 1, “Business”
Financial Overview
Since our inception in 1997, we have devoted substantial resources to developing and seeking regulatory approval for Twirla, building our intellectual property portfolio, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. While we anticipate that a portion of our operating expenses will continue to be related to research and development as we plan our post marketing studies, which include both our post marketing requirement and post marketing commitment to the FDA, and evaluate the development of our pipeline, our operating expenses have substantially shifted towards commercialization activities for Twirla.
We have funded our operations primarily through sales of common stock, convertible preferred stock, convertible promissory notes and term loans. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, we had $19.1 million and $54.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, respectively.
In February 2020, we entered into a Credit Agreement and Guaranty with Perceptive Credit Holdings III, LP, a related party (“Perceptive”), for a senior secured term loan credit facility of up to $35.0 million (the “Perceptive Credit Agreement”). A first tranche of $5.0 million was funded on execution of the Perceptive Credit Agreement. A second tranche of $15.0 million was funded as a result of the approval of Twirla by the FDA. Another $15.0 million tranche was to be available to us based on the achievement of a revenue milestone by December 31, 2021. We did not achieve that milestone and that tranche is no longer available to us. On February 26, 2021 the Perceptive Credit Agreement was amended (“Amended Perceptive Credit Agreement”) by creating a fourth tranche of $10.0 million that will be available based on the achievement of a revenue milestone. We currently do not believe we will achieve the milestone for the fourth tranche of $10.0 million. The facility will be interest only until the third anniversary of the closing date. The interest rate and 1% fee payable upon the drawing of a tranche set forth in the Perceptive Credit Agreement also applied to the fourth tranche created by the Amended Perceptive Credit Agreement. In addition, the Company received a covenant waiver pertaining to the existence of a “going concern” qualification in the accompanying opinion of the Company’s auditors in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed on March 1, 2021. In connection with the Amended Perceptive Credit Agreement, the Company issued to Perceptive a warrant to purchase 450,000 shares of the Company’s common stock with an exercise price of $2.87 per share.
On January 7, 2022, we entered into a second amendment to the Perceptive Credit Agreement (the “Second Amendment”). The Second Amendment waives our obligations to comply with certain financial covenants relating to minimum revenue requirements through September 30, 2022 and to file financial statements along with our Annual Report on Form 10-K that are not subject to any “going concern” qualification. The effectiveness of the Second Amendment is conditioned upon the satisfaction of certain conditions, including the Company raising additional capital and prepaying a portion of its outstanding debt. On March 10, 2022, we entered into a third amendment to the Perceptive Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment”). The Third Amendment waived the Company’s obligations to (1) comply with certain financial covenants relating to minimum revenue requirements through September 30, 2022, conditioned upon the satisfaction of certain conditions, including the Company raising additional capital and prepaying a portion of its outstanding debt by April 30, 2022 and (2) file financial statements along with its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 that are not subject to any “going concern” qualification.
In February 2020, we completed a public offering of 17,250,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $3.00 per share. Proceeds from the public offering, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses, were approximately $48.4 million.
In March 2021, we entered into a common stock sales agreement (the “2021 ATM Agreement”) under which we are authorized to sell up to an aggregate of $50.0 million in gross proceeds through the sale of shares of common stock from time to time in “at-the-market” equity offerings (as defined in Rule 415 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended). We agreed to pay a commission of up to 3% of the gross proceeds of any common stock sold under this agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued and sold a total of 6,915,151 shares of common stock under the 2021 ATM Agreement resulting in net proceeds of approximately $9.3 million.
In October 2021, we completed a public offering of 26,666,648 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase 13,333,324 shares of our common stock at a combined price of $0.85 per share of common stock and one-half
of a warrant to purchase one share of common stock. Proceeds from the public offering, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses were approximately $21.1 million.
In January 2022, we entered into a common stock sales agreement (the “2022 ATM Agreement”) under which we are authorized to sell up to an aggregate of $50.0 million in gross proceeds through the sale of shares of common stock from time to time in “at-the-market” equity offerings (as defined in Rule 415 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended). We agreed to pay a commission of up to 3% of the gross proceeds of any common stock sold under this agreement.
On March 13, 2022, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with a single healthcare-focused institutional investor (the “Purchaser”), pursuant to which the Company issued, in a registered direct offering (the “2022 Preferred Stock Offering”), 2,425 shares of Series A convertible preferred stock (the “Series A Preferred Stock”) and 2,425 shares of Series B convertible preferred stock (the “Series B Preferred Stock”) and Series A warrants (the “Series A Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 24,250,000 shares of the common stock of the Company (the “Common Stock”) and Series B warrants (the “Series B Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 24,250,000 shares of Common Stock. Each share of Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock has a stated value of $1,000 per share and a conversion price of $0.20 per share. The shares of preferred stock issued in the offering are convertible into an aggregate of 24,250,000 shares of Common Stock. The Series A Warrants have an exercise price of $0.26 per share, will become exercisable six months following the date of issuance, and will expire 5 years following the initial exercise date. The Series B Warrants have an exercise price of $0.26 per share, will become exercisable six months following the date of issuance, and will expire one and one-half years following the initial exercise date. The Purchase Agreement contains customary representations and warranties and agreements of the Company and the Purchaser and customary indemnification rights and obligations of the parties. Total gross proceeds from the 2022 Preferred Stock Offering, before deducting the placement agent's fees and other estimated offering expenses, are $4.9 million. The 2022 Preferred Stock Offering closed on March 14, 2022.
Moving forward, we plan to monitor our cash and cash equivalents balances, in an effort to ensure we have adequate liquidity to fund our operations. If the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors impact our current business plan or our ability to generate revenue from the launch of Twirla, we believe we have the ability to revise our commercial plans, including curtailing sales and marketing spending, to allow us to continue to fund our operations. In addition, we believe we may have the potential to access additional capital through the 2022 ATM Agreement, selling additional debt or equity securities or obtaining a line of credit or other loan as required.
We have generated minimal revenue and have never been profitable for any year. Our net loss was $74.9 million, $51.9 million and $18.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future as we commercialize Twirla. This includes commercially launching Twirla, advancing our other potential product candidates and expanding our research and development programs.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $19.1 million. In January 2022, we raised $0.4 million under the 2022 ATM Agreement. On March 14, 2022, we raised $4.3 million in the 2022 Preferred Stock Offering. We have been approved for and expect to receive approximately $4.7 million through the sale of net operating losses through the State of New Jersey’s Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program. We closely monitor our cash and cash equivalents and expect that our current cash will fund our planned operations into the second quarter of 2022. We plan to raise additional funds through debt issuances or the issuance and sale of our common stock to meet our projected operating requirements, including the continued commercialization of Twirla, the exploration and potential advancement of our existing pipeline and our possible expansion through business development activities. Prior to raising additional funds, we believe we need to regain compliance with the Nasdaq listing requirements because our stock price is currently trading below $1.00. As previously disclosed, we have been notified by Nasdaq that we have until May 9, 2022 to regain compliance. To that end, we plan to conduct a special meeting of shareholders in April to vote on a reverse stock split, and if successful, we will attempt to raise additional funds through the issuance and sale of our common stock.
Our future success depends on our ability to raise additional capital and/or implement various strategic alternatives. Our ability to continue operations will depend on our ability to obtain additional capital, and there can be no assurance that any financing can be realized by the Company, or if realized, what the terms of any such financing may be, or that any amount that the Company is able to raise will be adequate. Based upon the foregoing, management has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through the 12 months following the date on which this Annual Report on Form 10-K is filed.
We continue to analyze various alternatives, including refinancing alternatives, potential asset sales and mergers and acquisitions. We cannot be certain that these initiatives or raising additional capital, whether through selling additional debt or equity securities or obtaining a line of credit or other loan, will be available to us or, if available, will be on terms acceptable to us. If we issue additional securities to raise funds, whether through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, or any combination thereof, these securities may have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to those of our common stock, and our current stockholders will experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with pharmaceutical partners, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates, including Twirla, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to obtain funds when needed or on acceptable terms, we then may be unable to complete the commercialization of Twirla and may also be required to further cut operating costs, forego future development and other opportunities and may need to seek bankruptcy protection.
The financial statements as of December 31, 2021 have been prepared under the assumption that we will continue as a going concern for the next 12 months. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our uncertain ability to obtain additional capital, reduce expenditures and/or execute on our business plan and successfully launch Twirla. These financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
We do not own any manufacturing facilities and rely on our contract manufacturer, Corium, for all aspects of the manufacturing of Twirla. We will need to continue to invest in the manufacturing process for Twirla, and incur significant expenses, in order to be capable of supplying projected commercial quantities of Twirla. We have incurred significant expenses in order to create an infrastructure to support the commercialization of Twirla, including sales, marketing, distribution, medical affairs and compliance functions. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have generated minimal revenue from product sales. In the future, in addition to revenue from product sales, we may generate revenue from license fees, milestone payments or royalties from the sale of products developed using our intellectual property. Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable depends on our ability to successfully commercialize Twirla and any product candidates that we may advance in the future. If we fail to successfully commercialize Twirla, or any other product candidates we advance in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, could be adversely affected.
Cost of Product Revenues
Cost of product revenues include direct and indirect costs related to the manufacturing of Twirla sold, including packaging services, freight, obsolescence, and allocation of overhead costs that are primarily fixed such as depreciation, salaries and benefits, and insurance. We expect these relatively fixed costs to become less significant as a percentage of sales with anticipated volume increases. There was no direct cost of product revenue on approximately 3,000 units sold in the year ended December 31, 2021, as those units were validation inventory which was previously expensed as research and development expense in the fourth quarter of 2020. Had such inventory been valued at acquisition cost, it would have resulted in an immaterial increase to cost of goods sold and a corresponding decrease to gross profit.
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception and through approval of Twirla by the FDA in February 2020, we focused our resources on our research and development activities. Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of Twirla and other current and future potential product candidates, and include:
● expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical studies;
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expenses;
● the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials, including the supply of our potential product candidates; and
● costs associated with research, development and regulatory activities.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as subject enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our third-party vendors.
Research and development activities are central to our business model and to date, our research and development expenses have been related primarily to the development of Twirla. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We do not currently utilize a formal time allocation system to capture expenses on a project-by-project basis, as the majority of our past and planned expenses have been and will be in support of Twirla.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our research and development expenses were approximately $6.2 million, $13.5 million and $9.9 million, respectively. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by functional area.
It is difficult to determine with any certainty the exact duration and completion costs of any of our future clinical trials of Twirla or our current and future potential product candidates we may advance. It is also difficult to determine if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of Twirla or our potential product candidates that obtain regulatory approval.
Future research and development costs incurred for our potential product candidates and required post-marketing studies will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical trials and preclinical studies, the rate of subject enrollment, access to additional capital, and significant and changing government regulation. For the foreseeable future, we expect the current public health crisis to have a negative effect on the conduct of clinical trials. In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, or experience issues with our manufacturing capabilities, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time with respect to the development of that product candidate. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, coupled with an assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential. Substantially all of our resources are currently dedicated to commercializing Twirla.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses consist principally of the cost of salaries and related costs for personnel in sales and marketing, our contract sales force, brand building, advocacy, market research and consulting. Selling and marketing expenses are expensed as incurred.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our selling and marketing expenses totaled approximately $43.4 million, $23.3 million and $1.1 million, respectively. Our commercial launch of Twirla in the United States utilized a contract sales force. We anticipate that our selling and marketing expenses will continue to be significant as our commercialization efforts continue.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions including payroll taxes and health insurance, stock-based compensation and travel expenses. Other general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs, insurance and professional fees for legal, patent review, consulting and accounting services. General and administrative expenses are expensed as incurred.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our general and administrative expenses totaled approximately $14.7 million, $12.7 million and $7.9 million, respectively. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will stabilize in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, our actual results may differ significantly from our estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Product revenues consist of sales of Twirla in the United States. In December 2020, we began shipping Twirla to our customers in the U.S., which consist primarily of specialty distributors. We recognize product revenues in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606). The provisions of ASC 606 require the following steps to determine revenue recognition: (1) Identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) Determine the transaction price; (4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
In accordance with ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our performance obligation is satisfied by transferring control of the product to a customer. Per our contracts with customers, control of the product is transferred upon the conveyance of title, which occurs when the product is sold to and received by a customer. Trade accounts receivable due to us from contracts with our customers are stated separately in the balance sheet, net of various allowances as described in the Trade Accounts Receivable policy in Note 2- Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
The amount of revenue we recognize is equal to the amount of consideration which is expected to be received from the sale of product to our customers. Revenue is only recognized when it is probable that a significant reversal will not occur in future periods. To determine this, we assess both the likelihood and magnitude of any such potential reversal of revenue.
The product is sold to customers at the wholesale acquisition cost. However, we record product revenue, net of estimates for applicable variable consideration which consist primarily of wholesaler distribution fees, prompt pay and other discounts, rebates, chargebacks, product returns and co-pay assistance programs.
If any, or all, of our actual experiences vary from the estimates above, we may need to adjust prior period accruals, affecting revenue in the period of adjustment.
Cost of Product Revenues
We began to capitalize inventory costs associated with Twirla in December 2020 with the commercial launch of Twirla. Costs of product revenues consist of direct and indirect costs related to the manufacturing of Twirla sold, including third-party manufacturing costs, packaging services, freight, obsolescence, and allocation of overhead costs.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses, particularly for product development costs. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of services performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of
our estimates with service providers and make adjustments as necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include:
● fees paid to CROs in connection with clinical studies;
● fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
● fees paid to vendors in connection with preclinical development activities;
● fees paid to vendors related to product manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical supplies; and
● fees paid to a third-party manufacturer in connection with the development of our commercial manufacturing process.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of subjects and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of subjects, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrued liability or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Based on historical experience, actual results have not been materially different from our estimates. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any ongoing clinical trials.
Warrants
We account for warrants to purchase common stock in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. ASC 480 requires that a financial instrument, other than an outstanding share, that, at inception, is indexed to an obligation to repurchase the issuer’s equity shares, regardless of the timing or the probability of the redemption feature and may require the issuer to settle the obligation by transferring assets classified as a liability. We measure the fair value of our warrant liability using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with changes in fair value recognized as increases or reductions to other income (expense) in the statement of operations.
In connection with the completion of our initial public offering in May 2014, the warrants to purchase shares of Series A-1 and Series A-2 preferred stock expired unexercised and the warrants to purchase shares of Series C preferred stock automatically converted into warrants to purchase shares of common stock. Prior to January 1, 2019, warrants with non-standard anti-dilution provisions (referred to as down round protection) were classified as liabilities and re-measured each reporting period. On January 1, 2019, we adopted the provisions of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-11 Earnings Per Share (Topic 260); Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (Topic 480); Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): (Part 1) Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Down Round Features, (Part II) Replacement of the Indefinite Deferral for Mandatorily Redeemable Financial Instruments of Certain Nonpublic Entities and Certain Mandatorily Redeemable Non-controlling Interests with a Scope Exception, which indicates that a down round feature no longer precludes equity classification when assessing whether an investment is indexed to an entity’s own stock. We used a modified retrospective approach for adoption, which did not restate our financial statements as of the prior year end (December 31, 2018). The cumulative effect of adoption of ASU 2017-11 resulted in an adjustment to accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2019 of $0.2 million with a corresponding adjustment to additional paid-in capital. Warrants to purchase 62,505 shares of common stock at $6.00 per share expired on December 14, 2019, and none of these warrants were outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
The warrants issued in connection with our debt financing completed in February 2015 are classified as a component of stockholders’ equity. The value of such warrants was determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. These warrants expired without being exercised on February 24, 2020.
As part of the February 2020 Perceptive Credit Agreement, we issued Perceptive warrants to purchase 1,400,000 shares of Agile common stock, all of which expire on February 27, 2027. The per share exercise price for 700,000 shares is $3.74, which is equal to the 5-day volume weighted average exercise price (“5 Day VWAP”) as of the trading day immediately prior to closing. The per share exercise price for the remaining 700,000 shares of our common stock is $4.67, which is 1.25 times the 5 Day VWAP. In connection with entering into the Amended Perceptive Credit Agreement, we issued Perceptive a warrant to purchase 450,000 shares of Agile common stock at $2.87 per share.
In connection with an underwritten public offering completed in October 2021, we issued warrants to purchase 13,333,324 shares of common stock. This offering also triggered an adjustment to the exercise price of the existing warrants mentioned above. See Notes 9 and 16 for additional information.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation under ASC 718, Accounting for Stock Based Compensation, under which compensation expense is generally recognized over the vesting period of the award. Determining the amount of stock-based compensation to be required requires us to develop estimates of fair values of stock options as of the grant date.
We account for stock-based compensation by measuring and recognizing expense for all stock-based payments made to employees and directors based on estimated grant date fair values. We use the straight-line method to allocate compensation cost to reporting periods over each optionee’s requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We estimate the fair value of our stock-based awards to employees and directors using the Black-Scholes option valuation model, or Black-Scholes model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility, the calculation of expected term and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant, among other inputs. The risk-free interest rate was determined with the implied yield currently available for zero-coupon U.S. government issues with a remaining term approximating the expected life of the options.
We also award restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to employees and our board of directors (the “Board”). RSUs are generally subject to forfeiture if employment terminates prior to the completion of the vesting restrictions. We expense the cost of the RSUs, which is determined to be the fair market value of the shares of common stock underlying the RSUs at the date of grant, ratably over the period during which the vesting restrictions lapse. Cost associated with performance-based RSUs with a performance condition which affects the vesting is recognized only if the performance condition is probable of being satisfied.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues. Revenue, net consists of sales of Twirla, which was approved by the FDA in February 2020 and launched in the US in December 2020, and reflects the shipment of Twirla to specialty distributors, net of estimates for applicable variable consideration, which consist primarily of wholesale distribution fees, prompt pay and other discounts, rebates, chargebacks, product returns and co-pay assistance programs.
Cost of product revenues. Costs of product revenues totaled $10.7 million and consist of direct and indirect costs related to the manufacturing of Twirla sold, including third-party manufacturing costs, packaging services, freight, obsolescence and allocation of overhead costs that are primarily fixed such as depreciation, salaries and benefits, and insurance. Cost of product revenues included approximately $5.3 million of obsolescence reserves for inventory not expected to be sold prior to its shelf life date and $0.6 million for expense related to expired raw materials held by Corium.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses decreased by $7.3 million, or 54%, from $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This overall decrease in research and development expenses was primarily due to the following:
● a decrease in manufacturing commercialization expenses of $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease reflects costs to conduct validation work for the commercial manufacturing of Twirla by Corium, our contract manufacturer, which was completed in 2020; and
● a decrease in regulatory expenses of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily related to decreased costs associated with FDA approval of Twirla which was received in the first quarter of 2020; partially offset by
● an increase in clinical development expenses of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase reflects higher costs as we evaluate additional
line extensions for Twirla and initiate development of potential product candidates in addition to Twirla, costs incurred for our post marketing commitment to the FDA and higher medical education costs.
Selling and marketing expenses. Selling and marketing expenses increased by $20.2 million, from $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $43.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This overall increase in selling and marketing expenses relates to a full year of commercialization activities for Twirla such as brand building, advocacy, market research and consulting, and the costs of establishing and maintaining our contract sales force.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by $2.0 million, or 15%, from $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This overall increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to the following:
● an increase in salaries and wages of $0.9 million, due to new hires in 2021 and the maintenance of full year salaries for hires occurring throughout 2020;
● an increase in professional fee expense of $0.5 million primarily related to legal fees, accounting fees, investor relations and increased use of financial consultants; and,
● an increase in D&O insurance of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest income. Interest income comprises interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest expense. Interest expense is attributable to our term loan with Perceptive and includes the amortization of the discount associated with allocating value to the common stock warrants issued to Perceptive and the amortization of the deferred financing costs associated with the term loan. Interest expense increased by $0.8 million, from $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net Operating Losses and Tax Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $347.6 million of federal and $116.0 million of state net operating loss carryforwards. We also potentially have federal and state research and development tax credits which would offset future taxable income. We have not completed a study to assess whether an ownership change has occurred, or whether there have been multiple ownership changes since our inception, due to the significant costs and complexities associated with such studies. Accordingly, our ability to utilize the aforementioned carryforwards may be limited. Additionally, for federal net operating losses generated prior to 2018, U.S. tax laws limit the time during which these carryforwards may be utilized against future taxes. As a result, we may not be able to take full advantage of these carryforwards for federal and state tax purposes. As of December 31, 2021, all of our net operating losses were fully offset by a valuation allowance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $19.1 million. We invest our cash equivalents and marketable securities in short-term highly liquid, interest-bearing investment-grade and government securities in order to preserve principal.
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
We incurred significant costs in the area of research and development, including CRO fees, manufacturing, regulatory and other clinical trial costs, as Twirla was being developed. With the approval of Twirla early in 2020, our operating expenses shifted substantially to selling and marketing as we built out our commercial infrastructure. Net cash used in operating activities was $65.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $74.9 million and a net increase in working capital items of $2.9 million, largely an increase in inventory of $6.3 million and an increase in prepaid expenses of $1.0 million, offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $5.2 million. These uses of cash were partially offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $3.3 million, a non-cash inventory reserve of $5.3 million, depreciation expense of $2.1 million and $1.8 million of other non-cash charges, primarily interest expense. Net cash used in operating activities was $47.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $51.9 million, offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $2.8 million, and $1.6 million of other non-cash charges, primarily interest expense. Our net change in operating assets and liabilities was negligible. Net cash used in operating activities was $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted of a net loss of $18.6 million and an increase in prepaid expenses of $0.2 million, which was offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $1.8 million and depreciation and amortization of $0.2 million as well as an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $1.1 million which reflects increased commercial development and commercial manufacturing expenses related to the initialization of pre-commercialization activities for Twirla.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $39.5 million and primarily represents net sales and maturities of marketable securities. Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $40.7 million and $0.1 million, respectively. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily represents net purchases of marketable securities of $40.3 million with the balance being the acquisition of equipment to be used in the commercialization of Twirla.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $30.4 million, which primarily represents net proceeds of $21.1 million received from the issuance of 26,666,666 shares of our common stock through a public offering and net proceeds of $9.3 million from the sale of 6,915,151 shares of common stock through at-the-market, or ATM sales programs. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $68.0 million, which primarily represents net proceeds of $48.4 million received from the issuance of 17,250,000 shares of our common stock through a public offering, proceeds of $20.0 million from the Perceptive term loan, and stock option exercise proceeds of $0.6 million. These proceeds were partially offset by debt financing costs of $1.0 million. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $42.4 million which primarily represented net proceeds of $7.8 million received from the issuance of 8,426,750 shares of our common stock in a private placement, net proceeds of $12.7 million from the sale of 14,526,315 shares of common stock through a public offering, and net proceeds of approximately $21.8 million from the sale of a total of 12,242,436 shares of our common stock through two ATM sales programs.
Funding Requirements and Other Liquidity Matters
We closely monitor our cash and cash equivalents balances, in an effort to ensure we have adequate liquidity to fund the operations of the Company. If the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors impact our current business plan or our ability to generate revenue from the launch of Twirla, we believe we have the ability to revise our commercial plans, including curtailing sales and marketing spending, to allow us to continue to fund our operations. In addition, on October 2, 2020 we filed a universal shelf registration statement with the SEC for the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, rights, debt securities and units up to an aggregate amount of $200.0 million (the “2020 Shelf Registration Statement”). On October 14, 2020, the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC. Prior to the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement, we had filed a universal shelf registration statement in November 2018 for the issuance of up to $100.0 million of securities, which we refer to as the 2018 Shelf Registration Statement, which was declared effective by the SEC on November 14, 2018.
On February 21, 2020, we filed a prospectus supplement to our 2018 Shelf Registration Statement registering a public offering of 17,250,000 shares of common stock at a price of $3.00 per share. Proceeds from the public offering, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses were approximately $48.4 million.
On March 18, 2021, we filed a prospectus supplement to our 2020 Shelf Registration Statement registering an at-the-market offering program we entered into for the sale of up to $50.0 million of shares of our common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 6,915,151 shares of our common stock under the at-the-market program resulting in net proceeds of approximately $9.3 million.
On October 8, 2021, we filed a prospectus supplement to our 2020 Shelf Registration Statement registering a public offering of 26,666,648 shares of common stock sold together with warrants to purchase up to 13,333,324 shares of our common stock at a combined offering price of $0.85 per share of common stock and one-half of a warrant to purchase one share of common stock. The warrants have an exercise price of $0.85 per share, are exercisable immediately, and will expire five years from the date of issuance. On October 13, 2021, we completed the offering and realized proceeds of approximately $21.1 million, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
On January 10, 2022, we filed a prospectus supplement to our 2020 Shelf Registration Statement registering an at-the-market offering program (the “2022 ATM”) we entered into for the sale of up to $50.0 million of shares of our common stock.
On March 13, 2022, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with a single healthcare-focused institutional investor (the “Purchaser”), pursuant to which the Company issued, in a registered direct offering (the “2022 Preferred Stock Offering”), 2,425 shares of Series A convertible preferred stock (the “Series A Preferred Stock”) and 2,425 shares of Series B convertible preferred stock (the “Series B Preferred Stock”) and Series A warrants (the “Series A Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 24,250,000 shares of the common stock of the Company (the “Common Stock”) and Series B warrants (the “Series B Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 24,250,000 shares of Common Stock. Each share of Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock has a stated value of $1,000 per share and a conversion price of $0.20 per share. The shares of preferred stock issued in the offering are convertible into an aggregate of 24,250,000 shares of Common Stock. The Series A Warrants have an exercise price of $0.26 per share, will become exercisable six months following the date of issuance, and will expire 5 years following the initial exercise date. The Series B Warrants have an exercise price of $0.26 per share, will become exercisable six months following the date of issuance, and will expire one and one-half years following the initial exercise date. The Purchase Agreement contains customary representations and warranties and agreements of the Company and the Purchaser and customary indemnification rights and obligations of the parties. The 2022 Preferred Stock Offering closed on March 14, 2022 and total net proceeds were approximately $4.3 million.
We believe we may have the potential to access additional capital through the 2022 ATM, selling additional debt or equity securities or obtaining a line of credit or other loan as required.
We expect to continue to incur significant operating expenses for the foreseeable future in connection with our ongoing activities as we:
● maintain a sales and marketing infrastructure to support the continued commercialization of Twirla in the United States;
● continue to evaluate additional line extensions for Twirla and initiate development of potential product candidates in addition to Twirla;
● maintain, leverage and expand our intellectual property portfolio; and
● maintain operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and future commercialization efforts.
We may also need to raise additional funds if we need to change components of our commercial plan or we encounter any unforeseen events that affect our current business plan, or we may choose to raise additional funds to provide us with additional working capital. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when needed or on attractive terms or are unable to enter into strategic collaborations, we then may be unable to successfully commercialize Twirla and may also be required to further cut operating costs, forgo future development and other opportunities or even terminate our operations, which may involve seeking bankruptcy protection. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with such developments, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the commercialization of Twirla. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the costs of future commercialization activities, including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, for Twirla;
•
the revenue received from commercial sales of Twirla;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•
the costs associated with any potential business or product acquisitions, strategic collaborations, licensing agreements or other arrangements that we may establish.
We do not have any committed external source of funds. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial cash flows from product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $19.1 million. In January 2022, we raised $0.4 million under the 2022 ATM Agreement. On March 14, 2022, we raised $4.3 million in the 2022 Preferred Stock Offering. We have been approved for and expect to receive approximately $4.7 million through the sale of net operating losses through the State of New Jersey’s Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program. We closely monitor our cash and cash equivalents and expect that our current cash will fund our planned operations into the second quarter of 2022. We plan to raise additional funds through debt issuances or the issuance and sale of our common stock to meet our projected operating requirements, including the continued commercialization of Twirla, the exploration and potential advancement of our existing pipeline and our possible expansion through business development activities. Prior to raising additional funds, we believe we need to regain compliance with the Nasdaq listing requirements because our stock price is currently trading below $1.00. As previously disclosed, we have been notified by Nasdaq that we have until May 9, 2022 to regain compliance. To that end, we plan to conduct a special meeting of shareholders in April to vote on a reverse stock split, and if successful, we will attempt to raise additional funds through the issuance and sale of our common stock.
Our future success depends on our ability to raise additional capital and/or implement various strategic alternatives. We continue to analyze strategic and financing alternatives, potential asset sales as well as mergers and acquisitions. We
cannot be certain that these initiatives or raising additional capital, whether through selling additional debt or equity securities or obtaining a line of credit or other loan, will be available to us or, if available, will be on terms acceptable to us. If we issue additional securities to raise funds, whether through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, or any combination thereof, these securities may have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to those of our common stock, and our current shareholders may experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with pharmaceutical partners, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates, including Twirla, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to obtain funds when needed or on acceptable terms, we may be required to curtail our current development programs, cut operating costs, forego future development and other opportunities and may need to seek bankruptcy protection.
The financial statements as of December 31, 2021 have been prepared under the assumption that we will continue as a going concern for the next 12 months following the date this Annual Report on Form 10-K is filed. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our uncertain ability to obtain additional capital, reduce expenditures and/or execute on our business plan and successfully launch Twirla. The audited financial statements as of December 31, 2021 do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In April 2020, we entered into a manufacturing and commercialization agreement with Corium, Inc. (“the Corium Agreement”) for the manufacture and supply of Twirla. Under the terms of the Coriumn Agreement, Corium is to be the exclusive supplier of Twirla for ten years. The Corium Agreement includes a fixed price per unit for two years depending on annual purchase volume and quarterly minimum purchase amounts. As of December 31, 2021, the amount committed for purchases for 2022 is $1.8 million.
In April 2020, we entered into a project agreement with inVentiv Commercial Services, LLC, or inVentiv, a Syneos Health Group Company, which we refer to as the Syneos Agreement, under our Master Services Agreement with inVentiv. Pursuant to the Syneos Agreement, inVentiv, through its affiliate Syneos Selling Solutions, will provide a field force of sales representatives to provide certain detailing services, sales operation services, compliance services and training services with respect to Twirla to us in exchange for an up-front implementation fee and a fixed monthly fee. Effective February 1, 2022, we entered into an amendment to the Syneos Agreement that extended the term until August 23, 2024. At that time, the Syneos Agreement will terminate automatically unless extended upon the mutual written agreement of the Parties. We may terminate the Syneos Agreement for any reason upon timely written notice without incurring a termination fee. As of December 31, 2021, the minimum amount committed totals $3.5 million.
Our operating lease commitment relates to our lease of office space in Princeton, New Jersey. The lease for this space commenced in December 2021, and the minimum payments over the remaining 39 month term totals $1.2 million as of December 31, 2021.
Shelf Registration Statements
On October 2, 2020, we filed the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement. On October 14, 2020, the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC. Prior to the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement, we had filed a universal shelf registration statement in November 2018 for the issuance of up to $100.0 million of securities, which we refer to as the 2018 Shelf Registration Statement, which was declared effective by the SEC on November 14, 2018.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements that discusses new accounting pronouncements.