Item 7. Managements’ Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
In “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (“MD&A”), management explains the general financial condition and results of operations for Agilysys and subsidiaries including:
- what factors affect our business;
- what our earnings and costs were;
- why those earnings and costs were different from the year before;
- where the earnings came from;
- how our financial condition was affected; and
- where the cash will come from to fund future operations.
The MD&A analyzes changes in specific line items in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and provides information that management believes is important to assessing and understanding our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes that appear in Item 8 of this Annual Report titled, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” Information provided in the MD&A may include forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Many factors could cause actual results to be materially different from those contained in the forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Information” on page 3 of this Annual Report and Item 1A “Risk Factors” in Part I of this Annual Report for additional information concerning these items. Management believes that this information, discussion, and disclosure is important in making decisions about investing in Agilysys.
Overview
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic
The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11, 2020. COVID-19 has had a significant impact on our business during the year ended March 31, 2022. The extent to which COVID-19 will continue impacting our financial condition and results of operations remains uncertain and depends on various factors, including the ongoing or recurring impact on our customers, partners, and suppliers and on the operation of the global markets in general. Because an increasing portion of our business is based on a subscription model, the effect of COVID-19 on our results of operations may also not be fully reflected for some time.
While we have previously taken certain cost reduction measures, we may take further actions that alter our business operations in response to changes in the global environment. As a result, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the effects of the operational alterations we have made in response on our business, financial condition, liquidity, and financial results cannot be predicted at this time.
Our Business
Agilysys has been a leader in hospitality software for more than 40 years, delivering innovative cloud-native SaaS and on-premise guest-centric technology solutions for gaming, hotels, resorts and cruise, corporate foodservice management, restaurants, universities, stadiums and healthcare. Agilysys offers the most comprehensive software solutions in the industry, including point-of-sale (POS), property management (PMS), inventory and procurement, payments, and related applications, to manage the entire guest journey. Agilysys is also known for its world class customer-centric service. During recent years, Agilysys has made major investments in R&D and has successfully modernized virtually all its longstanding trusted software solutions. Some of the largest hospitality companies around the world use Agilysys solutions to help improve guest loyalty, drive revenue growth and increase operational efficiencies.
The Company has just one reportable segment serving the global hospitality industry. Agilysys operates across North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, and India with headquarters located in Alpharetta, Georgia.
Our top priority is increasing shareholder value by improving operating and financial performance and profitably growing the business through superior products and services. To that end, we expect to invest a certain portion of our cash on hand to fund enhancements to existing software products, to develop and market new software products, and to expand our customer breadth, both vertically and geographically.
Our strategic plan specifically focuses on:
•Putting the customer first
•Focusing on product innovation and development
•Improving our liquidity
•Increasing organizational efficiency and teamwork
•Developing our employees and leaders
•Growing revenue by improving the breadth and depth of our product set across both point-of-sale and property management applications
•Growing revenue through international expansion
The primary objective of our ongoing strategic planning process is to create shareholder value by capitalizing on growth opportunities, increasing profitability and strengthening our competitive position within the specific technology solutions and end markets we serve. Profitability and industry leading growth will be achieved through tighter management of operating expenses and sharpening the focus of our investments to concentrate on growth opportunities that offer the highest returns.
Revenue - Defined
As required by the SEC, we separately present revenue earned as products revenue, support, maintenance and subscription services revenue or professional services revenue in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. In addition to the SEC requirements, we may, at times, also refer to revenue as defined below. The terminology, definitions, and applications of terms we use to describe our revenue may be different from those used by other companies and caution should be used when comparing these financial measures to those of other companies. We use the following terms to describe revenue:
•Revenue - We present revenue net of sales returns and allowances.
•Products revenue - Revenue earned from the sales of software licenses, third party hardware and operating systems.
•Support, maintenance and subscription services revenue - Revenue earned from the sale of proprietary and remarketed ongoing support, maintenance and subscription services.
•Professional services revenue - Revenue earned from the delivery of implementation, integration and installation services for proprietary and remarketed products.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2022 Compared with Fiscal 2021
Net Revenue and Operating Income (Loss)
The following table presents our consolidated revenue and operating results for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021:
nm - not meaningful
The following table presents the percentage relationship of our Consolidated Statement of Operations line items to our consolidated net revenues for the periods presented:
Net revenue. Total revenue increased $25.5 million, or 18.6%, in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. Products revenue increased $9.2 million, or 34.6%, due to higher sales and deliveries as our customers re-open their locations for business. Support, maintenance and subscription services revenue increased $10.4 million, or 11.7%, driven by continued growth in subscription-based revenue, which increased 28.0% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. Professional services revenue increased $5.8 million, or 26.6%, due to higher sales and service activity as our customers shift their focus to implementing technology to improve their operations.
Gross profit and gross profit margin. Our total gross profit increased $12.2 million, or 13.6%, in fiscal 2022 and total gross profit margin decreased from 65.2% to 62.4%. Products gross profit increased $3.5 million and gross profit margin decreased from 49.4% to 46.5% due to a higher proportion of third-party products over proprietary software revenue. Support, maintenance and subscription services gross profit increased $7.2 million and gross profit margin decreased from 79.7% to 78.6% as certain variable costs increased ahead of related revenue. Professional services gross profit increased $1.4 million and gross profit margin decreased slightly from 25.5% to 25.3% due to continued hiring and training of new staff to meet increasing project backlogs from ongoing sales activity and certain project delays.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses, excluding the charges for legal settlements, severance and other charges, decreased $14.9 million, or 13.9%, in fiscal 2022 compared with fiscal 2021. As a percent of total revenue, operating expenses have decreased 21.5% in fiscal 2022 compared with fiscal 2021.
Product development. Product development includes all expenses associated with research and development. Product development decreased $9.0 million, or 16.3%, during fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 due to an increase of $4.4 million in payroll and other operating expenses as we continue to manage market compensation pressures offset by a decrease in share-based compensation expense of $13.4 million due to significant charges resulting from accelerated vesting of stock-settled appreciation rights (SSARs) upon their market condition satisfaction in February 2021.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing increased $0.5 million, or 3.8%, in fiscal 2022 compared with fiscal 2021 due to an increase of $3.4 million in payroll, travel, advertising, promotion and other operating expenses as we invest in our sales and marketing teams and return to travel for in-person selling and increased marketing event and trade show activity offset by a decrease in share-based compensation expense of $2.9 million due to significant charges resulting from the accelerated vesting of SSARs upon their market condition satisfaction in February 2021.
General and administrative. General and administrative decreased $5.5 million, or 16.6%, in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 due to an increase of $3.7 million in payroll and other expenses after restoring base pay, employee benefits and various operational activities offset by a decrease in share-based compensation expense of $9.2 million due to significant charges resulting from the accelerated vesting of SSARs upon their market condition satisfaction in February 2021.
Depreciation of fixed assets. Depreciation of fixed assets decreased $0.6 million or 22.0% in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 due to an increased level of assets with shorter useful lives.
Amortization of internal-use software and intangibles. Amortization of internal-use software and intangibles decreased $0.3 million or 15.6% in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 due to a lower unamortized cost base following the impairment of intangibles in fiscal 2020.
Severance and other charges. Severance and other charges decreased $0.9 million due to a significant reduction in employee terminations during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
Legal settlements. Legal settlements increased $0.8 million during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 due to an increase in settlements of employment and other business-related matters.
Other (Income) Expenses
nm - not meaningful
Interest income. Interest income consists of interest earned on cash equivalents including short-term investments in commercial paper, treasury bills and money market funds.
Interest expense. Interest expense consists of costs associated with finance leases.
Other expense, net. Other expense, net consists mainly of the impact of foreign currency due to movement of European and Asian currencies against the US dollar.
Income Taxes
nm - not meaningful
For fiscal 2022, the effective tax rate was different than the statutory rate due primarily to adjustments to deferred tax assets including increases in valuation allowances that reduce deferred tax assets and to the recording of net operating losses in a number of foreign jurisdictions offset by current year expense in other foreign jurisdictions.
Although the timing and outcome of tax settlements are uncertain, it is reasonably possible that during the next 12 months an immaterial reduction in unrecognized tax benefits may occur as a result of the expiration of various statutes of limitations. We are consistently subject to tax audits; due to the nature of examinations in multiple jurisdictions, changes could occur in the amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits during the next 12 months which cannot be estimated at this time.
The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets depends on the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences are deductible. Because of our losses in prior periods, management believes that it is more-likely-than-not that we will not realize the benefits of these deductible differences and have recorded a valuation allowance substantially offsetting our deferred tax assets. At March 31, 2022, we had $196.3 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards that expire, if unused, in fiscal years 2031 to 2038, and $42.8 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards that can be carried forward indefinitely. We also had $166.8 million of state net operating loss carryforwards that expire, if unused, in fiscal years 2023 through 2041.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Net Revenue and Operating Loss
The following table presents our consolidated revenue and operating results for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following table presents the percentage relationship of our Consolidated Statement of Operations line items to our consolidated net revenues for the periods presented:
Net revenue. Total revenue decreased $23.6 million, or 14.7%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Products revenue decreased $17.5 million, or 39.6%, due to delayed customer purchasing decisions as the timing of the hospitality recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic remained unclear during fiscal 2021. Support, maintenance and subscription services revenue increased $4.9 million, or 5.8%, driven by continued growth in subscription-based revenue, which increased 15.5% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Subscription revenue sales were led by our add on software modules, including modules enabling social distancing and contactless capabilities. Professional services revenue decreased $11.0 million, or 33.3%, due to delays in implementation services due to customer property restrictions, property closures and lower sales from delayed customer purchasing decisions as the timing of the hospitality recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic remained unclear.
Gross profit and gross profit margin. Our total gross profit increased $8.4 million, or 10.4%, in fiscal 2021 and total gross profit margin increased from 50.4% to 65.2%. Products gross profit increased $5.4 million and gross profit margin increased from 17.6% to 49.4% driven mostly by the absence of software development cost amortization during fiscal 2021. Support, maintenance and subscription services gross profit increased $6.1 million and gross profit margin increased 269 basis points to 79.7% due to increased subscription revenue on a relatively flat cost base. Professional services gross profit decreased $3.1 million and gross profit margin decreased slightly from 26.5% to 25.5% due to the delay in professional service projects and the fixed costs of maintaining a minimum required professional services team as customers continued to work towards re-opening their locations and accept implementations and installations.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses, excluding the charges for legal settlements, impairments, severance and other charges, increased $16.8 million, or 18.5%, in fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020. As a percent of total revenue, operating expenses have increased 22.0% in fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020.
Product development. Product development includes all expenses associated with research and development. Product development increased $13.9 million, or 33.5%, during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 due to the continued expansion of our R&D teams and significant share-based compensation charges resulting from the accelerated vesting of stock-settled appreciation rights (SSARs) upon their market condition satisfaction in February 2021.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing decreased $5.7 million, or 28.5%, in fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020 due to reduced commission expense as a result of lower sales levels, significantly reduced travel, layoffs, temporary reductions in employee benefits, and the absence of in-person trade shows and conference activity. The decrease was slightly offset by an increase in stock-based compensation charges resulting from the accelerated vesting of SSARs.
General and administrative. General and administrative increased $9.0 million, or 37.0%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The change is due primarily to significant share-based compensation charges resulting from the accelerated vesting of SSARs.
Depreciation of fixed assets. Depreciation of fixed assets increased $0.3 million or 10.0% in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 due to an increased level of assets with shorter useful lives.
Amortization of internal-use software and intangibles. Amortization of internal-use software and intangibles decreased $0.6 million or 22.9% in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 due to a lower unamortized cost base following the impairment of intangibles in fiscal 2020.
Impairments. There were no impairments in fiscal 2021. Impairments totaled $23.7 million in fiscal 2020. The impairments resulted from specific capitalized software development costs supporting certain software applications. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the hospitality industry resulted in economic conditions that made it difficult to project future sales and revenue accurately for the impacted solutions at the time of impairment determination. After evaluating the Company’s strategy for market development and continued costs to support the software, an impairment charge was required. We recorded impairment charges to reduce the net realizable value of the related assets to zero during the 2020 fiscal year.
Severance and other charges. Severance and other charges increased $1.9 million due to an increase in non-restructuring severance activity during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Legal settlements. Legal settlements consist of settlements of employment and other business-related matters.
Other (Income) Expenses
nm - not meaningful
Interest income. Interest income consists of interest earned on short-term investments in commercial paper, money market funds and interest-bearing bank accounts.
Interest expense. Interest expense consists of costs associated with finance leases.
Other expense, net. Other expense, net consists mainly of the impact of foreign currency due to movement of European and Asian currencies against the US dollar.
Income Taxes
nm - not meaningful
For fiscal 2021, the effective tax rate was different than the statutory rate due primarily to adjustments to deferred tax assets including increases in valuation allowances that reduce deferred tax assets and to the recording of net operating losses in a number of foreign jurisdictions offset by current year expense in other foreign jurisdictions.
Because of our losses in prior periods, we have recorded a valuation allowance offsetting substantially all of our deferred tax assets. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets depends on the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences are deductible. Because of our losses in prior periods, management believes that it is more-likely-than-not that we will not realize the benefits of these deductible differences. At March 31, 2021, we had $199.1 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards that expire, if unused, in fiscal years 2031 to 2038, and $46.8 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards that can be carried forward indefinitely. We also had $165.6 million of state net operating loss carryforwards that expire, if unused, in fiscal years 2022 through 2041.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our cash requirements consist primarily of working capital needs, capital expenditures, payments of preferred stock dividends, and operating expenses including payments of lease obligations. Our contractual obligations consist primarily of operating leases for office space and preferred stock dividends. We disclose our lease obligations in Note 6, Leases, and preferred stock dividends in Note 14, Preferred Stock, to our Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8 of this Annual Report.
At March 31, 2022, all $97.0 million of our cash on hand was deposited in bank accounts, of which 93% are located in the United States. We believe there is limited credit risk with respect to our cash balances.
We believe that cash flow from operating activities, cash on hand of $97.0 million as of March 31, 2022, and access to capital markets will provide adequate funds to meet our short-and long-term liquidity requirements.
Cash Flow
Cash flow provided by operating activities. Cash flows provided by operating activities were $28.5 million in fiscal 2022. The provision of cash was due primarily to our net income of $6.5 million adjusted for $17.7 million in non-cash expense including depreciation, amortization, and share-based compensation and an increase of $4.3 million from the changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash flows provided by operating activities were $28.4 million in fiscal 2021. The provision of cash was due primarily to our operating loss of $21.0 million adjusted for $44.0 million in non-cash expense including depreciation, amortization, and share-based compensation and an increase of approximately $5.4 million from the changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash flows provided by operating activities were $10.6 million in fiscal 2020. The provision of cash was due primarily to our operating loss of $34.1 million adjusted for $46.2 million in non-cash expense including impairment charges, depreciation, amortization, and share-based compensation and a decrease of approximately $1.5 million in net operating assets and liabilities.
Cash flow used in investing activities. Cash flows used in investing activities in fiscal 2022 were $25.7 million due to $24.5 million in cash paid for business combinations, net of cash acquired, and $1.2 million in purchases of property and equipment, including internal use software.
Cash flows used in investing activities in fiscal 2021 were $1.4 million due primarily to the purchase of property and equipment, including internal use software.
Cash flows used in investing activities in fiscal 2020 were $3.4 million due primarily to the purchase of property and equipment, including internal use software.
Cash flow provided by (used in) financing activities. Cash flows used in financing activities in fiscal 2022 were $4.9 million and primarily comprised of share repurchases of $3.0 million to satisfy employee tax withholding on share-based compensation and $1.8 million in preferred stock dividends.
During fiscal 2021, the $25.3 million provided by financing activities consisted primarily of $34.0 million in preferred stock issuance proceeds from the MAK Capital investment, net of issuance costs, offset by $7.5 million for the repurchase of shares to satisfy employee tax withholding on share-based compensation and $1.1 million in preferred stock dividends.
Cash flows used in financing activities in fiscal 2020 were $1.1 million and primarily comprised of share repurchases to satisfy employee tax withholding on share-based compensation.
Investments
Investments in Corporate-Owned Life Insurance Policies
Agilysys invests in corporate-owned life insurance policies for certain former executives, for which some are endorsement split-dollar life insurance arrangements. We entered into agreements with each of the former executives, whereby we must maintain the life insurance policy for a specified amount and split a portion of the policy benefits with their designated beneficiary. Our investment in these corporate-owned life insurance policies were recorded at their cash surrender value, which approximates fair value at the balance sheet date. In the Consolidated Balance Sheets at the balance sheet date, the cash surrender value of $1.0 million for the remaining policies were held in “Other non-current assets,” and the present value of future proceeds owed to those executives’ designated beneficiary of $0.1 million, which approximates fair value, were recorded within “Other non-current liabilities” in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at the balance sheet date.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have had or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
Managements’ Discussion and Analysis is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We regularly evaluate our estimates, including those related to bad debts, inventories, investments, intangible assets, income taxes, restructuring, contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Our most significant accounting policies relate to the sale, purchase, and promotion of our products and services. The policies discussed below are considered by management to be critical to an understanding of our Consolidated Financial Statements because their application places the most significant demands on management’s judgment, with financial reporting results relying on estimation about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Specific risks for these critical accounting policies are described in the following paragraphs.
For all these policies, management cautions that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment.
Revenue recognition. Our customary business practice is to enter into legally enforceable written contracts with our customers. The majority of our contracts are governed by a master service agreement between us and the customer, which sets forth the general terms and conditions of any individual contract between the parties, which is then supplemented by a customer order to specify the different goods and services, the associated prices, and any additional terms for an individual contract. Performance obligations specific to each individual contract are defined within the terms of each order. Each performance obligation is identified based on the goods and services that will be transferred to our customer that are both capable of being distinct and are distinct within the context of the contract. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled and expect to receive in exchange
for transferring goods or services to the customer. Typically, our contracts do not provide our customer with any right of return or refund; we do not constrain the contract price as it is probable that there will not be a significant revenue reversal due to a return or refund.
Typically our customer contracts contain one or more of the following goods or services which constitute performance obligations.
Our software licenses typically provide for a perpetual right to use our software. Generally, our contracts do not provide significant services of integration and customization and installation services are not required to be purchased directly from us. The software is delivered before related services are provided and is functional without professional services, updates and technical support. We have concluded that the software license is distinct as the customer can benefit from the software on its own. Software revenue is typically recognized when the software is delivered or made available for download to the customer.
Revenue for hardware sales is recognized when the product is shipped to the customer and when obligations that affect the customer’s final acceptance of the arrangement have been fulfilled. Hardware is purchased from suppliers and provided to the end-user customers via drop-ship or from inventory. We are responsible for negotiating the price both with the supplier and the customer, payment to the supplier, establishing payment terms and product returns with the customer, and bearing the credit risk if the customer does not pay for the goods. As the principal contact with the customer, we recognize revenue and cost of goods sold when we are notified by the supplier that the product has been shipped. In certain limited instances, as shipping terms dictate, revenue is recognized upon receipt at the point of destination or upon installation at the customer site.
Support and maintenance revenue is derived from providing telephone and on-line technical support services, bug fixes, and unspecified software updates and upgrades to customers on a when-and-if-available basis. These services represent a stand-ready obligation that is concurrently delivered and has the same pattern of transfer to the customer; we account for these support and maintenance services as a single performance obligation recognized over the term of the maintenance agreement.
Our subscription service revenue is comprised of fees for contracts that provide customers a right to access our software for a subscribed period. We do not provide the customer the contractual right to license the software at any time outside of the subscription period under these contracts. The customer can only benefit from the software and software maintenance when provided the right to access the software. Accordingly, each of the rights to access the software, the maintenance services, and any hosting services is not considered a distinct performance obligation in the context of the contract and should be combined into a single performance obligation to be recognized over the contract period. The Company recognizes subscription revenue over a one-month period based on the typical monthly invoicing and renewal cycle in accordance with our customer agreement terms.
Professional services revenues primarily consist of fees for consulting, installation, integration and training and are generally recognized over time as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the professional services as the services are being performed. Professional services can be provided by internal or external providers, do not significantly affect the customer’s ability to access or use other provided goods or services, and provide a measure of benefit beyond that of other promised goods or services in the contract. As a result, professional services are considered distinct in the context of the contract and represent a separate performance obligation. Professional services that are billed on a time and materials basis are recognized over time as the services are performed. For contracts billed on a fixed price basis, revenue is recognized over time using an input method based on labor hours expended to date relative to the total labor hours expected to be required to satisfy the related performance obligation.
We use the market approach to drive standalone selling price (“SSP”) by maximizing observable data points (in the form of recently executed customer contracts) to determine the price customers are willing to pay for the goods and services transferred. If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to that performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative SSP basis.
Share-based compensation. We have an equity incentive plan under which we may grant non-qualified stock options, incentive stock options, stock-settled stock appreciation rights, time-vested restricted shares, restricted share units, performance-vested restricted shares, and performance shares. Shares issued pursuant to awards under this plan may be made out of treasury or authorized but unissued shares.
We record compensation expense related to stock-settled stock appreciation rights, restricted shares, and performance shares granted to certain employees and non-employee directors based on the fair value of the awards on the grant date. The fair value of restricted share grants subject only to a service condition is based on the closing price of our common shares on the grant date. For stock option and stock-settled appreciation right (SSAR) grants subject only to a service condition, we estimate the fair value on the grant date using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model with inputs including the closing market price at grant date, exercise price and assumptions regarding the risk-free interest rate, expected volatility of our common shares based on historical volatility, and expected
term as estimated using the simplified method. For restricted share and SSAR grants subject to a market condition, we estimate the fair value on the grant date through a lattice option pricing model that utilizes a Monte Carlo analysis with inputs including the closing market price at grant date, share price threshold and assumptions regarding the risk-free interest rate and expected volatility of our common shares based on historical volatility. Inputs for SSAR grants subject to a market condition also include exercise price, remaining contractual term, and suboptimal exercise factor. Forfeitures of awards are recognized as they occur. Additional information regarding the assumptions used to value share-based compensation awards is provided in Note 13, Share-Based Compensation, to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information about recent accounting pronouncements recently adopted and those not yet effective.