ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
We use the terms “Athena,” “we,” “our,” and “us” to refer to Athena Gold Corporation and its consolidated subsidiary, Athena Minerals, Inc (“AMI”).
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this Report. The discussion of results, causes and trends should not be construed to imply any conclusion that these results or trends will necessarily continue into the future.
Forward-Looking Statements
Some of the information presented in this Form 10-K constitutes “forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements that include terms such as “may,” “will,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “continue,” “believe,” “plan,” or the like, as well as all statements that are not historical facts. Forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations. Although we believe our expectations are based on reasonable assumptions within the bounds of our knowledge of our business and operations, there can be no assurance that actual results will not differ materially from expectations.
All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to update such statements to reflect events that occur or circumstances that exist after the date on which they are made.
Results of Operations:
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and
A summary of our results from operations is as follows:
For the twelve months ending December 31, 2021, the Company increased general and administrative expenses by approximately $430,000. The increase was due to the following year over year variances:
· The increase in legal and professional fees increase is associated with the acquisition and maintenance of the Excelsior Springs project and our listing on the Canadian Stock Exchange (“CSE”).
· On March 22, 2021, the Company issued a total of 2,000,000 non-statutory stock options to four individuals, three of which are Directors of the Company, the other an independent technical consultant. Upon vesting, each option is exercisable to purchase one share of common stock at a price of $0.09 per share. The options vest 50% upon issuance, and 25% on each of the first and second anniversaries of the grant date. The Company recognized share-based compensation expense related to the stock options of $128,000 for 2021.
· On March 22, 2021 the Company agreed to issue a total of 300,000 restricted stock units at a price of $0.10 per share to the independent technical consultant helping design our 2021 exploration programs at Excelsior Springs. As such, we have recorded stock-based compensation in the amount of $30,000.
· The increase in stock exchange fees was a result of listing on the CSE and other compliance reporting.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 there was a variance $48,000 for the same period in 2020 in exploration and evaluation expenses. We have begun initial activities on our future exploration programs which has resulted in an additional exploration cost compared to 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 interest expense includes $112,140 of related party interest associated with the convertible credit facility, and $20,822 of interest expense associated with the convertible note payable which includes $14,649 of interest expense resulting from the amortization of the note discount.
On May 25, 2021 we completed a private placement in which we sold 6,250,000 units. Each unit was priced at CAD$0.08 and consisted of one share of the Company’s common stock and one stock purchase warrant granting the holder the right to purchase one additional share of common stock at a price of CAD$0.15. At inception date of May 25, 2021, we determined the warrants fair value to be $485,052. For the twelve months ending December 31, 2021, the warrant liability was valued at $683,063, resulting in a revaluation of warrant liability of $198,011.
On September 30, 2021 we completed a private placement in which we sold 3,108,700 units. Each unit was priced at CAD$0.08 and consisted of one share of the Company’s common stock and one stock purchase warrant granting the holder the right to purchase one additional share of common stock at a price of CAD$0.15. At inception date of September 30, 2021, we determined the warrants fair value to be $269,674. For the twelve months ending December 31, 2021, the warrant liability was valued at $341,145, resulting in a revaluation of warrant liability of $71,471.
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
The Company has no revenue generating operations from which it can internally generate funds. To date, the Company’s ongoing operations have been financed by the sale of its equity securities by way of public offerings, private placements and the exercise of incentive stock options and share purchase warrants. The Company believes that it will be able to secure additional private placements and public financings in the future, although it cannot predict the size or pricing of any such financings. This situation is unlikely to change until such time as the Company can develop a bankable feasibility study on one of its projects.
On May 25, 2021 we completed a private placement in which we sold 6,250,000 units. We realized total proceeds of $401,823 net of offering costs. Additionally, on September 30, 2021 we completed a private placement in which we sold 3,108,700 units. We realized total proceeds of $190,552 net of offering costs.
Going Concern
Our financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes that we will be able to meet our obligations and continue our operations during the next fiscal year. Asset realization values may be significantly different from carrying values as shown in our consolidated financial statements and do not give effect to adjustments that would be necessary to the carrying values of assets and liabilities should we be unable to continue as a going concern
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $73,000 of cash and working capital of approximately $74,000. This compares to cash on hand of approximately $9,000 and negative working capital of approximately $236,000 at December 31, 2020.
The Company expects that it will operate at a loss for the foreseeable future and believes the current cash and cash equivalents and working capital will be sufficient for it to maintain its currently held properties, fund its planned exploration, and fund its currently anticipated general and administrative costs for at least the next 12 months from the date of this report. However, the Company does expect that it will be required to raise additional funds through public or private equity financings in the future in order to continue in business in the future past the immediate 12 month period. Should such financing not be available in that time-frame, the Company will be required to reduce its activities and will not be able to carry out all of its presently planned exploration and, if warranted, development activities on its currently anticipated scheduling.
Capital Management
The Company’s objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern in order to pursue the development and exploration of its mineral properties and to maintain a flexible capital structure, which optimizes the costs of capital to an acceptable risk.
As of December 31, 2021, the capital structure of the Company consists of 119,858,700 shares of common stock, par value $0.0001. The Company manages the capital structure and adjusts it in response to changes in economic conditions, its expected funding requirements, and risk characteristics of the underlying assets. The Company’s funding requirements are based on cash forecasts. In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure, the Company may issue new debt, new shares and/or consider strategic alliances. Management reviews its capital management approach on a regular basis. The Company is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not engage in any activities involving variable interest entities or off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements. The accounting positions described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates.
We believe that the significant estimates, assumptions and judgments used when accounting for items and matters such as capitalized mineral rights, asset valuations, recoverability of assets, asset impairments, taxes, and other provisions were reasonable, based upon information available at the time they were made. Actual results could differ from these estimates, making it possible that a change in these estimates could occur in the near term.