ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND FINANCIAL CONDITION
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere herein. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect,” and the like, and/or future-tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements in this annual report. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors including, but not limited to, those noted under “Risk Factors” of the reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, except as may be required under applicable law.
Overview-
AiAdvertising’s primary focus is to disrupt the digital advertising world by offering a solution that harnesses the power of artificial intelligence (AI) to enable marketers to increase productivity, efficiency and performance.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, including the discussion on liquidity and capital resources, are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, management re-evaluates its estimates and judgments, particularly those related to the determination of the estimated recoverable amounts of trade accounts receivable, impairment of long-lived assets, revenue recognition, and deferred tax assets. We believe the following critical accounting policies require more significant judgment and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements.
Among the significant judgments made by management in the preparation of our financial statements are the following:
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASU 2014-09 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and all subsequent amendments to the ASU (collectively, “ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2018 are presented under Topic 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic accounting under Topic 605. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The adoption of ASC 606 did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. See footnote 3 for a disclosure of our use of estimates and judgement, as it relates to revenue recognition.
Included in revenue are costs that are reimbursed by our clients, including third party services, such as photographers and stylists, furniture, supplies, and the largest component, digital advertising. We have determined, based on our review of ASC 606-10-55-39, that the amounts classified as reimbursable costs should be recorded as gross, due to the following factors:
●
The Company is primarily in control of the inputs of the project and responsible for the completion of the client contract;
●
We have discretion in establishing price; and
●
We have discretion in supplier selection.
Accounts Receivable
The Company extends credit to its customers, who are located nationwide. Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal trade terms. The Company performs continuing credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition. Management reviews accounts receivable on a regular basis, based on contracted terms and how recently payments have been received to determine if any such amounts will potentially be uncollected. The Company includes any balances that are determined to be uncollectible in its allowance for doubtful accounts. After all attempts to collect a receivable have failed, the receivable is written off. The balances of the allowance account at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $4,469 and $742 respectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. To determine recoverability of a long-lived asset, management evaluates whether the estimated future undiscounted net cash flows from the asset are less than its carrying amount. If impairment is indicated, the long-lived asset would be written down to fair value. Fair value is determined by an evaluation of available price information at which assets could be bought or sold, including quoted market prices, if available, or the present value of the estimated future cash flows based on reasonable and supportable assumptions.
Indefinite Lived Intangibles and Goodwill Assets
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, “Business Combinations,” where the total purchase price is allocated to the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The purchase price is allocated using the information currently available, and may be adjusted, up to one year from acquisition date, after obtaining more information regarding, among other things, asset valuations, liabilities assumed and revisions to preliminary estimates. The purchase price in excess of the fair value of the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired less liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
The Company tests for indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill impairment in the fourth quarter of each year and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value and may not be recoverable. In accordance with its policies, at December 31, 2020 the Company performed a qualitative assessment of indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill related to WebTegrity and determined the fair value of each intangible asset and goodwill. Therefore, an impairment of indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill was recognized.
The impairment test conducted by the Company includes an assessment of whether events occurred that may have resulted in impairment of goodwill and intangible assets. Because it was determined that events had occurred which effected the fair value of goodwill and intangible assets, the Company conducted the two-step approach to determine the fair value and required adjustment. The steps are as follows:
1.
Based on the totality of qualitative factors, determine whether the carrying amount of the intangible asset may not be recoverable. Qualitative factors and key assumptions reviewed include the following:
●
Increases in costs, such as labor, materials or other costs that could negatively affect future cash flows. The Company assumed that costs associated with labor, materials, and other costs should be consistent with fair market levels. If the costs were materially higher than fair market levels, then such costs may adversely affect the future cash flows of the Company or reporting units.
●
Financial performance, such as negative or declining cash flows, or reductions in revenue may adversely affect recoverability of the recorded value of the intangible assets. During our analysis, the Company assumes that revenues should remain relatively consistent or show gradual growth month-to-month and quarter-to-quarter. If we report revenue declines, instead of increases or flat levels, then such condition may adversely affect the future cash flows of the Company or reporting units.
●
Legal, regulatory, contractual, political, business or other factors that could affect future cash flows. During our analysis, the Company assumes that the legal, regulatory, political or business conditions should remain consistent, without placing material pressure on the Company or any of its reporting units. If such conditions were to become materially different than what has been experienced historically, then such conditions may adversely affect the future cash flows of the Company or reporting units.
●
Entity-specific events such as losses of management, key personnel, or customers, may adversely affect future cash flows. During our analysis, the Company assumes that members of management, key personnel, and customers will remain consistent period-over-period. If not effectively replaced, the loss of members of management and key employees could adversely affect operations, culture, morale and overall success of the company. In addition, if material revenue from key customers is lost and not replaced, then future cash flows will be adversely affected.
●
Industry or market considerations, such as competition, changes in the market, changes in customer dependence on our service offering, or obsolescence could adversely affect the Company or its reporting units. We understand that the market we serve are constantly changing, requiring us to change with it. During our analysis, we assume that we will address new opportunities in service offering and industries served. If we do not make such changes, then we may experience declines in revenue and cash flow, making it difficult to re-capture market share.
●
Macroeconomic conditions such as deterioration in general economic conditions or limitations on accessing capital could adversely affect the Company. During our analysis, we acknowledge that macroeconomic factors, such as the economy, may affect our business plan because our customers may reduce budgets for our services. If there are material declines in the economy, which lead to reductions in revenue then such conditions may adversely affect the Company.
2.
Compare the carrying amount of the intangible asset to the fair value.
3.
If the carrying amount is greater than the fair value, then the carrying amount is reduced to reflect fair value.
In accordance with its policies, the Company performed a qualitative assessment of indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill at December 31, 2020 and determined there was impairment of indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill from our WebTegrity acquisition. Accordingly, all intangible assets and goodwill related to the WebTegrity acquisition have been written off, amounting to $560,000. This amount was included in Operating Expenses on the Income Statement, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Goodwill and Intangible assets are comprised of the following, presented as net of amortization:
December 31, 2021
December 31, 2020
Business Combinations
The Company allocates the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customer lists, acquired technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Fair value of financial instruments
The Company’s financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities are carried at cost, which approximates their fair value, due to the relatively short maturity of these instruments. During year ended 2020, the Company’s notes payable had stated borrowing rates that were consistent with those currently available to the Company and, accordingly, the Company believes the carrying value of these debt instruments approximated their fair value. As of December 31, 2021 the Company has zero note payables.
Fair value is defined as the price to sell an asset or transfer a liability, between market participants at the measurement date. Fair value measurements assume that the asset or liability is (1) exchanged in an orderly manner, (2) the exchange is in the principal market for that asset or liability, and (3) the market participants are independent, knowledgeable, able and willing to transact an exchange. Fair value accounting and reporting establishes a framework for measuring fair value by creating a hierarchy for observable independent market inputs and unobservable market assumptions and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. Considerable judgment is required to interpret the market data used to develop fair value estimates. As such, the estimates presented herein are not necessarily indicative of the amounts that could be realized in a current exchange. The use of different market assumptions and/or estimation methods could have a material effect on the estimated fair value.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company does not elect to delay complying with any new or revised accounting standards, but to apply all standards required of public companies, according to those required application dates.
Management reviewed accounting pronouncements issued during the year ended December 31, 2021, and no pronouncements were adopted during the period.
Management reviewed accounting pronouncements issued during the year ended December 31, 2020, and the following pronouncement was adopted during the period.
In January 2017, the FASB issued 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. The amendments in this ASU simplify the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test and eliminating the requirement for a reporting unit with a zero or negative carrying amount to perform a qualitative assessment. Instead, under this pronouncement, an entity would perform its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and would recognize an impairment change for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized is not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In addition, income tax effects will be considered, if applicable. This ASU is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. Early adoption is permitted. Due to the limited amount of goodwill and intangible assets recorded at December 31, 2021, the impact of this ASU on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures was immaterial.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In June 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-13 (ASU 2016-13) "Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments" which requires the measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held at amortized cost. ASU 2016-13 replaces the existing incurred loss impairment model with an expected loss methodology, which will result in more timely recognition of credit losses. ASU 2016-13 is effective for annual reporting periods, and interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently in the process of evaluating the impact of the adoption of ASU 2016-13 on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). The intention of ASU 2020-06 update is to address the complexity of accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts in an entity’s own equity. Under ASU 2020-06, the number of accounting models for convertible notes will be reduced and entities that issue convertible debt will be required to use the if-converted method for computing diluted Earnings Per Share. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2021 and may be adopted through either a modified or fully retrospective transition. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this ASU on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021, compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
REVENUE
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $2,534,943 to $6,868,261, compared to $9,406,204 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a pivot of focus from professional services to SaaS revenue generated by our AiAd Platform. During this pivot, we strategically chose to discontinue parts of our business, such as our hosting business, that was not part of our core focus going forward. The hosting business is recorded separately as discontinued operations in the statement of operations for years ended 2021 and 2020.
COST OF REVENUE
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $1,555,923 to $4,696,317, compared to $6,252,240 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the decrease in digital marketing advertising costs.
SALARIES AND OUTSIDE SERVICES
Salaries and outside services for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1,574,792 to $4,048,508, compared to $2,473,716 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases of salary expense of non-cost of revenue employees, payments to contractors and professional services.
SELLING, GENERAL, AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $3,117,909 to $4,767,334 compared to $1,649,425 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in warrant and stock option expense.
LOSS ON IMPAIRMENT OF GOODWILL AND INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Loss on impairment of goodwill and intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $560,000 to zero, compared to $560,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the impairment and write-off of the goodwill and intangible assets from WebTegrity acquisition during 2020.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $66,752 to $46,535, compared to $113,287 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, as of December 31, 2020, which eliminated additional amortization of intangible assets in the current period.
OTHER INCOME AND EXPENSE
Total other income and expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $2,032,053 to net other expense of $1,865,952 compared to net other income of $166,101 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net other expense was primarily due to an increase in finance charges and compensation expense related to the issuance of shares of common stock to a related party, partially offset by the sale of the hosting revenue stream.
NET LOSS
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8,482,771, compared to the net loss of $1,270,650 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net loss for the period was primarily due to an increase in warrant and stock option expenses, increase in finance charges and SG&A expenses and decrease in third party revenue.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company had a net working capital (i.e. the difference between current assets and current liabilities) of $2,706,377 at December 31, 2021 compared to a net working capital deficit of ($4,784,105) at December 31, 2020.
Cash flow used in operating activities was $4,958,822 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to cash flow used in operating activities of $1,812,623 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash flow used in operating activities of $3,146,199 was primarily due to an increase in net loss, partially offset by finance charges and warrant and stock option expenses.
Cash flow provided by investing activities was $128,046 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to cash flow used in investing activities of $5,253 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash flow provided by investing activities of $133,299 was primarily due to the sales of hosting revenue stream, partially offset by purchase of computers, printer, and videography equipment.
Cash flow provided by financing activities was $8,251,693 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to cash flow provided by financing activities of $1,009,086 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash flow provided by financing activities of $7,242,607 was due to the issuance of our common stock, partially offset by debt repayments.
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity are funds generated by operations, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had short-term borrowing relationships with two lenders. During the current period, one lender provides short-term financing under a stock purchase arrangement disclosed in footnote 10. The Company does not have any long-term sources of liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, there were no unused sources of liquidity, nor were there any commitments of material capital expenditures.
The Company has negative monthly cash flows from operations of approximately $300,000. The Company’s current cash is sufficient to sustain the Company’s operations for approximately 18 months without additional borrowings. To satisfy cash needs, the Company relies on various borrowing mechanisms to fund operations and service debt, as discussed above.
The Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared on a going concern basis of accounting, which contemplates continuity of operations, realization of assets and liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. Management believes that our current cash flow will sustain our operations and obligations as they become due, additionally will allow the development of our core business operations. Furthermore, the Company anticipates that it will raise additional capital through investments from our existing shareholders, prospective new investors and future revenue generated by our operations.
Any additional capital we may raise through the sale of equity or equity-backed securities may dilute current stockholders’ ownership percentages and could also result in a decrease in the fair market value of our equity securities. The terms of the securities issued by us in future capital transactions may be more favorable to new investors and may include preferences, superior voting rights and the issuance of warrants or other derivative securities which may have a further dilutive effect.
Furthermore, any additional debt or equity or other financing that we may need may not be available on terms favorable to us, or at all. If we are unable to obtain required additional capital, we may have to curtail our growth plans or cut back on existing business. Further, we may not be able to continue operations if we do not generate sufficient revenues from operations.
We may incur substantial costs in pursuing future capital financing, including investment banking fees, legal fees, accounting fees, securities law compliance fees, printing and distribution expenses and other costs. We may also be required to recognize non-cash expenses in connection with certain securities we issue, such as convertible notes and warrants, which may adversely impact our reported financial results.