ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this annual report. Unless expressly stated otherwise, for discussion and analysis of results for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the comparison of 2020 and 2019 results, please refer to Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on February 19, 2021 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Business Overview
We are a leading provider of advanced wireless connectivity solutions and technologies used to enable high performance wireless networking across a broad and increasing range of devices and markets, including consumer, enterprise and automotive. Our mission is to connect the world through advanced antenna systems and integrated wireless solutions. Our innovative antenna systems are designed to address key challenges with wireless system performance faced by our customers. We provide solutions to complex RF, engineering challenges to help improve wireless services that require higher throughput, broad coverage footprint, and carrier grade quality.
We are transitioning from a passive antenna and related services provider to a wireless system solutions provider, targeting higher levels of integration and complexity, and therefore, higher selling prices and margins and in 2020 we announced our new patented AirgainConnect® platform. The first product from this platform is the FirstNet Ready™ AirgainConnect AC-HPUE antenna-modem, targeting vehicles used by first responders. The AC-HPUE antenna-modem includes an integrated high-power LTE modem supporting the 3GPP Band 14 HPUE (or high-power user equipment) output power functionality and is certified to run on the AT&T FirstNet network.
On January 7, 2021 we purchased 100% of the outstanding shares of Minnesota-based NimbeLink Corp., an IIoT company focused on the design, development, and delivery of cellular solutions for enterprise customers. NimbeLink provides carrier-certified embedded modems and asset tracking solutions that minimize or often eliminate RF design and certification time from project schedules, significantly reducing costs and time to market. The acquisition of NimbeLink supports our transition toward becoming a more system-level company and will play an important role in our overall growth strategy to broaden market diversification, especially within the IIoT space. NimbeLink’s IIoT expertise puts them squarely in one of our targeted enterprise submarkets and extends the breadth and opportunity for our AirgainConnect platform. Our worldwide salesforce represents a present opportunity to expand NimbeLink’s reach and NimbeLink will now gain access to design opportunities they were not previously able to win. The result is an increase in the opportunities for Airgain in the enterprise market and a more diverse offering of products and expertise for our customers.
The consumer market encompasses a large and growing market of consumers using wireless-enabled devices and our antennas are deployed in consumer access points, wireless gateways, Wi-Fi Mesh systems and extenders, smart TVs, smart home devices, and set-top boxes. Our Antennas support an array of technologies, including WLAN, Wi-Fi, LTE, 5G and LPWAN.
The enterprise market is characterized by devices that provide reliable wireless access for high-density environments such as buildings, campuses, transportation terminals and stadiums. Within this market our antennas are deployed across a wide range of systems, devices, and applications that include access points and gateways, fixed wireless access infrastructure, small cells, and remote radio heads. Our products are well positioned to increase our growth in this market.
In the automotive market, our antennas are deployed in a wide range of vehicles to support a variety of wireless connectivity solutions in the fleet and aftermarket segment and support a variety of technologies that include WiFi, 3G, LTE, Satellite and LPWAN. The fleet and aftermarket segment of the automotive market consists
of applications whereby rugged vehicular wireless routers are paired with external antenna systems to provide connectivity to fixed and mobile assets. Within the fleet and aftermarket market segment, there has been a rise in the number of antennas per vehicle. The majority of our revenues are currently derived from fleet and aftermarket sales and going forward, our strategy is to augment our current sales in the automotive aftermarket with design wins and sales into the automotive OEMs.
Our design teams partner with customers from the early stages of antenna prototyping to device throughput testing to facilitate optimal performance and quick time to market. Our capabilities include design, custom engineering support, integration, and OTA testing. These capabilities have resulted in a strong reputation across the OEM, ODM and chipset manufacturer ecosystem. Our competencies and strengths have helped us secure design wins used in multiple reference designs from leading Wi-Fi chipset vendors, OEMs, ODMs, chipset manufacturers and service providers rely on these reference designs and our engineering skills to deliver superior throughput performance. We view our relationship with OEM, ODM, chipset manufacturers and service providers as an important attribute to our long-term strategy and success.
We believe demand is growing rapidly for our advanced wireless connectivity solutions and technologies and there is a significant market opportunity. As the ability to provide mobile internet access grows, our solutions and expertise become more important to prospects and customers. As a passive component, embedded antennas can be viewed as a commodity. However, our design, engineering, and research show that antenna selection, placement, and testing can have significant improvements in device performance. We believe that we are chosen when performance is a more significant factor than price, and our distinctive focus on superior designs that provide increased range and throughput has allowed us to build a leadership position in the in-home WLAN device market.
Our financial highlights for 2021 include the following:
•Sales increased by 32.5% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in sales was primarily driven by the increase in enterprise product sales, due to sales of industrial IoT products resulting from the NimbeLink acquisition, the launch of a Wi-Fi product for a major enterprise customer, and growth in AirgainConnect product sales offset by a decline in sales in the consumer market.
•Gross profit as a percentage of sales decreased to 38.3% in 2021 compared to 46.6% in 2020. The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was largely due to changes in product mix including increased sales of industrial IoT devices with lower gross margins, and higher production and freight costs as well as an inventory step-up adjustment and higher amortization costs associated with the NimbeLink acquisition.
•Loss from operations increased by $8.9 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $11.0 million in operating expenses due to the NimbeLink acquisition which added headcount, IT and facilities costs as well as the change in the fair value of contingent consideration related to the NimbeLink acquisition. The increase in operating expenses was offset by an increase of $2 million in gross profit.
•Our effective tax rate was 17% in 2021 compared to (9.0)% in 2020.
•We ended 2021 with cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash totaling $14.7 million.
We believe that our performance and future success depend upon several factors including continuing effects of COVID-19 on our customer product rollouts, continuation of the global supply shortages, the growth in sales of AirgainConnect AC-HPUE and related products, transitions to contract manufacturers and success in integrating NimbeLink and increasing its sales. Our performance and future success also depend on historical factors such as manufacturing costs, continued investments in our growth, our ability to expand into growing addressable markets, including consumer, enterprise, and automotive, the average selling prices of our products per device, the number of antennas per device, and our ability to diversify the number of devices that incorporate our antenna products. Our customers are price conscious, and our operating results are affected by pricing pressure which may force us to lower prices below our established list prices. In addition, a few end-customer devices which incorporate our antenna products comprise a significant amount of our sales, and the discontinuation or modification of such devices may materially and adversely affect our sales and results of operations. Our ability to maintain or increase our sales depends on, among other things, new and existing end-customers selecting our antenna solutions for their wireless
devices and networks, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as discussed above, the deployment level of AirgainConnect AC-HPUE, the proliferation of Wi-Fi connected home devices and data intensive applications, trends related to in-house design in our traditional set top market, investments in our growth to address customer needs, the impact of the global supply shortage on our business and that of our end customers, our ability to target new end markets, development of our product offerings and technology solutions, and international expansion, as well as our ability to successfully integrate past and any future acquisitions. While each of these areas presents significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges we must successfully address. We discuss many of these risks, uncertainties and other factors in this annual report in greater detail under the section entitled “Risk Factors.”
COVID-19 Pandemic
The United States and other countries around the world are experiencing a major health pandemic related to COVID-19, which has created considerable instability and disruption in the U.S. and world economies. Governmental authorities in impacted regions have taken actions in an effort to slow the spread of COVID-19’s spread, resulting in limitations on business operations and consumer and employee travel. We have worked, and continue to work, to comply within the framework of local, county, state, and federal laws. In that regard, we have implemented a wide range of practices to protect and support our employees and to modify and monitor the engagement with our customers, suppliers, and contract manufacturers. Specifically, in response to continuing efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 as new strains emerge, we have continued to monitor or modify our workspaces and facilities to continue to operate at full function yet with precautions in place to help prevent outbreak or spread of the virus. In the United States, we continue to manage the number of our employees present in the San Diego office and those who are working from home, in a manner to maximize operational capacity yet still limit any spread or outbreaks of the virus. In accordance with local regulations, engineering, testing and production operations in our Scottsdale offices, as well as testing operations in our remote facilities, have resumed with protocols in place to help prevent and limit the spread of the virus. In each work location, protocols have been established and remain in place, in accordance with government guidance, in order to minimize the risk to those employees whose presence in the office is necessary or allowed. Our salespeople have recommenced some business travel but also continue to engage with customers remotely rather than in person to secure sales of, and opportunities for, our products and services.
The continued spread of COVID-19 and its related effects on our business have had a material and adverse effect on our business operations. Through the date of this filing, these disruptions or restrictions include restrictions on our ability to travel, temporary closures of our office buildings or the facilities of our customers or suppliers, and during 2021 disruptions with certain components in our supply chain located in Asia as well as those of our customers. Such disruptions to our customers have had a negative impact on our sales and operating results throughout 2021. Related to sales, we saw orders reach historic lows for our previously core consumer business in the fourth quarter. We have seen signs that the consumer business is beginning to rebound, however, the continued spread of COVID-19 may adversely affect such rebound and have a negative effect on our operating results in future quarters.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the U.S. and world economies generally, and our future results in particular, could be significant and will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Seasonality
Our operating results historically have not been subject to significant seasonal variations. However, our operating results are affected by how customers make purchasing decisions around local holidays in China. For example, a national holiday the first week of October in China may cause customers to purchase product in the third quarter ahead of their holiday season to account for higher volume requirements in the fourth quarter. In addition, although it is difficult to make broad generalizations, our sales tend to be lower in the first quarter of each year compared to other quarters due to the Chinese New Year. The broader economic impacts caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in China may also contribute to the traditionally slower first quarter sales this year. Results for any quarter may not be indicative of the results that may be achieved for the full fiscal year and these patterns may change as a result of general customer demand or product cycles.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Sales
We primarily generate revenue from the sales of our products. As discussed further in “Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates” below, we recognize revenue to depict the transfer of control over promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled for those goods or services. We generally recognize product sales at the time of shipment to our customers, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Although currently insignificant, we also generate service revenue from agreements to provide design, engineering, and testing services as well as subscription revenue from the sale of data plans.
Cost of Goods Sold
The cost of goods sold reflects the cost of producing antenna, embedded modem and asset tracking products that are shipped for our customers’ devices as well as costs incurred for service agreements. This primarily includes manufacturing costs of our products payable to our third-party contract manufacturers, as well as manufacturing costs incurred at our facility in Arizona. The cost of goods sold that we generate from services provided to customers primarily includes personnel costs and the cost to maintain data lines.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses are classified into four categories: research and development, sales and marketing, general and administrative and the change in fair value of contingent consideration . For the first three categories, the largest component is personnel costs, which includes salaries, employee benefit costs, bonuses, and stock-based compensation. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for depreciation of equipment, facilities and information technology. Allocated costs for facilities consist of leasehold improvements and rent. Operating expenses are generally recognized as incurred.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility-related costs attributable to our engineering research and development personnel. These expenses include work related to the design, engineering and testing of antenna and modem designs and antenna integration, validation and testing of customer devices. These expenses include salaries, including stock-based compensation, benefits, bonuses, travel, communications, and similar costs, and depreciation and allocated costs for certain facilities. We may also incur expenses from consultants and for prototyping new antenna solutions. We expect research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we continue to invest in the development of new solutions and markets and as we invest in improving efficiencies within our supply chain, although our research and development expense may fluctuate as a percentage of total sales.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility-related costs for our sales, marketing, and business development personnel, stock-based compensation and bonuses earned by our sales personnel, and commissions earned by our third-party sales representative firms. Sales and marketing expenses also includes the costs of trade shows, marketing programs, promotional materials, demonstration equipment, travel, recruiting, and allocated costs for certain facilities. We expect sales and marketing expenses to fluctuate as a percentage of total sales.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility- related costs for our executive, finance, and administrative personnel, including stock-based compensation, as well as legal, accounting, and other professional services fees, depreciation, and other corporate expenses. We expect general and administrative expenses to fluctuate as we grow our operations.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration. The fair value of contingent consideration associated with the NimbeLink acquisition is remeasured at each reporting period based on the forecasted revenue targets. The change in the fair value of contingent consideration is recorded to operating expenses. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained within this annual report for further information.
Other Expense (Income)
Interest Income, net. Interest income consists of interest from our cash and cash equivalents offset by interest expense which consists of interest charges on credit card charges and certain vendor bills.
Other Expense. Other expense consists of the loss from disposal of property and equipment, realized foreign exchange gains or losses, and other expenses.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of federal and state income taxes. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities (including the impact of available carryback and carryforward periods), projected future taxable income, and tax-planning strategies in making this assessment. It is difficult for us to project future taxable income as the timing and size of sales of our products are variable and difficult to predict. We concluded that it is not more likely than not that we will utilize our deferred tax assets other than those that are offset by reversing temporary differences.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our operating results for the periods presented as a percentage of our total sales for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
(all tables-dollars in thousands)
Sales
Sales increased $15.8 million, or 32.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue from our consumer market decreased $10.9 million, to $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $37.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the continuing weakness from global supply shortage impacting our customers' product sales. Revenue from our
enterprise market increased $23.5 million, to $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to revenue generated from the sale of industrial IoT products resulting from the NimbeLink acquisition along with the launch of a Wi-Fi product for a major enterprise customer. Revenue for our automotive market grew approximately $3.2 million to $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to growth in sales from AirgainConnect products that were launched in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold increased $13.7 million or 53.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the incremental volume and related costs from the sale of industrial IoT products resulting from the NimbeLink acquisition, growth in sales from our AirgainConnect products, higher production and freight costs, and higher amortization of intangible assets and an inventory step-up adjustment as a result of the NimbeLink acquisition.
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of sales decreased by 8.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to changes in the product mix including the sale of industrial IoT products resulting from the NimbeLink acquisition, and AirgainConnect products which yield lower gross margins, higher production and freight costs, and higher intangible asset amortization and an inventory step-up adjustment associated with the NimbeLink acquisition.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased $1.8 million or 19.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the acquisition of NimbeLink on January 7, 2021 which resulted in added headcount, facilities and IT expenses offset by lower product development expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $4.1 million or 66.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the acquisition of NimbeLink on January 7, 2021, which resulted in added headcount, facilities and IT expenses as well as higher personnel-related expenses and higher advertising and tradeshow expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased $3.1 million or 29.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the acquisition of NimbeLink on January 7, 2021, which resulted in added headcount, facilities and IT expenses as well as higher amortization of intangible assets. In addition, stock-based compensation expense, outsourced service costs and travel costs increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a change in the fair value of contingent consideration related to the NimbeLink acquisition of $2.0 million based on revenue recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Expense (Income)
Other income decreased $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 resulting in a net other expense. The decrease was primarily due to lower interest income on cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments along with the loss on disposal of fixed assets, recorded in other expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $14.7 million at December 31, 2021.
Prior to 2013, and for the years ended 2018, 2020 and 2021, we have incurred net losses. As a result, we have an accumulated deficit of $57.4 million at December 31, 2021.
Since inception, we have primarily financed our operations and capital expenditures through private sales of preferred stock, public offerings of our common stock and cash flows from our operations. We have raised an aggregate of $29.5 million in net proceeds from the issuance of our preferred stock and convertible promissory notes and $37.0 million from the sale of common stock in public offerings.
We previously had a revolving line of credit for $10.0 million under our second amended and restated loan and security agreement with Silicon Valley Bank. As of December 31, 2019, there was no balance owed on the line of credit. The revolving line of credit expired in January 31, 2020, and the loan agreement was terminated in accordance with its terms.
On February 18, 2022, we and our subsidiary NimbeLink Corp entered into a loan and security agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, pursuant to which we together have a revolving line of credit for $4.0 million. As of the date of this annual report, there was no balance owed on the line of credit. The line of credit will only allow for maximum advances of 80% of the aggregate face amount of certain eligible receivables. The line of credit bears an interest rate of WSJ prime (currently 3.25%) plus 1.75%, and matures in February 2023. The lender has a first security interest in all of our and NimbeLink’s assets, excluding intellectual property, for which the lender has received a negative pledge.
On January 7, 2021, as a result of the Nimbelink acquisition, we assumed a revolving line of credit, or the Line of Credit, with Choice Financial Group (Choice), whereby Choice had made available to Airgain a secured credit facility of up to the lesser of (1) $1.5 million or (2) the sum of (a) 80% of the aggregate amount of third party
accounts receivable balances, excluding progress billings, foreign receivables, accounts subject to dispute or setoff and doubtful accounts (Eligible Accounts) aged less than 90 days, net of 10% allowance, and (b) 25% of raw materials and finished goods, except those held at named contract manufacturer, after a 10% reserve for excess and obsolete inventory. Amounts borrowed under the Line of Credit bore interest at the prime rate plus 1%, payable monthly. The facility was secured by a commercial guarantee and a lien over the property of NimbeLink including inventory, equipment, accounts receivable, investments, deposit accounts, other rights to payment and performance and general intangibles. No amounts were borrowed under this facility during the year ended December 31, 2021 and in April 2021, we closed the Line of Credit with Choice.
On September 9, 2019, our board of directors approved a new share repurchase program pursuant to which we could purchase up to $7.0 million of shares of our common stock over the twelve-month period following the establishment of the program. The repurchases under the new share repurchase program were made from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions and are funded from our working capital. Repurchases were made in compliance with Rule 10b-18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, subject to market conditions, available liquidity, cash flow, applicable legal requirements and other factors. In September 2020, our board of directors approved an extension to our share repurchase program for an additional twelve-month period ending September 9, 2021. Upon expiration of the program, our Board has not authorized a new repurchase program, but may do so in the future. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased 7,200 shares of common stock under the 2019 program. These shares were repurchased at an average price per share of $13.47, for a total cost of $0.1 million. Since inception of the stock repurchase programs, including our prior share repurchase programs, we have purchased a total of 541,310 shares for a total cost of $5.4 million.
We plan to continue to invest for long-term growth, including expanding our sales force and engineering organizations and making additional capital expenditures to further penetrate markets both in the United States and internationally, as well as expanding our research and development for new product offerings and technology solutions. We anticipate that these investments will continue to increase in absolute dollars. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents balance together with cash proceeds from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements for at least the next 12 months.
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow activity for the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily driven by non-cash operating expenses of $7.4 million, including depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, the change in fair value of the contingent consideration and deferred tax liabilities. The increase in non-cash operating expenses was offset by the net loss of $10.1 million and the change in operating assets and liabilities of $8.5 million mostly associated with the timing of inventory purchases resulting in increased accounts payable and inventory balances as well as the timing of order shipments toward the second half of the fourth quarter resulting in higher accounts receivable balances.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily driven by non-cash operating expenses of $3.7 million and the change in operating assets and liabilities of $3.2 million offset by a net loss of $3.3 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 of which $14.2 million was cash paid for the NimbeLink acquisition, net of cash acquired, and $0.7 million used for the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This consisted of $22.4 million received from the maturity of available-for-sale securities offset by $0.8 million used to purchase of available-for-sale securities and $0.8 million purchases of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This primarily consisted of $2.5 million proceeds from stock option exercises and employee stock plan purchases offset by $0.1 million in common stock repurchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This primarily consisted of $1.2 million in proceeds from stock option exercises and employee stock plan purchases offset by $0.6 million in common stock repurchases.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We subcontract with other companies to manufacture our products. During the normal course of business, our contract manufacturers procure components based upon orders placed by us. If we cancel all or part of the orders, we may still be liable to the contract manufacturers for the cost of the components purchased by the subcontractors to manufacture our products. We periodically review the potential liability, and as of December 31, 2021 we have no significant accruals recorded. Our financial position and operating results could be negatively impacted if we were required to compensate the contract manufacturers for any unrecorded liabilities incurred.
We entered into a supply agreement with a vendor to purchase up to $2.0 million of inventory during the initial term of the agreement through December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, the obligation had been met and $2.0 million has been paid under this supply agreement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined by applicable regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and operating results is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported sales and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements in this annual report, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2019, we adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, using the modified retrospective method. We generate revenue mainly from the sale of our wireless connectivity solutions and technologies. A portion of revenue is generated from service agreements and data subscription plans with certain customers. The revenue generated from service and data subscription plans is insignificant. We recognize revenue to depict the transfer of control of the promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the
consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled for those goods or services. Control transfers to customers either when the products are shipped to or received by the customer, based on the terms of the specific agreement with the customer. Revenue from NimbeLink's data subscription plans is recognized over the period of the subscription.
The Company records revenue based on a five-step model in accordance with ASC 606 whereby the company (i) identifies the contract(s) with the customer, (ii) identifies the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determines the transaction price, (iv) allocates the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract and (v) recognizes the revenue when (as) the entity satisfies performance obligations. The Company only applies the five-step model when it is probable that the entity will collect substantially all of the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer.
For product sales, each purchase order, along with existing customer agreements, when applicable, represents a contract from a customer and each product sold represents a distinct performance obligation. The contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The majority of our revenue is recognized on a “point-in-time” basis when control has passed to the customer. The revenue from service contracts is recognized either at a point-in-time or “over time”, based on the terms and conditions in the contract. Revenue from data subscription plans are recognized “over time”.
A portion of our sales is made through distributors under agreements allowing for pricing credits and/or rights of return under certain circumstances. A reserve for potential rights of return from distributors of $109,000 was recorded as of December 31, 2021. No reserve for potential rights of return from distributors was recorded as of December 31, 2020.
Our contracts with customers do not typically include extended payment terms. Payment terms may vary by contract and type of customer and generally range from 30 to 90 days from delivery.
We provide assurance-type warranties on all product sales ranging from one to two years. we accrue for the estimated warranty costs at the time of sale based on historical warranty experience plus any known or expected changes in warranty exposure. We accrue for the estimated warranty costs at the time of sale based on historical warranty experience plus any known or expected changes in warranty exposure. We have recorded a warranty reserve of $58,000 and $10,000 as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
We have opted to not disclose the portion of revenues allocated to partially unsatisfied performance obligations, which represent products to be shipped within 12 months under open customer purchase orders, at the end of the current reporting period as allowed under ASC 606. We have also elected to record sales commissions when incurred, pursuant to the practical expedient under ASC 340, Other Assets and Deferred Costs, as the period over which the sales commission asset that would have been recognized is less than one year. Shipping and handling costs are immaterial and reported in operating expenses in the consolidated statement of operations.
Business Combinations
We apply the provisions of ASC 805, Business Combinations, in accounting for acquisitions. It requires us to recognize separately from goodwill the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as any contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed,
whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are required to be recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances assumed, if any, in connection with a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date. The Company re-evaluates these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date with any adjustments to the preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill if identified within the measurement period. Subsequent to the end of the measurement period or final determination of the estimated value of the tax allowance or contingency, whichever comes first, changes to these uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances will affect the income tax provision (benefit) in the consolidated statements of operations and could have a material impact on the results of operations and financial position.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained within this annual report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.