Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risk, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to the “Company,” “Elite Body Sculpture,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to, (i) EBS Intermediate Parent LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries and the Professional Associations immediately prior to the Reorganization (as defined in the prospectus filed in connection with our IPO) and the consummation of our IPO and (ii) AirSculpt Technologies, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, including EBS Intermediate Parent LLC, and the Professional Associations immediately following the Reorganization and the consummation of our IPO. Further, references in this form 10-K to "our board of directors" refer to, (i) the Board of Managers of EBS Parent LLC immediately prior to the Reorganization and the consummation of our IPO and (ii) the Board of Directors of AirSculpt Technologies, Inc. immediately following the Reorganization and the consummation of our IPO.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our results of operations and financial condition have been, and will continue to be, affected by a number of factors, including the following:
Our Ability to Attract New Patients
The decision to undergo an AirSculpt® procedure is driven by patient demand, which may be influenced by a number of factors, such as:
•general consumer confidence, which may be impacted by economic and political conditions;
•individual levels of disposable income to pay for our procedures and the continued availability of financing for our patients;
•the cost, safety and efficacy of AirSculpt® relative to other aesthetic products and alternative treatments;
•the success of our sales and marketing programs;
•the perceived advantages or disadvantages of AirSculpt® compared to other aesthetic products and treatments;
•the extent to which our AirSculpt® procedure satisfies patient expectations;
•our ability to properly train our surgeons in performing AirSculpt® procedures such that our patients do not experience excessive discomfort during treatment or adverse side effects; and
•consumer sentiment about the benefits and risks of aesthetic procedures generally and AirSculpt® in particular.
Our Ability to Successfully Expand our Footprint
Our growth strategy depends, in large part, on growing and expanding our operations, both in existing and new geographic regions, particularly in densely populated and affluent metropolitan and suburban regions, and operating our new centers successfully.
Our ability to successfully open and operate new centers depends on many factors, including, among others, our ability to:
•recruit qualified surgeons for our new centers;
•address regulatory, competitive, marketing, and other challenges encountered in connection with expansion into new markets;
•hire, train and retain surgeons and other personnel;
•maintain adequate information system and other operational system capabilities;
•successfully integrate new centers into our existing management structure and operations, including information system integration;
•negotiate acceptable lease terms at suitable locations;
•source sufficient levels of medical supplies at acceptable costs;
•obtain and maintain necessary permits and licenses;
•construct and open our centers on a timely basis;
•generate sufficient levels of cash or obtain financing on acceptable terms to support our expansion;
•achieve and maintain brand awareness in new and existing markets; and
•identify and satisfy the needs and preferences of our patients.
Our failure to effectively address challenges such as these could adversely affect our ability to successfully open and operate new centers in a timely and cost-effective manner.
In addition, there can be no assurance that newly-opened centers will achieve net sales or profitability levels comparable to those of our existing centers in the time periods estimated by us, or at all.
Key Operational and Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key operational and business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts and make strategic decisions:
Twelve months ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
•Cases performed were 11,050, 5,885 and 3,865 in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively;
•Revenue per case was $12,065, $10,665 and $10,669 in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively;
•Same-center information;
◦Same-center revenue per case increased 12.1% and (0.6)% in 2021 and 2020, respectively;
◦Same-center volume increased 55.5% and 9.8% in 2021 and 2020, respectively;
•Net income (loss) was $10.6 million, $7.6 million and $(2.2) million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively;
•Adjusted EBITDA was $46.1 million, $17.5 million and $7.3 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively; and
•Adjusted EBITDA Margin was 34.6%, 27.9% and 17.8% in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cases Performed and Revenue per Case
Our case volumes in the table below, which are used for calculating revenue per case, represent one patient visit; notwithstanding that, a patient may incur multiple procedures during one visit. We believe this provides the best approach for assessing our revenue performance and trends.
Total Case and Revenue Metrics
Same-Center Case and Revenue Metrics
Same-Center Information
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we define same-center case and revenue growth as the growth in each of our cases and revenue at facilities that have been owned and operated since January 1, 2020. We define same-center facilities and procedure rooms as facilities and procedure rooms that have been owned or operated since January 1, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we define same-center case and revenue growth as the growth in each of our cases and revenue at facilities that have been owned and operated since January 1, 2019. We define same-center facilities and procedure rooms as facilities and procedure rooms that have been owned or operated since January 1, 2019.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We report our financial results in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), however, management believes the evaluation of our ongoing operating results may be enhanced by a presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, which are non-GAAP financial measures.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) excluding loss on debt modification, IPO related costs, sponsor management fee, pre-opening de novo and relocation costs, restructuring and related severance, equity-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net and income tax expense.
We include Adjusted EBITDA because it is an important measure on which our management assesses and believes investors should assess our operating performance. We consider Adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure because it helps illustrate underlying trends in our business and our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool including: (i) Adjusted EBITDA does not include results from equity-based compensation and (ii) Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense on our debt or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments.
We define Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue. We include Adjusted EBITDA Margin because it is an important measure on which our management assesses and believes investors should assess our operating performance. We consider Adjusted EBITDA Margin to be an important measure because it helps illustrate underlying trends in our business and our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis.
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure:
1: Sponsor management fee for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 includes a $1.0 million fee related to the termination of the related management and advisory services agreement. See “Note 10 - Related Party Transactions” for further discussion.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 global pandemic has significantly affected our centers, employees, customers, communities, business operations and financial performance, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The COVID-19 pandemic materially impacted our financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our facilities were shutdown for two to three months during 2020. Our operating structure allows for some flexibility in the cost structure according to the volume of cases performed, including much of our cost of services. As a result of this flexibility and the return of volumes in the second half of 2020, we did not request or receive any proceeds from the CARES Act and other governmental assistance programs. Other than the temporary decrease in revenue and cost of service, we did not incur any significant costs attributable to the pandemic.
We have not experienced any facility shutdowns during 2021. However, we continue to monitor the current COVID-19 situation in each market we perform procedures and will react accordingly should events require us to temporarily close.
Our Operating Structure
The Company owns and operates non-clinical assets and provides Management Services, through its wholly-owned subsidiaries, to our affiliated Professional Associations located across the United States under the MSAs. The Management Services provide for the administration of the non-clinical aspects of the medical operations and include, but are not limited to, financial, administrative, technical, marketing and personnel services. We do not practice medicine. The Professional Associations, which are all owned by licensed surgeons, are responsible for all clinical aspects of the medical operations that take place in each of our centers.
Our consolidated financial statements present the results of operations and financial position of the Company, its wholly-owned subsidiaries and each of the Professional Associations that we manage under the MSAs.
Even though we do not have voting control over the Professional Associations, we have a long-term and unilateral controlling financial interest over such Professional Associations’ assets and operations under the MSAs. As a result, GAAP require us to consolidate the results of the Professional Associations into our financial statements. All of our revenue is earned from services provided by the Professional Associations we manage. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Principles of Consolidation.”
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue is generated from our patented AirSculpt® procedures performed on our patients. We are 100% self-pay and do not accept payments from the U.S. federal government or payer organizations. We assist patients, as needed, by providing third-party financing options to pay for procedures. We have arrangements with various financing companies to facilitate this option. There is a financing transaction fee based on a set percentage of the amount financed and we recognize revenue based on the expected transaction price which is reduced for financing fees.
Our policy is to require full payment for services in advance of performing a procedure. Payments received for which services have yet to been performed for all reported periods are included in deferred revenue and patient deposits on our balance sheets.
Cost of Service (excluding depreciation and amortization)
Cost of service is comprised of all service and product costs related to the delivery of procedures, including but not limited to compensation to our physicians and clinical staff, medical supply costs, and facility-related rent expense.
Operating Expense
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative consists of marketing and advertising expenses we incur to market our patented AirSculpt® procedures to potential patients and general and administrative costs, including rent for our corporate offices.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses consist of advertising costs for social, digital and traditional marketing and sales and marketing personnel. Our advertising costs include both national and site-based advertising used to generate greater awareness and engagement among our current and potential patients. Our advertising costs include social media, digital marketing and traditional advertising. Selling costs include salaries and commissions for employees engaged in marketing and sales. We define our customer acquisition costs as the total selling expenses per case.
We generally expect our selling costs to increase as we continue to grow our brand and expand our national footprint. We evaluate our selling expense as compared to growth in our sales volume and will invest accordingly to the extent we believe we can increase our growth without materially negatively impacting our Adjusted EBITDA Margins.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses include employee-related expenses, including salaries and related costs (excluding physician and clinical cost included in cost of service and the salaries and commissions of sales and marketing employees), equity-based compensation, technology, operations, finance, legal, corporate office rent and human resources. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase over time due to the additional legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs that we will continue to incur as a public company. We also expect increases from other costs associated with continuing to grow our business. As we continue to expand the number of centers and procedures rooms, we anticipate general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue over time.
Interest Expense
Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest costs on our outstanding borrowings under our debt. We expect this amount to increase as a result of our recent amendment to our credit agreement in May 2021, which increased our long-term debt balance by approximately $52.0 million to approximately $85.0 million.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize certain results from the statements of operations for each of the periods indicated and the changes between periods. The tables also show the percentage relationship to revenue for the periods indicated:
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020
Overview-Our financial results for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 reflect the addition of four de novo centers which increased our procedure rooms by eight. In addition, we expanded one of our existing facilities from one to two procedure rooms.
Revenue-Our revenue increased $70.5 million, or 112.4%, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase is the result of adding four de novo centers and adding a procedure room to an existing facility which expanded our footprint from 14 centers to 18 centers.
Our revenue increase was also driven by our same-center case and revenue per case growth of 55.5% and 12.1%, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily due to continued growth at our existing centers as we continue to increase our social media and marketing capabilities to drive our brand awareness and increase consumer acceptance for our procedures. Further, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, our facilities were shut down for two to three months as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Services-Our cost of services increased $21.1 million, or 89.7%, compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to our increase in revenue related to our de novo centers and our same-center case and revenue per case growth. The increase in our cost of service also relates to the increase in our same center volumes and revenue. Cost of service was 33.4% and 37.4% as a percentage of revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease is due to leveraging certain fixed costs, such as rent at our facilities, as well as improved efficiencies with our clinical staff.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses-Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $42.1 million, or 178.3%, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. This increase is related to cost incurred with our IPO of $11.8 million and an increase in equity-based compensation of $6.9 million primarily related to awards granted in connection with our IPO. We also incurred additional expenses related to marketing and corporate support as we grow our center count through de novo expansion and providing support for our centers. We expect these costs to continue to increase as we continue to open de novo centers and expand the support we provide to our centers. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percent of revenue was 49.3% and 37.6% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase is tied to the previously mentioned cost incurred with the IPO, increase in equity-based compensation and growth in our infrastructure supporting our centers. We expect this percentage
to decrease over time as we expand our national footprint, however, we do expect additional absolute dollar increases as we expand our footprint and related support services. Additionally, we expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase over time due to the additional legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs that we incur as a public company.
Selling expenses consist of advertising costs for social, digital and traditional marketing and sales and marketing personnel. Total selling expenses were approximately $21.0 million and $9.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our customer acquisition costs were approximately $1,902 and $1,619 per customer in 2021 and 2020, respectively. We intend to continue investing in our sales and marketing capabilities and expect these costs to increase on an absolute dollar basis. Additionally, selling expenses as a percentage of revenue may fluctuate from quarter to quarter based on the timing and scope of our investments.
General and administrative expenses include employee-related expenses, including salaries and related costs (excluding physician and clinical cost included in cost of service), equity-based compensation, technology, operations, finance, legal, corporate office rent and human resources. General and administrative expense were approximately $44.7 million and $14.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase over time in absolute dollars following the closing of our IPO due to the additional legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs that we will incur as a public company. General and administrative includes our sponsor management fees of $1.6 million and $0.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The twelve months ended December 31, 2021 includes a one-time $1.0 million termination fee related to our sponsor management and advisory agreement.
Loss on Debt Modification-We recognized a $0.7 million loss related to amending our existing credit agreement in May 2021, adding an incremental $52.0 million of senior secured term loans.
Depreciation and Amortization-Depreciation and amortization increased to approximately $6.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.6 million for the same period in 2020. This increase is the result of opening four de novo centers and expanding an existing facility by one procedure room during the 12 months ended December 31, 2021 and having a full twelve months of depreciation in 2021 for facilities opened during the 2020 period.
Interest Expense, Net-Interest expense increased to $4.9 million from $2.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is the result of adding an incremental $52.0 million of senior secured term loans in May 2021.
Income Tax Expense-As a result of the Reorganization, the Company became subject to taxation as a C corporation for periods after October 28, 2021. Our effective tax rate is 3.0% and 0% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect our effective tax rate to increase in the future as we will be a C corporation for the full financial periods presented.
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
Overview-Our financial results for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 reflect the addition of four centers which increased our procedure rooms by seven. Additionally, our 2020 results were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in March 2020, our revenue and operations were negatively affected. As a result of federal, state, and local guidelines, we cancelled or postponed most procedures scheduled at our facilities during the second half of March 2020 and much of the second quarter of 2020. As a result, case volumes and revenue and cost of services across most of our centers were significantly impacted in the second quarter of 2020.
Revenue-Our revenue increased $21.5 million, or 52.2%, compared to 2019. The increase is the result of adding four de novo centers which expanded our footprint from 10 centers to 14 centers and our number of procedure rooms from 16 to 23 as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, the increase was due in part to three centers opened during 2019 but subsequent to January 1, 2019. Revenue also increased due to our same-center case volume increase to 4,074 cases from 3,712 cases for 2020 compared to 2019.
The increases in revenue was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic due to decreased case volume primarily in the second quarter of 2020.
Cost of Services-Our cost of services increased $8.0 million, or 51.5%, compared to 2019. This increase is primarily attributable to opening four de novo centers. Additionally, the increase was due in part from three centers opened during
2019 but subsequent to January 1, 2019. Cost of services also increased due to our same-center volume to 4,074 from 3,712 for 2020 compared to 2019.
The increase in our cost of services was offset by reduced cost during the second quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic as we were able to manage our surgeon costs to match our lower volumes.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses-Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $3.5 million, or 17.4%, compared to 2019. This increase is related to additional expenses we incurred for marketing and corporate support as we grow our center count through de novo expansion and providing superior support for our centers. We expect these costs to continue to increase as we continue to open de novo centers and expand the support we provide to our centers.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percent of revenue was 37.6% and 48.8% for the 2020 and 2019, respectively. This decrease is related to leveraging certain existing costs which are mostly fixed in nature. We expect this percentage to continue to decrease over time as we expand our national footprint, however, we do expect additional increases as we expand our footprint and related support services. Additionally, we expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase over time due to the additional legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs that we will continue to incur as a public company.
Depreciation and Amortization-Depreciation and amortization increased to approximately $5.6 million for 2020 compared to $5.0 million for 2019. This increase is the result of opening four de novo centers during 2020 plus three centers opened during 2019 but subsequent to January 1, 2019.
Interest Expense, Net-Interest expense decreased to $2.5 million from $2.9 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is primarily a result of decreases in the LIBOR rate during 2020 compared to 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We principally rely on cash flows from operations as our primary source of liquidity and, if needed, up to $5.0 million in revolving loans under our revolving credit facility. Our primary cash needs are for payroll, marketing and advertisements, rent, capital expenditures associated with adding procedure rooms to existing locations and opening de novo locations, as well as information technology and infrastructure, including our corporate office. We believe that cash expected to be generated from operations and the availability of borrowings under the revolving credit facility will be sufficient for our working capital requirements, liquidity obligations, anticipated capital expenditures relating to the opening of de novo centers, and payments due under our existing credit facilities for at least the next 12 months.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $25.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and an available amount of $5.0 million under our revolving credit facility. We do not have any letters of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $10.4 million in cash and cash equivalents and $5.0 million of additional availability under our revolving credit facility, which represents the full available amount under the revolving credit facility. We did not have any letters of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes the net cash provided by (used for) operating activities, investing activities and financing activities for the periods indicated:
In May 2021, we amended our existing credit agreement by adding an incremental $52.0 million of senior secured term loans. We used the proceeds from these borrowings plus approximately $10.0 million of cash from our balance sheet to pay $59.7 million of distributions to our member.
Operating Activities
The primary source of our operating cash flow is the collection of patient payments received prior to performing surgical procedures. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, our operating cash flow increased by $12.7 million compared to the same period in 2020. This increase is primarily driven by improved income from operations related to opening four new centers in the 12 months ended December 31, 2021 and an increase in same store volumes which were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in the second quarter of 2020. At December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $13.0 million compared to $2.1 million at December 31, 2020.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, our operating cash flow increased by $9.0 million compared to the same period in 2019. This increase is primarily driven by improved income from operations related to opening four new centers in the 12 months ended December 31, 2020 and an increase in same store volumes. At December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $2.1 million compared to $(1.8) million at December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $7.1 million and $3.7 million, respectively. These expenditures were used to open new de novo centers. We also added one procedure room to an existing facility during the fiscal year 2021.
The increase in investing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the impact of COVID-19 limiting our ability to fully execute our de novo center growth strategy during 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $3.7 million and $4.4 million, respectively which was primarily to fund capital expenditures to open de novo centers.
The decrease in investing activities during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to the impact of COVID-19 limiting our ability to fully execute our de novo center growth strategy.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $4.5 million. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we received cash of $49.6 million, net of fees, from amending our existing credit agreement, adding an incremental $52.0 million in senior secured term loans. We used the proceeds from these borrowings plus approximately $10.0 million of cash from our balance sheet to pay $59.7 million of distributions to our member. We had further distributions to our member during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $7.2 million and made scheduled principal payments on our debt of $0.8 million.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we received proceeds from our IPO of $13.5 million, net of issuance costs of $10.4 million.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5.0 million. During 2020, we made distributions to our member of $4.6 million. In May 2020, we borrowed $2.5 million on our revolving credit facility. We used the proceeds along with cash from operations to maintain cash liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to stronger than expected volumes returning that favorably impacted our cash position, we repaid $2.5 million on our revolving credit facility in December 2020. Additionally, we made our scheduled $0.1 million quarterly principal payments during 2020 for a total of $0.4 million for the full year.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.8 million. During 2019, we made distributions to our member of $0.3 million. We also made principal payments during 2019 for a total of $0.5 million for the full year.
Material Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes our material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021:
___________
(1)Amounts in the table reflect the contractually required interest payable pursuant to borrowings under our debt related to our Credit Agreement. Interest payments in the table above were calculated using an interest rate of 6.0% for the debt which was the average interest rate applicable to the borrowing as of December 31, 2021.
Long-term Debt
The carrying value of our total indebtedness was $82.6 million, $32.5 million and $32.7 million, which includes unamortized deferred financing costs, issuance discount and premium of $1.7 million, $0.6 million and $0.8 million, as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Term Loan and Revolving Credit Agreement
In October 2018, we entered into our credit agreement with First Eagle Alternative Capital (formerly known as THL Corporate Finance). Under the terms of the credit agreement, we obtained a $34.0 million term loan and a $5.0 million revolving credit facility. Principal payments on the term loan commenced in January 2019 and are paid quarterly in the initial amount of $100,000, which increased to $212,500 subsequent to the May 2021 amendment, through the maturity date on October 2, 2023 when all remaining unpaid principal shall be due. The term loan is presented as long-term debt, net of debt issuance costs.
In May 2021, we amended the credit agreement by adding an incremental $52.0 million senior secured term loan to the existing term loan. The proceeds from this incremental loan plus excess cash on our balance sheet were used to pay a distribution to our member of approximately $59.7 million and the related fees for this transaction. Beginning on June 30, 2021, our quarterly principal payments increased from $100,000 to $212,500.
Under the credit agreement, we are obligated to make interest payments on the last day of each month. All outstanding loans bear interest based on either a base rate or LIBOR (in all cases, the LIBOR component has a floor of 1%) plus an applicable per annum margin of 4.5% (base rate) or 5.5% (LIBOR) if our total leverage ratio, as defined in the credit agreement, is equal to or greater than 2.5x and less than 4.25x. If our total leverage ratio is equal to or greater than 4.25x, the interest is based on either a base rate or LIBOR plus an applicable per annum margin of 5.0% (base rate) or 6.0% (LIBOR). If our total leverage ratio is below 2.5x, the interest is based on either a base rate or LIBOR plus an applicable per annum margin of 4.0% (base rate) or 5.0% (LIBOR). At December 31, 2021, the applicable per annum margins under the credit agreement were 4.0% (base rate) and 5.0% (LIBOR). Additionally, we are required to pay an unused credit facility fee equal to 0.5% per annum on the unused amount of the revolving line of credit.
If our total leverage ratio exceeds 4.25x for the preceding twelve-month period the principal payment on the term loan is $250,000 per quarter or, beginning on September 30, 2021, $531,250 per quarter. Also, additional principal prepayments could be required if excess cash flow exists, as defined in the credit agreement.
All borrowings under the credit facility are collateralized by substantially all our assets. We are subject to certain restrictive financial covenants including quarterly total leverage ratio and fixed charge ratio requirements and a limit on capital expenditures.
On October 25, 2021, we amended certain provisions in our credit agreement related to the IPO. The amendment revises certain definitions and covenant requirements but does not change the timing or amount of principal payments or interest due under the agreement. We did not make any payments on our debt with the IPO proceeds received during the period.
We were in compliance with all covenants and had no letters of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Seasonality
Our business experiences limited seasonality.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, if applicable, in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in greater detail in Note 1-“Organization and Summary of Key Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. In addition, refer to Note 1-“Organization and Summary of Key Accounting Policies,” in our consolidated financial statements for a summary of recent and pending accounting standards.
Revenue Recognition
We have adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
i.Identify the contract(s) with a customer;
ii.Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
iii.Determine the transaction price;
iv.Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
v.Recognize revenue as the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Our revenue consists primarily of revenue earned for the provision of the Company’s patented AirSculpt® procedures. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account for revenue recognition. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. Our performance obligations are delivery of specialty, minimally invasive liposuction services.
Revenue for services is recognized over time as the service is delivered, typically over a single day. Payment is typically rendered in advance of the service. Customer contracts generally do not include more than one performance obligation.
Our policy is to require payment for services in advance of performing any procedure. Payments received for which services have yet to been performed were $2.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and $3.2 million as of December 31, 2020, respectively and are included in deferred revenue and patient deposits on our balance sheets.
Variable Interest Entities
Some states have laws that prohibit business entities with non-physician owners from practicing medicine, which are generally referred to as the corporate practice of medicine. States that have corporate practice of medicine laws require only physicians to practice medicine, exercise control over medical decisions or engage in certain arrangements with other physicians, such as fee-splitting. Therefore, we mainly operate by maintaining MSAs with our affiliated Professional Associations, which are owned, directly or indirectly, and operated by a licensed surgeon, and which contract with individual surgeons to provide medical services. Under the MSAs, we provide and perform non-medical Management Services for which we are paid a management fee by each Professional Association. See “Business-Surgeon Practice Structure-Management Services Agreements.”
The surgeons contracted by the Professional Associations are exclusively in control of, and responsible for, all aspects of the practice of medicine. Each surgeon owner of a Professional Association (each a “Surgeon Owner,” and collectively, the “Surgeon Owners”) is also party to a continuity agreement (each, a “Continuity Agreement,” and collectively, the “Continuity Agreements”), which (i) prohibits the applicable surgeons from freely transferring or selling their interests in the Professional Associations, (ii) provides for the ability to add a second surgeon equity holder to help ensure continuity of the Professional Association, and (iii) provides for the automatic transfer of ownership upon the occurrence of certain events, save that, due to limitations under New York law, there is no Continuity Agreement in place with respect to the New York Professional Association. See “Business-Surgeon Practice Structure-Continuity Agreements.”
In accordance with relevant accounting guidance, each of these Professional Associations is determined to be a variable interest entity. Elite Body Sculpture has the ability, through the Management Services and (with the exception of New York) Continuity Agreements to direct the activities (excluding clinical decisions) that most significantly affect the Professional Associations’ economic performance. Accordingly, we are the primary beneficiary of the Professional Associations, and, in accordance with GAAP, we consolidate the Professional Associations into our financial statements. All management fee revenue and related expenses are eliminated in consolidation, and all of the revenue reflected in our financial statements is revenue from services provided by the affiliated Professional Associations to patients.
Goodwill and intangible assets
Indefinite-lived, non-amortizing intangible assets include goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of the fair value of the consideration conveyed in the acquisition over the fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized and are evaluated annually for impairment or sooner if factors occur that would trigger an impairment review. Our judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on market conditions and operational performance.
Definite-lived, amortizing intangible assets primarily consist of trademarks and tradenames, patents and other intellectual property. We amortize definite-lived identifiable intangible assets on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful life of 15 years.
Impairment of goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but evaluated for impairment at least annually at the reporting unit level or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the value may not be recoverable. Events or changes in circumstances which could trigger an impairment review include significant adverse changes in the business climate, unanticipated competition, a loss
of key personnel, or the strategy for our overall business, significant industry or economic trends, or significant underperformance relevant to expected historical or projected future results of operations.
Goodwill is assessed for possible impairment by performing a qualitative analysis to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the events or circumstances, we determine it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then additional impairment testing is not required. However, if we were to believe our fair value was more likely lower than our carrying value, then we are required to perform a quantitative analysis.
The quantitative analysis involves comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with its respective book value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value exceeds book value, goodwill is considered not to be impaired and no additional steps are necessary. If, however, the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its book value, then the carrying amount of the goodwill is reduced by recording an impairment loss in an amount equal to the excess. We review goodwill for impairment annually in the month of October.
We performed our annual review of goodwill impairment in October 2021 and 2020 using a qualitative analysis and determined that a quantitative analysis was not required. There were no triggering events during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Equity-Based Compensation
We recognize equity-based compensation expense for employees and non-employees based on the grant-date fair value of awards over the applicable service period. See “Note 6 - Equity-based Compensation” for further discussion of the awards outstanding. The grant date fair value of awards that contain market-based conditions are estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Determining the fair value of market-based awards requires judgment. The assumptions used in a Monte Carlo simulation model requires the input of subjective assumptions and are as follows:
•Expected volatility-Expected volatility is based on historical volatilities of a publicly traded peer group based on daily price observations over a period equivalent to the expected term of the market-based PSU awards.
•Expected term-The term is estimated in consideration of the time period expected to achieve the market condition.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield of treasury bonds with a maturity that approximates the expected term of the market-based PSU awards.
•Expected dividend yield-The dividend yield is based on the current expectations of dividend payouts. The Company does not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
See “Note 6 - Equity-based Compensation” for further discussion on the valuation of these awards.