Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Report. It contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results might differ materially from those projected in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Report, particularly under the headings “Item 1A - Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
General
Sale of Global Preneed
In August 2021, we completed the sale of the disposed Global Preneed business to CUNA for an aggregate purchase price at closing of $1.34 billion in cash. For additional information, refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Prior to the sale, we determined that the disposed Global Preneed business met the criteria to be classified as held for sale and that the sale represented a strategic shift that had a major impact on our operations and financial results. Accordingly, the results of operations of the disposed Global Preneed business are presented as net income from discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of operations and segregated in the consolidated statement of cash flows for all periods presented, and the assets and liabilities for the disposed Global Preneed business have been classified as held for sale and segregated as of December 31, 2020 in the consolidated balance sheets. Transactions between the disposed Global Preneed business and businesses in our continuing operations were not eliminated to appropriately reflect the continuing operations and the assets, liabilities and results of the disposed Global Preneed business. Refer to “-Results of Operations - Discontinued Operations” below and Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Reportable Segments
We report our results through three segments: Global Lifestyle, Global Housing and Corporate and Other. Corporate and Other includes activities of the holding company, financing and interest expenses, net realized gains (losses) on investments and fair value changes to equity securities, interest income earned from short-term investments held, income (expenses) primarily related to our frozen benefit plans, amounts related to businesses previously disposed of through reinsurance and the run-off of the Assurant Health business. Corporate and Other also includes goodwill impairments, the foreign currency gains (losses) from remeasurement of monetary assets and liabilities, changes in the fair value of derivative instruments and other expenses related to merger and acquisition activities, as well as other highly variable or unusual items other than reportable catastrophes (reportable catastrophe losses, net of reinsurance and client profit sharing adjustments, and including reinstatement and other premiums).
The following discussion covers the year ended December 31, 2021 (“Twelve Months 2021”), the year ended December 31, 2020 (“Twelve Months 2020”) and the year ended December 31, 2019 (“Twelve Months 2019”). Please see the discussion that follows, for each of these segments, for a more detailed comparative analysis.
Executive Summary
Overview
We have undertaken several acquisitions and dispositions in the current and prior years, which are reflected in our results. In August 2021, we completed the sale of the disposed Global Preneed business to CUNA for an aggregate purchase price at closing of $1.34 billion in cash. For additional information, refer to Notes 3 and 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
In June 2021, we issued $350.0 million of 2.65% senior notes due January 2032 and used the proceeds, along with cash on hand, to redeem all of the $350.0 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 4.00% senior notes due March 2023 and paid accrued interest, related premiums, fees and expenses in July 2021. See “ - Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further details.
Summary of Financial Results
Consolidated net income from continuing operations increased $93.1 million, or 18%, to $613.5 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $520.4 million for Twelve Months 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities, including $67.5 million of fair value changes in unrealized equity positions that went public during Twelve Months 2021, compared to net losses in Twelve Months 2020, as well as growth in Global Lifestyle. This was partially offset by the absence of an $84.4 million tax benefit that was recorded in Twelve Months 2020 related to the utilization of net operating losses in connection with the 2020 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”).
Global Lifestyle segment net income increased $47.5 million, or 11%, to $484.7 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $437.2 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily driven by significant growth in Global Automotive, continued expansion in mobile within Connected Living and greater contributions from Global Financial Services and Other. Global Automotive results included underlying growth from prior period sales driven by expanded and new client relationships globally, favorable loss experience in select ancillary products and $8.2 million of one-time benefits in the first half of Twelve Months 2021 that are not expected to repeat. Mobile growth was primarily driven by strong trade-in volumes, including HYLA, and improved performance in Asia Pacific. Results were partially offset by investments in our in-store service and repair capabilities.
Global Lifestyle net earned premiums, fees and other income increased $410.1 million, or 6%, to $7.75 billion for the Twelve Months 2021 compared with $7.34 billion for Twelve Months 2020, primarily driven by Global Automotive from strong sales across the U.S., as well as growth in Connected Living from extended service contracts. In mobile, higher trade-in volumes and subscriber growth were offset by declines from runoff programs and the $176 million reduction from the previously disclosed program contract change.
Global Housing segment net income increased $10.8 million, or 5%, to $244.6 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $233.8 million for Twelve Months 2020. Segment net income for Twelve Months 2021 included $113.9 million of reportable catastrophes compared to $137.2 million of reportable catastrophes for Twelve Months 2020. Excluding reportable catastrophes, segment net income decreased $12.5 million, primarily due to higher non-catastrophe loss experience from an anticipated increase to more normalized levels, as well as a $12.3 million year-over-year increase within small commercial that was primarily related to reserve strengthening for run-off claims. This was partially offset by higher premium rates and average insured values in Lender-placed Insurance.
Global Housing net earned premiums, fees and other income increased $19.3 million, or 1%, to $2.00 billion for Twelve Months 2021 compared with $1.98 billion for Twelve Months 2020, primarily driven by growth in Multifamily Housing across affinity and property management company channels as well as Lender-placed Insurance. The increase was partially offset by declines in Specialty and Other products from client runoff.
Corporate and Other segment net loss decreased $34.8 million, or 23%, to $115.8 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $150.6 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily due to the higher net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities, compared to net losses in Twelve Months 2020, partially offset by the absence of an $84.4 million tax benefit related to the utilization of net operating losses in connection with the CARES Act.
Critical Factors Affecting Results
Our results depend on, among other things, the appropriateness of our product pricing, underwriting, the accuracy of our reserving methodology for future policyholder benefits and claims, the frequency and severity of reportable and non-reportable catastrophes, returns on and values of invested assets, our investment income and our ability to manage our expenses and achieve expense savings. Our results also depend on our ability to profitably grow all of our businesses, including our Connected Living, Multifamily Housing and Global Automotive businesses, and maintain our position in our Lender-placed Insurance business. Factors affecting these items, including conditions in financial markets, the global economy and the markets in which we operate, fluctuations in exchange rates, interest rates and inflation, including the current period of inflationary pressures, may have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. For more information on these and other factors that could affect our results, see “Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
Our results may also be impacted by our ability to continue to grow in the markets in which we operate, including in our Connected Living, Multifamily Housing and Global Automotive businesses, which will be impacted by our ability to provide a superior digital-first customer experience, including from our investments in technology and digital initiatives, and capitalize on the smart home opportunity. Our mobile business is subject to volatility in mobile device trade-in volumes based on the actual and anticipated timing of the release of new devices and carrier promotional programs, as well as to changes in consumer preferences. Our Lender-placed Insurance revenues will be impacted by changes in the housing market. In addition, across many of our businesses, we must respond to the threat of disruption and the competition for talent. See “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Business, Strategic and Operational Risks - Significant competitive pressures, changes in customer preferences and disruption could adversely affect our results of operations” and “ - The success of our business depends on the execution of our strategy, including through the continuing service of key executives, senior leaders, highly-skilled personnel and a high-performing workforce.”
For Twelve Months 2021, net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $630.5 million; net cash provided by investing activities from continuing operations was $302.8 million; and net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $1.09 billion. We had $2.04 billion in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021. Please see “ - Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further details.
Revenues
We generate revenues primarily from the sale of our insurance policies, service contracts and related products and services and from income earned on our investments. Sales of insurance policies are recognized in revenue as earned premiums while sales of administrative services are recognized as fee income.
Our premium and fee income is supplemented by income earned from our investment portfolio. We recognize revenue from interest payments, dividends, change in market value of equity securities and sales of investments. Currently, our investment portfolio is primarily invested in fixed maturity securities. Both investment income and changes in market value on these investments can be significantly affected by changes in interest rates.
Interest rate volatility can increase or reduce unrealized gains or losses in our investment portfolios. Interest rates are highly sensitive to many factors, including governmental monetary policies, domestic and international economic and political conditions, inflation and other factors beyond our control. Fluctuations in interest rates affect our returns on, and the market value of, fixed maturity and short-term investments.
The fair market value of the fixed maturity securities in our investment portfolio and the investment income from these securities fluctuate depending on general economic and market conditions. The fair market value generally increases or decreases in an inverse relationship with fluctuations in interest rates, while net investment income realized by us from future investments in fixed maturity securities will generally increase or decrease with interest rates. We also have investments that are subject to pre-payment risk, such as mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities. Interest rate fluctuations may cause actual net investment income and/or timing of cash flows from such investments to differ from estimates made at the time of investment. In periods of declining interest rates, mortgage prepayments generally increase and mortgage-backed securities, commercial mortgage obligations and bonds are more likely to be prepaid or redeemed as borrowers seek to borrow at lower interest rates. Therefore, in these circumstances we may be required to reinvest those funds in lower interest-earning investments.
Expenses
Our expenses are primarily policyholder benefits, underwriting, general and administrative expenses and interest expense.
Policyholder benefits are affected by our claims management programs, reinsurance coverage, contractual terms and conditions, regulatory requirements, economic conditions, and numerous other factors. Benefits paid or reserves required for future benefits could substantially exceed our expectations, causing a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Underwriting, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of commissions, premium taxes, licenses, fees, amortization of deferred costs, general operating expenses and income taxes. We continue to undertake various expense savings initiatives while also making investments in talent, capabilities and technology, among other things, which will impact our expenses.
We also incur interest expense related to our debt.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Certain items in our Consolidated Financial Statements are based on estimates and judgment. Differences between actual results and these estimates and judgments could in some cases have material impacts on our Consolidated Financial Statements. The following critical accounting policies require significant estimates and judgment:
•Reserves, Net of Reinsurance
•Valuation of Investments, including Evaluation of Credit Losses
•Valuation and Recoverability of Goodwill
Reserves, Net of Reinsurance
Reserves are established using generally accepted actuarial methods and reflect judgments about expected future claim payments. Factors used in their calculation include experience derived from historical claim payments and actuarial assumptions. Calculations incorporate assumptions about the incidence of incurred claims, the extent to which all claims have been reported, reporting lags, expenses, inflation rates, future investment earnings, internal claims processing costs and other relevant factors. While the methods of making such estimates and establishing the related liabilities are periodically reviewed and updated, the estimation of reserves includes an element of uncertainty given that management is using historical information and methods to project future events and reserve outcomes.
The recorded reserves represent our best estimate at a point in time of the ultimate costs of settlement and administration of a claim or group of claims, based upon actuarial assumptions and projections using facts and circumstances known at the time of calculation. The adequacy of reserves may be impacted by future trends in claims severity, frequency, judicial theories of liability and other factors. These variables are affected by both external and internal events, including: changes in the economic cycle, inflation, changes in repair costs, natural or human-made catastrophes, judicial trends, legislative changes and claims handling procedures.
Many of these items are not directly quantifiable and not all future events can be anticipated when reserves are established. Reserve estimates are refined as experience develops. Adjustments to reserves, both positive and negative, are reflected in the consolidated statement of operations in the period in which such estimates are updated.
Because establishment of reserves is an inherently complex process involving significant judgment and estimates, there can be no certainty that future settlement amounts for claims incurred through the financial reporting date will not vary from reported claims reserves. Future loss development could require reserves to be increased or decreased, which could have a material effect on our earnings in the periods in which such increases or decreases are made. However, based on information currently available, we believe our reserve estimates are adequate. See “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Financial Risks - Our actual claims losses may exceed our reserves for claims, requiring us to establish additional reserves or to incur additional expense for settling unreserved liabilities, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, profitability and capital” and “ - Financial Risks - Actual results may differ materially from the analytical models we use to assist in our decision-making in key areas such as pricing, catastrophe risks, reserving and capital management” for more detail on this risk.
Reinsurance Recoverables
We utilize reinsurance for loss protection and capital management, business dispositions and client risk and profit sharing. Reinsurance premiums paid are amortized as reductions to premium over the terms of the underlying reinsured policies. Amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with claim and claim adjustment expense reserves or future policy benefits reserves. Reinsurance recoverables include amounts we are owed by reinsurers for claims paid as well as those included in reserve estimates that are subject to the reinsurance.
We use a probability of default and loss given default methodology in estimating an expected credit loss allowance, whereby the credit ratings of reinsurers are used in determining the probability of default. The allowance is established for reinsurance recoverables on paid and unpaid future policy benefits and claims and benefits. Prior to applying default factors, the net exposure to credit risk is reduced for any collateral for which the right of offset exists, such as funds withheld, assets held in
trust and letters of credit, which are part of the reinsurance arrangements, with adjustments to include consideration of credit exposure on the collateral. Our methodology incorporates historical default factors for each reinsurer based on their credit rating using comparably rated bonds as published by a major ratings service. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing and other relevant factors.
In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in both the assumption and cession of reinsurance with non-affiliated companies. The following table provides details of the reinsurance recoverables balance as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
For additional information regarding our reserves and reinsurance recoverables, see Notes 2, 5, 17 and 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Short Duration Contracts
Claims and benefits payable reserves for short duration contracts include (1) case reserves for known claims which are unpaid as of the balance sheet date; (2) IBNR reserves for claims where the insured event has occurred but has not been reported to us as of the balance sheet date; and (3) loss adjustment expense reserves for the expected handling costs of settling the claims. Periodically, we review emerging experience and make adjustments to our reserves and assumptions where necessary.
Ultimate loss and loss adjustment expenses are estimated utilizing generally accepted actuarial loss reserving methods. Both paid claims development as well as case incurred development are typically analyzed at the product or product grouping level, considering product size and data credibility. The reserving methods widely employed by us include the Chain Ladder, Munich Chain Ladder and Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods. For Global Housing, reportable catastrophes are analyzed and reserved for separately using a frequency and severity approach.
The methods all involve aggregating paid and case-incurred loss data by accident quarter (or accident year) and accident age for each product grouping. As the data ages, development factors are calculated that measure emerging claim development patterns between reporting periods. By selecting loss development factors indicative of remaining development, known losses are projected to an ultimate incurred basis for each accident period. The underlying premise of the Chain Ladder method is that future claims development is best estimated using past claims development, whereas the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method employs a combination of past claims development and prior estimates of ultimate losses based on an expected loss ratio. The Munich Chain Ladder method incorporates the correlations between paid and incurred development in projecting future development factors, and is typically more applicable to products experiencing variability in incurred to paid ratios.
Each of these methods applied to the data groupings produces an estimate of the loss reserves for the product grouping. The best estimate is generally selected from a blend of the different methods. The IBNR associated with the best estimate is then allocated to accident year based on a weighting of the underlying actuarial methods. The determination of the best estimate is based on many factors, including:
•the nature and extent of the underlying assumptions;
•the quality and applicability of historical data - whether internal or industry data;
•current and expected future economic and market conditions;
•regulatory, legislative, and judicial considerations;
•the extent of data segmentation - data should be homogeneous yet credible enough for loss development methods to apply;
•trends in loss frequency and severity for various causes of loss;
•consideration of the distribution of loss reserves, management’s selection of the best estimate that may exceed an estimate based on median values, suggesting that favorable development may be more likely than unfavorable development; and
•hindsight testing of prior loss estimates - the loss estimates on some product lines will vary from actual loss experience more than others.
When employing the reserving methods, consideration is given to contractual requirements, historical utilization trends and payment patterns, coverage changes, seasonality, product mix, the legislative and regulatory environment, economic factors, natural catastrophes and other relevant factors. We consistently apply reserving principles and methodologies from year to year, while also giving due consideration to the potential variability of these factors.
While management has used judgment in establishing its best estimate of required reserves, different assumptions and variables could lead to significantly different reserve estimates. Two key measures of loss activity are loss frequency, which is a measure of the number of claims per unit of insured exposure, and loss severity, which is a measure of the average size of claims. Factors affecting loss frequency include the effectiveness of loss controls, changes in economic activity and weather patterns. Factors affecting loss severity include changes in policy limits, retentions, rate of inflation and judicial interpretations.
If the actual level of loss frequency and severity are higher or lower than expected, the ultimate reserves required will be different than management’s estimate. The effect of higher and lower levels of loss frequency and severity on our ultimate costs for claims occurring in 2021 would be as follows:
(1)Represents the sum of the case reserves and incurred but not reported reserves as of December 31, 2021 for Global Lifestyle and Global Housing.
Long Duration Contracts, including Disposed and Runoff Long Duration Lines
Reserves for future policy benefits represent the present value of future benefits to policyholders and related expenses less the present value of future net premiums. Reserve assumptions reflect best estimates for expected investment yield, inflation, mortality, morbidity, expenses and withdrawal rates. These assumptions are based on our experience to the extent it is credible, modified where appropriate to reflect current trends, industry experience and provisions for possible unfavorable deviation. We also record an unearned revenue reserve which represents premiums received which have not yet been recognized in our consolidated statements of operations.
Risks related to the reserves recorded for certain discontinued individual life, annuity and long-term care insurance policies have been fully ceded via reinsurance. While we have not been released from our contractual obligation to the policyholders, changes in and deviations from economic, mortality, morbidity, and withdrawal assumptions used in the calculation of these reserves will not directly affect our results of operations unless there is a default by the assuming reinsurer.
Valuation of Investments
In determining the estimated fair value of our investments, fair values are primarily based on unadjusted quoted prices for identical investments in active markets that are readily and regularly obtainable. When such unadjusted quoted prices are not available, estimated fair values are based on quoted prices for identical or similar investments in markets that are not active, or other observable inputs. If these observable inputs are not available, or observable inputs are not determinable, unobservable inputs or adjustments to observable inputs requiring management judgment are used to determine the estimated fair value of investments. The methodologies, assumptions and inputs utilized are described in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Financial markets are susceptible to severe events evidenced by rapid depreciation in asset values accompanied by a reduction in asset liquidity. Our ability to sell investments and the price ultimately realized for investments depends upon the demand and liquidity in the market.
See also Notes 2 and 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report, “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Financial Risks - Our investment portfolio is subject to market risk, including changes in interest rates, that may adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition” and “ - Investments” contained in this Item 7.
Valuation and Recoverability of Goodwill
Our goodwill related to acquisitions of businesses was $2.57 billion and $2.59 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We review our goodwill annually in the fourth quarter for impairment, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. Such indicators include: a significant adverse change in legal factors, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, unanticipated competition, loss of key personnel or a significant decline in our expected future cash flows due to changes in company-specific factors or the broader business climate. The evaluation of such factors requires considerable management judgment. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of goodwill and could have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is either at the operating segment or one level below, if that component is a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews such information. Components within an operating segment can be aggregated into one reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics. A goodwill impairment loss is measured as the excess of the carrying value, including goodwill, of the reporting unit over its fair value. An impairment loss is limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Our Global Lifestyle operating segment is disaggregated into the following three reporting units: Connected Living, Global Automotive and Global Financial Services and Other. Our reporting unit for goodwill testing was at the same level as the operating segment for Global Housing.
The following table illustrates the amount of goodwill carried by operating segment as of the dates indicated:
(1) As of December 31, 2021, $698.7 million, $1,420.5 million and $72.9 million of goodwill was assigned to the Connected Living, Global Automotive and Global Financial Services and Other reporting unit, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, $715.2 million, $1,421.3 million, and $73.3 million of goodwill was assigned to the Connected Living, Global Automotive and Global Financial Services and Other reporting unit, respectively.
Quantitative Impairment Testing
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed a quantitative assessment for the Global Lifestyle and Global Housing reporting units given the uncertainty in macro-economic conditions and the overall industry performance due to prolonged COVID-19 impacts. Based on this quantitative assessment, the Company determined that it was more likely than not that the reporting units’ fair values were more than their carrying amounts and that there was no impairment for the Global Lifestyle and Global Housing reporting units as of October 1, 2021.
The determination of fair value of the reporting units requires many estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include earnings and required capital projections discussed above, discount rates, terminal growth rates, operating income and dividend forecasts for each reporting unit and the weighting assigned to the results of each of the three valuation methods described above. Changes in certain assumptions could have a significant impact on the goodwill impairment assessment.
Should the operating results of these reporting units decline substantially compared to projected results, or should further interest rate declines increase the net unrealized investment portfolio gain position, we could determine that we need to perform an updated impairment test due to the potential impairment indicators, which may require the recognition of a goodwill impairment loss in any of the reporting units.
For the fourth quarter of 2021 quantitative assessment, had the net book value for any of the reporting units exceeded its estimated fair value, the Company would have recognized a goodwill impairment loss for the difference up to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Refer to Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report for further detail.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Results of Operations
Assurant Consolidated
Overview
The table below presents information regarding our consolidated results of operations:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Income from Continuing Operations
Consolidated net income from continuing operations increased $93.1 million, or 18%, to $613.5 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $520.4 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily due to higher net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities compared to net losses in the prior period, including $67.5 million of after-tax unrealized gains from four equity positions that went public during Twelve Months 2021, the absence of $25.5 million of after-tax net unrealized losses on collateralized loan obligations in Twelve Months 2020 and $19.2 million of after-tax unrealized gains from equity securities accounted for under the measurement alternative. The increase was also due to favorable earnings contributions from Global Lifestyle, mainly due to continued organic growth and favorable loss experience in Global Automotive. These increases were partially offset by the absence of an $84.4 million tax benefit that was recorded in Twelve Months 2020 related to the utilization of net operating losses in connection with the CARES Act.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Income from Continuing Operations
Consolidated net income from continuing operations increased $214.0 million, or 70%, to $520.4 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $306.4 million for Twelve Months 2019. Net income for Twelve Months 2020 included $137.2 million of reportable catastrophes, due to several storms in 2020 including Hurricane Laura, compared to $41.0 million in Twelve Months
2019. Excluding reportable catastrophes, net income increased $310.2 million, or 89%, due to $154.6 million of lower after-tax losses from decreases in the estimated fair value of Iké Grupo, Iké Asistencia and certain of their affiliates (collectively, “Iké”), an $84.4 million tax benefit related to the utilization of net operating losses in connection with the CARES Act and an improvement in our results from Global Housing and Global Lifestyle. The increase was also due to the absence of $29.6 million of after-tax debt related charges from Twelve Months 2019. These increases were partially offset by a $55.8 million after-tax decrease in net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities mostly due to a decrease in net unrealized gains on equity securities and higher unrealized losses from the decrease in fair value of collateralized loan obligations, as well as $21.2 million of after-tax direct and incremental operating expenses incurred in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Global Lifestyle
Overview
The table below presents information regarding the Global Lifestyle segment’s results of operations for the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Income
Segment net income increased $47.5 million, or 11%, to $484.7 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $437.2 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily due to Global Automotive from underlying growth from prior period sales driven by expanded and new client relationships globally, favorable loss experience in select ancillary products and $8.2 million of one-time benefits in Twelve Months 2021 that are not expected to repeat. Connected Living and Global Financial Services and Other also contributed to the increase. Connected Living growth was led by mobile, mainly from higher mobile trade-in volumes, including Hyla, better performance in Asia Pacific and additional domestic mobile subscribers across carrier and cable operator clients. This increase was partially offset by investments to build out service and repair capabilities and a $6.7 million after-tax benefit for an extended service contract client recoverable in Twelve Months 2020. Growth in Global Financial Services and Other was mainly due to claims and sales recoveries as Twelve Months 2020 included unfavorable impacts related to COVID-19.
Total Revenues
Total revenues increased $417.1 million, or 6%, to $7.95 billion for Twelve Months 2021 from $7.53 billion for Twelve Months 2020. Net earned premiums increased $278.1 million, or 4%, primarily driven by continued growth from strong U.S. sales in our Global Automotive business across all distribution channels. The increase in net earned premiums was partially offset by modest declines in Connected Living, as the run-off of certain global mobile programs was offset by growth in extended service contract programs and domestic mobile subscribers within our cable operator distribution channel. Fees and other income increased $132.0 million, or 15%, driven by Connected Living from higher mobile repair and logistics volumes
mainly from HYLA contributions and mobile carrier promotions, partially offset by the $176 million reduction from the previously disclosed program contract change. Net investment income increased $7.0 million, or 4%, primarily due to higher income from real estate related investments.
Total Benefits, Losses and Expenses
Total benefits, losses and expenses increased $366.2 million, or 5%, to $7.33 billion for Twelve Months 2021 from $6.97 billion for Twelve Months 2020. Amortization of deferred acquisition costs and value of business acquired increased $236.3 million, or 7%, primarily due to an increase in amortization of deferred acquisition costs (“DAC”) due to growth in our Global Automotive business and extended service contract programs within our Connected Living business, partially offset by a decrease in amortization of VOBA related to the acquisition of TWG Holdings Limited and its subsidiaries. Underwriting, general and administrative expenses increased $209.4 million, or 10%, primarily due to growth across the businesses, including higher mobile repair and logistics volumes, with contributions from HYLA, and investments to build out service and repair capabilities, partially offset by the impact of the previously disclosed program contract change. The increase in total benefits, losses and expenses was partially offset by a $79.5 million, or 6%, decrease in policyholder benefits, primarily due to the run-off of certain global mobile programs in our Connected Living business and lower loss experience in select ancillary products in Global Automotive, partially offset by growth across our Global Automotive and Connected Living businesses.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Income
Segment net income increased $27.9 million, or 7%, to $437.2 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $409.3 million for Twelve Months 2019, primarily driven by our Connected Living business, mainly due to continued mobile subscriber growth in North America and Asia Pacific and improved extended service contract loss experience, as well as higher income and organic growth from our Global Automotive business. These increases were partially offset by lower investment income and unfavorable foreign exchange. Additionally, our Global Financial Services and Other business had lower income, mainly due to lower volumes and higher loss experience, primarily resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, and anticipated declines from domestic business in run-off.
Total Revenues
Total revenues increased $186.9 million, or 3%, to $7.53 billion for Twelve Months 2020 from $7.35 billion for Twelve Months 2019. Net earned premiums increased $368.5 million, or 6%, primarily driven by continued growth from prior period production in our Global Automotive business and growth in our Connected Living business, mainly due to growth in domestic extended service contract programs and continued subscriber growth from mobile protection programs. These increases in net earned premiums were partially offset by unfavorable foreign exchange and a decrease in our Global Financial Services and Other business, mainly due to domestic business in run-off. Fees and other income decreased $125.1 million, or 12%, primarily driven by lower mobile trade-in results, mainly due to a $117.0 million impact resulting from the previously mentioned mobile program contract change. Net investment income decreased $56.5 million, or 23%, primarily due to lower cash yields, lower invested asset balances, lower income from real estate and unfavorable foreign exchange.
Total Benefits, Losses and Expenses
Total benefits, losses and expenses increased $158.1 million, or 2%, to $6.97 billion for Twelve Months 2020 from $6.81 billion for Twelve Months 2019. Amortization of deferred acquisition costs and value of business acquired increased $350.2 million, or 12%, primarily due to growth from our Global Automotive and Connected Living businesses. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in policyholder benefits of $103.6 million, or 7%, primarily driven by a favorable mix of mobile business, lower loss experience within our Connected Living and Global Automotive businesses, in part due to COVID-19, partially offset by an increase from growth in those businesses. Underwriting, general and administrative expenses decreased $88.5 million, or 4%, primarily due to a mobile program contract change, as mentioned above, favorable foreign exchange and expense initiatives across the segment, partially offset by an increase from growth in our Global Automotive and Connected Living businesses, including new acquisitions.
Global Housing
Overview
The table below presents information regarding the Global Housing segment’s results of operations for the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Income
Segment net income increased $10.8 million, or 5%, to $244.6 million for Twelve Months 2021 compared to $233.8 million for Twelve Months 2020. Segment net income for Twelve Months 2021 included $113.9 million of reportable catastrophes, primarily related to Hurricane Ida and the Texas winter storms, compared to $137.2 million for Twelve Months 2020. Excluding reportable catastrophes, segment net income decreased $12.5 million, or 3%, driven by higher non-catastrophe loss experience from an anticipated increase to more normalized levels than experienced in Twelve Months 2020 and a $12.3 million year-over-year increase within small commercial that was primarily related to reserve strengthening for run-off claims, as well as lower REO volumes related to COVID-19 foreclosure moratoriums in Lender-placed Insurance. These decreases were partially offset by premium rate and average insured value increases in our Lender-placed Insurance business.
Total Revenues
Total revenues increased $27.5 million, or 1%, to $2.08 billion for Twelve Months 2021 from $2.05 billion for Twelve Months 2020. Net earned premiums increased $18.2 million, or 1%, primarily due to average insured value and premium rate increases in our Lender-placed Insurance business and continued growth from renters insurance in our Multifamily Housing business. These increases were partially offset by a decline in Specialty and Other from client run-offs, lower REO volumes, higher estimated catastrophe premium and higher reinsurance reinstatement premium primarily related to Hurricane Ida. Net investment income increased $8.2 million, or 11%, primarily due to higher income from real estate related investments.
Total Benefits, Losses and Expenses
Total benefits, losses and expenses increased $12.6 million, or 1%, to $1.77 billion for Twelve Months 2021 from $1.76 billion for Twelve Months 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in policyholder benefits of $10.5 million, or 1%, from higher non-catastrophe losses, primarily in Lender-placed Insurance and, to a lesser extent, Specialty and Other and Multifamily Housing, from an anticipated increase to more normalized levels than experienced in Twelve Months 2020 as well as an increase in reserves related to the cost of settling run-off claims within our small commercial product, partially offset by a decrease in reportable catastrophe losses. Amortization of DAC and VOBA increased $8.0 million, or 4%, consistent with the
increase in net earned premium. Underwriting, general and administrative expenses decreased $5.9 million, or 1%, primarily due to a decrease in commission expense in our Specialty and Other business, partially offset by an increase in expenses from growth and continued investments in Multifamily Housing.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Income
Segment net income decreased $24.9 million, or 10%, to $233.8 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $258.7 million for Twelve Months 2019. Segment net income for Twelve Months 2020 included $137.2 million of reportable catastrophes, due to several storms in 2020, compared to $40.9 million in Twelve Months 2019. Excluding reportable catastrophes, segment net income increased $71.4 million, or 24%, primarily driven by favorable non-catastrophe losses across all major lines of businesses, including underwriting improvements in sharing economy offerings. The increase was also driven by higher premium rates in our Lender-placed Insurance business, the absence of losses from our small commercial product and lower operating expenses in our Lender-placed Insurance business. The increase was partially offset by lower REO volume and fee income in our Lender-placed Insurance business, fewer policies in-force from a financially insolvent client and lower investment income.
Total Revenues
Total revenues decreased $78.8 million, or 4%, to $2.05 billion for Twelve Months 2020 from $2.13 billion for Twelve Months 2019. Net earned premiums decreased $51.5 million, or 3%, primarily due to declines in our Lender-placed Insurance business, declines in our small commercial business, a reduction in policies in-force for a financially insolvent client and lower REO volume. This decrease was partially offset by premium rate increases in our Lender-placed Insurance business, continued growth from renters insurance in our Multifamily Housing business and growth from our Specialty and Other business, mainly sharing economy products. Net investment income decreased $22.4 million, or 24%, primarily due to lower income from real estate related investments, lower cash yields and a decrease in invested assets. Fees and other income decreased $4.9 million, or 3%, primarily due to a decline in our Lender-placed Insurance business, mostly due to lower loss draft volume.
Total Benefits, Losses and Expenses
Total benefits, losses and expenses decreased $47.6 million, or 3%, to $1.76 billion for Twelve Months 2020 from $1.80 billion for Twelve Months 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $34.3 million, or 5%, in underwriting, general and administrative expenses, primarily due to lower employment related expenses in our Lender-placed Insurance business. Policyholder benefits decreased $17.4 million, or 2%, mainly from lower non-catastrophe losses across all major lines of businesses and the absence of losses from our small commercial product, partially offset by higher reportable catastrophe losses.
Corporate and Other
Overview
The table below presents information regarding the Corporate and Other segment’s results of operations for the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Loss from Continuing Operations
Segment net loss from continuing operations decreased $34.8 million, or 23%, to $115.8 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $150.6 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily due to a $110.0 million after-tax increase in net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities compared to net losses in the prior year, including $67.5 million of after-tax unrealized gains from four equity positions that went public during Twelve Months 2021, the absence of $25.5 million of after-tax unrealized losses on collateralized loss obligations in Twelve Months 2020 and $19.2 million of after-tax unrealized gains from equity securities accounted for under the measurement alternative. The decrease in net loss was also driven by lower general operating expenses, which included a $13.2 million decrease in after-tax direct and incremental expenses incurred in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, and an increase in net investment income. These items were partially offset by the absence of an $84.4 million tax benefit related to the utilization of net operating losses in connection with the CARES Act from Twelve Months 2020, a $16.3 million after-tax loss on extinguishment of debt and the absence of an $11.8 million gain related to the reduction of the valuation allowance on our Patient Protection and Affordable Health Care Act of 2010 (“ACA”) risk corridor program receivable.
Total Revenues
Total revenues increased $147.5 million to $161.0 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $13.5 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily driven by an $136.4 million increase in net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities compared to net losses in the prior year, including $85.4 million of unrealized gains from four equity positions that went public during Twelve Months 2021, the absence of $32.3 million of unrealized losses on collateralized loss obligations in Twelve Months 2020 and $24.3 million of unrealized gains from equity securities accounted for under the measurement alternative. The increase is also due to $13.6 million of higher net investment income, mostly driven by gains from the sale of real estate joint venture properties and higher income from limited partnerships.
Total Benefits, Losses and Expenses
Total benefits, losses and expenses increased $11.1 million, or 4%, to $303.2 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $292.1 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily due to the $20.7 million loss on extinguishment of debt, the absence of certain gains from Twelve Months 2020 that included a $14.8 million gain related to the reduction of the valuation allowance of our ACA risk corridor program receivable and $10.8 million of income, net of certain exit costs from the sale of our CLO asset management platform. These increases were partially offset by $17.3 million of lower operating expenses, including employee-related and third-party expenses, and a $16.8 million decrease in direct and incremental operating expenses incurred in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Loss from Continuing Operations
Segment net loss from continuing operations decreased $211.0 million, or 58%, to $150.6 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $361.6 million for Twelve Months 2019, primarily due to $154.6 million of lower after-tax losses from decreases in the estimated fair value of Iké, an $84.4 million tax benefit related to the utilization of net operating losses in connection with the CARES Act in Twelve Months 2020, the absence of $29.6 million of after-tax debt related charges associated with refinancing debt at a lower interest rate in Twelve Months 2019. These increases were partially offset by a $55.8 million after-tax decrease in net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities as well as $21.2 million of after-tax direct and incremental operating expenses incurred in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Total Revenues
Total revenues decreased $81.7 million, or 86%, to $13.5 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $95.2 million for Twelve Months 2019, primarily driven by an $65.2 million decrease in net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities mostly due to $22.6 million of higher net unrealized losses from the decrease in fair value of our collateralized loan obligations, $21.4 million of lower net unrealized gains on equity securities, a $15.6 million increase in impairments on equity investments accounted for under the measurement alternative and a decrease in net realized gains from sales of fixed maturity securities. The decrease was also driven by $18.7 million of lower net investment income due to a higher concentration of lower yielding liquid investments in 2020 compared to 2019 and lower income from real estate.
Total Benefits, Losses and Expenses
Total benefits, losses and expenses decreased $210.2 million, or 42%, to $292.1 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $502.3 million for Twelve Months 2019. The decrease in expenses for Twelve Months 2020 was primarily due to the absence of certain events that occurred in Twelve Months 2019, mainly $157.1 million of lower losses associated with Iké, $37.4 million of debt related charges associated with refinancing debt at a lower interest rate and a $15.6 million impairment of certain intangible assets from our acquisition of Green Tree Insurance Agency. The decrease was also due to $10.0 million of income, net of certain exit costs, from the sale of our CLO asset management platform, $10.0 million increase in the net pension benefit and the absence of a $9.6 million loss on the sale of our Mortgage Solutions business in Twelve Months 2019. These decreases were partially offset by $26.8 million of direct and incremental operating expenses incurred in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic and $11.8 million lower gain related to the reduction of the valuation allowance on the Company’s ACA risk corridor program receivables.
Discontinued Operations
Overview
The table below presents information regarding the results of the discontinued operations for the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations
Net income from discontinued operations was $758.9 million for Twelve Months 2021 compared to a net loss from discontinued operations of $77.7 million for Twelve Months 2020. The change was primarily due to a $720.1 million after-tax gain on the sale of the disposed Global Preneed business in Twelve Months 2021. The gain includes $606.0 million in after-tax AOCI, primarily net unrealized gains on investments, that was recognized in earnings upon the sale. The increase was also due to the absence of a $137.8 million after-tax goodwill impairment on the disposed Global Preneed business from Twelve Months 2020. These items were partially offset by lower operating results for the disposed Global Preneed business as Twelve Months 2021 included only seven months of results since the sale closed on August 2, 2021.
Total Revenues
Total revenues increased $723.1 million to $1.22 billion for Twelve Months 2021 from $499.3 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily due to the gain on the sale of the disposed Global Preneed business. The gain is inclusive of $774.2 million of pre-tax AOCI, primarily net unrealized gains on investments, that was recognized in earnings upon sale. The increase in total revenues was partially offset by a $120.9 million, or 42%, decrease in net investment income, a $60.1 million, or 40%, decrease in fees and other income and a $24.3 million, or 36%, decrease in net earned premiums, primarily because Twelve Months 2021 included only seven months of results.
Total Benefits, Losses and Expenses
Total benefits, losses and expenses decreased $306.9 million, or 54%, to $257.9 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $564.8 million for Twelve Months 2020, primarily due to the absence of a $137.8 million goodwill impairment on the disposed Global Preneed business from Twelve Months 2020. The decrease in total benefits, losses and expenses was also due to a $111.7 million, or 39%, decrease in policyholder benefits, a $34.3 million, or 43%, decrease in amortization of deferred acquisition costs and value of business acquired and a $23.1 million, or 37%, decrease in underwriting, general and administrative expenses, primarily because Twelve Months 2021 included only seven months of results.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations
Net loss from discontinued operations was $77.7 million for Twelve Months 2020 compared to net income from discontinued operations of $80.4 million for Twelve Months 2019. The change was primarily due to the $137.8 million after-tax impairment on the disposed Global Preneed business goodwill, lower amortization of deferred gains mainly associated with the sale of Assurant Employee Benefits, higher mortality from COVID-19, a decrease in investment income, an increase in final need policy cancellations in the disposed Global Preneed business in the fourth quarter of 2020, partly due to COVID-19, and updated assumptions for the earnings patterns of new policies. These decreases were partially offset by the absence of a $9.9 million after-tax expense related to an out of period adjustment for over-capitalization of deferred acquisition costs occurring over a ten-year period recorded in Twelve Months 2019.
Total Revenues
Total revenues decreased $18.4 million, or 4%, to $499.3 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $517.7 million for Twelve Months 2019, primarily due to a $17.3 million decrease in net realized gains on investments and fair value changes to equity securities mostly due to lower net unrealized gains on equity securities, a $7.1 million decrease in amortization of deferred gains mainly associated with the sale of Assurant Employee Benefits and lower investment income, mainly due to lower income from real estate and lower yielding new money fixed maturity securities purchases. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in net earned premiums and fees and other income, primarily due to growth in domestic pre-funded funeral policies in the U.S. and sales of the Final Need product.
Total Benefits, Losses and Expenses
Total benefits, losses and expenses increased $146.9 million, or 35%, to $564.8 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $417.9 million for Twelve Months 2019, primarily due to the $137.8 million impairment on the Global Preneed goodwill and an increase in policyholder benefits, mainly driven by the growth in the domestic preneed business. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in amortization of deferred acquisition costs and value of business acquired, primarily due to the absence of a $14.2 million expense recorded in Twelve Months 2019 related to an out of period adjustment for over-capitalization of deferred acquisition costs occurring over a ten-year period, partially offset by growth in the domestic preneed business and higher amortization resulting from the increase in final need policy cancellations in the disposed Global Preneed business in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Investments
We had total investments of $8.67 billion and $8.22 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net unrealized gains on our fixed maturity securities portfolio decreased $259.5 million during Twelve Months 2021, from $570.9 million at December 31, 2020 to $311.4 million at December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in Treasury yields.
The following table shows the credit quality of our fixed maturity securities portfolio as of the dates indicated:
The following table shows the major categories of net investment income for the periods indicated:
(1)The following table shows the revenues net of expenses from consolidated investment entities for the periods indicated.
(1)The investment income from the real estate funds includes income attributable to non-controlling interest of $1.1 million and $3.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net investment income increased $28.8 million, or 10%, to $314.4 million for Twelve Months 2021 from $285.6 million for Twelve Months 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher income from other investments mostly due to higher income from sales of real estate joint venture partnerships and higher valuations in our real estate joint venture and other partnerships. Fixed maturity income increased, mostly due to higher asset levels, partially offset by lower yields. Investment expenses decreased due to prior year costs associated with the disposed Global Preneed business and one-time expenses related to the outsourcing of our real estate asset management. These increases were offset in part by a decrease in income from short-term investments and cash and cash equivalents mainly due to continued low yields.
Net investment income decreased $97.6 million, or 25%, to $285.6 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $383.2 million for Twelve Months 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower income from other investments, primarily due to lower income from sales of real estate joint venture partnerships and lower unrealized gains from increases in fair market value in each period, and a decrease in income from short term investments and cash and cash equivalents mainly due to lower cash
yields and unfavorable foreign exchange. The decrease was also due to a reduction in income from fixed maturity securities due to lower-yielding new money bond purchases.
As of December 31, 2021, we owned $18.5 million of securities guaranteed by financial guarantee insurance companies. Included in this amount was $14.9 million of municipal securities, whose credit rating was A+ with the guarantee, but would have had a rating of AA- without the guarantee.
For more information on our investments, see Notes 8 and 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following section discusses our ability to generate cash flows from each of our subsidiaries, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet our operating and growth needs. Management believes that we will have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our needs over the next twelve months, including the ability to pay interest on our debt and dividends on our common stock.
Regulatory Requirements
Assurant, Inc. is a holding company and, as such, has limited direct operations of its own. Our assets consist primarily of the capital stock of our subsidiaries. Accordingly, our future cash flows depend upon the availability of dividends and other statutorily permissible payments from our subsidiaries, such as payments under our tax allocation agreement and under management agreements with our subsidiaries. Our subsidiaries’ ability to pay such dividends and make such other payments is regulated by the states and territories in which our subsidiaries are domiciled. These dividend regulations vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and by type of insurance provided by the applicable subsidiary, but generally require our insurance subsidiaries to maintain minimum solvency requirements and limit the amount of dividends they can pay to the holding company. See “Item 1 - Business - Regulation - U.S. Insurance Regulation” and “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Legal and Regulatory Risks - Changes in insurance regulation may reduce our profitability and limit our growth.” Along with solvency regulations, the primary driver in determining the amount of capital used for dividends from insurance subsidiaries is the level of capital needed to maintain desired financial strength ratings from A.M. Best. For the year ending December 31, 2022, the maximum amount of dividends our regulated U.S. domiciled insurance subsidiaries could pay us, under applicable laws and regulations without prior regulatory approval, is approximately $475.3 million. In addition, our international and non-insurance subsidiaries provide additional sources of dividends.
Regulators or rating agencies could become more conservative in their methodology and criteria, increasing capital requirements for our insurance subsidiaries or the enterprise. In 2021, the following actions were taken by the rating agencies:
A.M. Best
•In July 2021, affirmed all financial strength ratings of Assurant, Inc. and our subsidiaries, each with a stable outlook, except for Union Security Life Insurance Company of New York, whose financial strength rating was withdrawn in August 2021 at our request, following the sale of the disposed Global Preneed business.
Moody’s
•In June 2021, assigned a Baa3 rating to our new 2032 Senior Notes (as defined below) with a stable outlook.
•In August 2021, upgraded the insurance financial strength rating of American Bankers Life Assurance Company of Florida to A3 from Baa1.
•In March 2021, affirmed all other ratings with a stable outlook.
S&P
•In June 2021, assigned a BBB rating to our new 2032 Senior Notes (as defined below) with a stable outlook.
•In September 2021, affirmed all other ratings with a stable outlook.
For further information on our ratings and the risks of ratings downgrades, see “Item 1 - Business - Ratings” and “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Financial Risks - A decline in the financial strength ratings of our insurance subsidiaries could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition.”
Holding Company
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.05 billion in holding company liquidity, $827.0 million above our targeted minimum level of $225.0 million. The target minimum level of holding company liquidity, which can be used for unforeseen capital needs at our subsidiaries or liquidity needs at the holding company, is calibrated based on approximately one year of corporate operating losses and interest expenses. We use the term “holding company liquidity” to represent the portion of cash and other liquid marketable securities held at Assurant, Inc., out of a total of $1.16 billion of holding company investment securities and cash, which we are not otherwise holding for a specific purpose as of the balance sheet date. We can use such assets for stock repurchases, stockholder dividends, acquisitions and other corporate purposes.
Dividends or returns of capital paid by our subsidiaries, net of infusions and excluding amounts used for or as a result of acquisitions or received from dispositions, were $728.6 million and $821.0 million for Twelve Months 2021 and Twelve Months 2020, respectively, which included approximately $12.0 million and $31.0 million, respectively, of dividends from subsidiaries, net of infusions, in the disposed Global Preneed business. We use these cash inflows primarily to pay holding company operating expenses, to make interest payments on indebtedness, to make dividend payments to our common stockholders, to fund investments and acquisitions, and to repurchase our common stock. From time to time, we may also seek to purchase outstanding debt in open market repurchases or privately negotiated transactions.
Dividends and Repurchases
During Twelve Months 2021 and Twelve Months 2020, we made common stock repurchases and paid dividends to our common stockholders of $1.00 billion and $454.4 million, respectively.
On January 11, 2022, the Board declared a quarterly dividend of $0.68 per common share payable on March 21, 2022 to stockholders of record as of February 28, 2022. We paid dividends of $0.68 per common share on December 20, 2021 to stockholders of record as of November 29, 2021. This represented a 3% increase to the quarterly dividend of $0.66 per common share paid on September 21, June 22, and March 15, 2021.
We paid a quarterly dividend of $1.6250 per share of MCPS on March 15, 2021 to stockholders of record as of March 1, 2021, which was the final dividend paid on the MCPS. The MCPS converted into shares of common stock in March 2021. Refer to “-Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock” below.
Any determination to pay future dividends will be at the discretion of the Board and will be dependent upon various factors, including: our subsidiaries’ payments of dividends and other statutorily permissible payments to us; our results of operations and cash flows; our financial condition and capital requirements; general business conditions and growth prospects; any legal, tax, regulatory and contractual restrictions on the payment of dividends; and any other factors the Board deems relevant. The Credit Facility also contains limitations on our ability to pay dividends to our stockholders and repurchase capital stock if we are in default, or such dividend payments or repurchases would cause us to be in default, of our obligations thereunder. In addition, if we elect to defer the payment of interest on our Subordinated Notes, we generally may not make payments on or repurchase any shares of our capital stock.
During Twelve Months 2021, we repurchased 5,337,122 shares of our outstanding common stock at a cost of $844.4 million, exclusive of commissions. In January and May 2021, the Board authorized new share repurchase programs for up to $600.0 million and $900.0 million, respectively, of our outstanding common stock. As of December 31, 2021, $842.1 million aggregate cost at purchase remained unused under the May 2021 authorization. The timing and the amount of future repurchases will depend on various factors, including those listed above.
We expect to deploy capital primarily to support business growth, fund other investments and return capital to shareholders, subject to Board approval and market conditions. In addition, we completed the sale of the disposed Global Preneed business to CUNA in August 2021 for net proceeds of $1.31 billion and, as previously disclosed, we intend to return $900.0 million to shareholders through share repurchases within one year of closing. Refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock
In March 2018, we issued 2,875,000 shares of our MCPS. In March 2021, each outstanding share of MCPS converted automatically into 0.9405 shares of common stock, or 2,703,911 common shares in total plus an immaterial amount of cash in lieu of fractional shares. Dividends on the MCPS were payable on a cumulative basis when, as and if declared, at an annual rate of 6.50% of the liquidation preference of $100.00 per share. We paid preferred stock dividends of $4.7 million and $18.7 million for Twelve Months 2021 and Twelve Months 2020, respectively. For additional information regarding the MCPS, see Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Assurant Subsidiaries
The primary sources of funds for our subsidiaries consist of premiums and fees collected, proceeds from the sales and maturity of investments and net investment income. Cash is primarily used to pay insurance claims, agent commissions, operating expenses and taxes. We generally invest our subsidiaries’ funds in order to generate investment income.
We conduct periodic asset liability studies to measure the duration of our insurance liabilities, to develop optimal asset portfolio maturity structures for our significant lines of business and ultimately to assess that cash flows are sufficient to meet the timing of cash needs. These studies are conducted in accordance with formal company-wide Asset Liability Management guidelines.
To complete a study for a particular line of business, models are developed to project asset and liability cash flows and balance sheet items under a varied set of plausible economic scenarios. These models consider many factors including the current investment portfolio, the required capital for the related assets and liabilities, our tax position and projected cash flows from both existing and projected new business. For risks related to modeling, see “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Financial Risks -Actual results may differ materially from the analytical models we use to assist in our decision-making in key areas such as pricing, catastrophe risks, reserving and capital management.”
Alternative asset portfolio asset allocations are analyzed for significant lines of business. An investment portfolio maturity structure is then selected from these profiles given our return hurdle and risk appetite. Scenario testing of significant liability assumptions and new business projections is also performed.
Our liabilities generally do not include policyholder optionality, which means that the timing of payments is generally insensitive to the interest rate environment. In addition, our investment portfolio is largely comprised of highly liquid public fixed maturity securities with a sufficient component of such securities invested that are near maturity which may be sold with minimal risk of loss to meet cash needs.
Generally, our subsidiaries’ premiums, fees and investment income, along with planned asset sales and maturities, provide sufficient cash to pay claims and expenses. However, there may be instances when unexpected cash needs arise in excess of that available from usual operating sources. In such instances, we have several options to raise needed funds, including selling assets from the subsidiaries’ investment portfolios, using holding company cash (if available), issuing commercial paper, or drawing funds from the Credit Facility (as defined below).
Senior and Subordinated Notes
The following table shows the principal amount and carrying value of our outstanding debt, less unamortized discount and issuance costs as applicable, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In January 2021, we repaid the remaining $50.0 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of our floating rate senior notes due March 2021. In June 2021, we issued 2.65% senior notes due January 2032 with an aggregate principal amount of $350.0 million (the “2032 Senior Notes”). We used the proceeds from the issuance along with cash on hand, to redeem all of the $350.0 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 4.00% senior notes due March 2023 and paid accrued interest, related premiums, fees and expenses in July 2021.
In the next five years, we have one upcoming debt maturity in September 2023 when our 4.20% senior notes with an outstanding aggregate principal of $300.0 million are due. For additional information, see Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Credit Facility and Commercial Paper Program
In December 2021, we entered into a $500.0 million five-year senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) with a syndicate of banks arranged by JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association. The Credit Facility replaced our prior five-year $450.0 million revolving credit facility, which terminated upon the effectiveness of the Credit Facility. The Credit Facility provides for revolving loans and the issuance of multi-bank, syndicated letters of credit and letters of credit from a sole issuing bank in an aggregate amount of $500.0 million, which may be increased up to $700.0 million. The Credit Facility is available until December 2026, provided we are in compliance with all covenants. The Credit Facility has a sublimit for letters of credit issued thereunder of $50.0 million. The proceeds from these loans may be used for our commercial paper program or for general corporate purposes.
We made no borrowings using the Credit Facility or our prior five-year $450.0 million revolving credit facility during Twelve Months 2021 and no loans were outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Our commercial paper program requires us to maintain liquidity facilities either in an available amount equal to any outstanding notes from the program or in an amount sufficient to maintain the ratings assigned to the notes issued from the program. Our commercial paper is rated AMB-1 by A.M. Best, P-3 by Moody’s and A-2 by S&P. Our subsidiaries do not maintain commercial paper or other borrowing facilities. This program is currently backed up by the Credit Facility, of which $495.5 million was available as of December 31, 2021, and $4.5 million letters of credit were outstanding.
We did not use the commercial paper program during Twelve Months 2021 and there were no amounts relating to the commercial paper program outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Covenants
The Credit Facility contains restrictive covenants including:
(i)Maintenance of a maximum consolidated total debt to capitalization ratio on the last day of any fiscal quarter of not greater than 0.35 to 1.0; and
(ii)Maintenance of a consolidated adjusted net worth in an amount not less than a “Minimum Amount” equal to the sum of (a) $4.20 billion, (b) 25% of consolidated net income (if positive) for each fiscal quarter ending after December 31, 2021 and (c) 25% of the net cash proceeds received from any capital contribution to, or issuance of any capital stock, disqualified capital stock and hybrid securities.
In the event of a breach of certain covenants, all obligations under the Credit Facility, including unpaid principal and accrued interest and outstanding letters of credit, may become immediately due and payable.
Letters of Credit
In the normal course of business, letters of credit are issued primarily to support reinsurance arrangements in which we are the reinsurer. These letters of credit are supported by commitments under which we are required to indemnify the financial institution issuing the letter of credit if the letter of credit is drawn. We had $7.2 million and $7.6 million of letters of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash Flows
We monitor cash flows at the consolidated, holding company and subsidiary levels. Cash flow forecasts at the consolidated and subsidiary levels are provided on a monthly basis, and we use trend and variance analyses to project future cash needs making adjustments to the forecasts when needed.
The table below shows our recent net cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities
We typically generate operating cash inflows from premiums collected from our insurance products, fees received for services and income received from our investments while outflows consist of policy acquisition costs, benefits paid and operating expenses. These net cash flows are then invested to support the obligations of our insurance products and required capital supporting these products. Our cash flows from operating activities are affected by the timing of premiums, fees, and investment income received and expenses paid.
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $630.5 million and $1.11 billion for Twelve Months 2021 and Twelve Months 2020, respectively. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the timing of certain cash payments and business activities from our Global Lifestyle segment. The primary factors contributing to the variance included timing of cumulative payments to a vendor related to various programs for acquiring mobile devices used to meet insurance claims or generate profits through sales to third parties and higher commission payments associated with fourth quarter 2020 premiums that were paid in first quarter 2021. The decrease was also due to the absence of a $204.9 million tax refund, including interest, related to the ability to carry back operating losses to prior periods under the CARES Act that was collected during Twelve Months 2020 and higher tax payments, net of refunds, primarily due to the gain on sale of the disposed Global Preneed business and an increase in taxable income for Twelve Months 2021. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in premiums collected in connection with the continued growth in Global Automotive.
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $1.11 billion and $1.13 billion for Twelve Months 2020 and Twelve Months 2019, respectively. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the timing of certain cash payments and business activities from our Global Lifestyle business. The primary factors contributing to the decrease included the absence of a prior year receipt of prepaid premiums in Japan given subsequent changes in payment terms under the program and the timing of cumulative payments to a vendor related to a program initiated in 2019 for acquiring mobile devices used to meet insurance claims or generate profits through sales to third parties. These decreases were partially offset by receipt of a $204.9 million tax refund, which includes interest, related to the ability to carryback net operating losses to prior periods under the CARES Act and higher collections of premium receivable balances mostly due to timing.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities from continuing operations was $302.8 million for Twelve Months 2021 compared to net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations of $519.4 million for Twelve Months 2020, respectively. The increase in cash provided by investing activities was primarily driven by an increase in cash from sales and maturities, net of purchases, due to the ongoing management of our investment portfolio and a reduction in net cash used for acquisitions. Twelve Months 2021 included $1.27 billion of proceeds from the sale of the disposed Global Preneed business that were mostly reinvested within our investment portfolio. Twelve Months 2020 included $135.8 million of net cash used for
the AFAS acquisition, $276.8 million of net cash used for the HYLA acquisition and $51.3 million of cash outflow, net of $22.0 million of proceeds from a foreign currency hedge, for the sale of our interests in Iké. Additionally, Twelve Months 2020 included a $34.0 million cash outflow to Iké Grupo for the Iké Loan that was repaid and reflected as a net cash inflow for Twelve Months 2021. These increases were partially offset by the absence of $197.1 million of net cash provided by consolidated investment entities and a $66.2 million increase in purchases of property and equipment mostly due to continued investments in information technology supporting our core operations.
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $519.4 million and $336.9 million for Twelve Months 2020 and Twelve Months 2019, respectively. The increase in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to $458.6 million of cash used for acquisitions, net of $135.5 million of cash acquired, partially offset by the timing of net purchases of securities in connection with collateralized loan obligations structures launched in 2019. For additional information, see Notes 3 and 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report. The remaining changes were due to the ongoing management of our investment portfolio.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $1.09 billion and $264.8 million for Twelve Months 2021 and Twelve Months 2020, respectively. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was mainly due to a $542.3 million increase in share repurchases, a portion of which was funded using the proceeds from the Global Preneed sale, the issuance of the 5.25% subordinated notes due January 2061 with an aggregate principal amount of $250.0 million (the “2061 Subordinated Notes”), net of issuance costs, of $243.7 million in Twelve Months 2020, the $50.0 million repayment of our floating rate senior notes due March 2021 in first quarter 2021 and the loss on extinguishment of debt related to the repayment of our 4.00% senior notes due March 2023.
Net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $264.8 million and $179.2 million for Twelve Months 2020 and Twelve Months 2019, respectively. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to $268.4 million of lower cash from our CIEs provided, net of repayments of borrowings to short-term warehouse facilities, primarily related to the timing of CLO structures launched in 2019. Also contributing was an increase in the repurchase of the Company’s outstanding common stock for Twelve Months 2020. These were partially offset by the issuance of the 2061 Subordinated Notes, net of issuance costs, of $243.7 million in Twelve Months 2020 and a $31.4 million loss on extinguishment of debt in connection with the tender offer of $100.0 million of our 6.75% notes due 2034 recorded in Twelve Months 2019. For additional information, see Notes 9 and 19, respectively, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Discontinued operations
Changes in cash flows from the operating and investing activities from our discontinued operations for Twelve Months 2021 as compared to Twelve Months 2020 were lower mainly due to Twelve Months 2021 including only seven months of net cash flows since the sale closed on August 2, 2021.
Cash flows provided by operating activities from our discontinued operations for Twelve Months 2020 compared to Twelve Months 2019 were lower mainly due to higher mortality in Twelve Months 2020 and an increase in final need policy cancellations in the disposed Global Preneed business in Twelve Months 2020, partially due to COVID-19.
Cash flows used in investing activities from discontinued operations for Twelve Months 2020 compared to Twelve Months 2019 were lower due to ongoing management of the investment portfolio.
The table below shows our cash outflows for taxes, interest and dividends for the periods indicated:
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We have contractual obligations and commitments to third parties as a result of our operations, as detailed in the table below by maturity date as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Insurance liabilities reflect undiscounted estimated cash payments to be made to policyholders, net of expected future premium cash receipts on in-force policies and excluding fully reinsured runoff operations. The total gross reserve for fully reinsured runoff operations that was excluded was $625.7 million which, if the reinsurers defaulted, would be payable over a 30+ year period with the majority of the payments occurring after 5 years. Additional information on the reinsurance arrangements can be found in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report. As a result, the amounts presented in this table do not agree to the future policy benefits and expenses and claims and benefits payable in the consolidated balance sheets.
(2)Our pension obligations and postretirement benefits include an Assurant Pension Plan, various non-qualified pension plans (including an Executive Pension Plan) and certain life and health care benefits for retired employees and their dependents (“Retirement Health Benefits”), all of which were frozen in 2016. In February 2020, we amended the Retirement Health Benefits to terminate such plan benefits to retirees effective December 31, 2024. Due to the Assurant Pension Plan’s current overfunded status, no contributions were made during 2021 and none are expected to be made in 2022. See Note 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report for more information.
Liabilities for future policy benefits and expenses have been included in the commitments and contingencies table. Significant uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, persistency, investment returns, inflation, contract terms and the timing of payments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources of the Company.