Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our operations are organized into two segments: (i) Aerospace and Defense and (ii) Real Estate. Refer to “Item 1 Business” for information related to our business segments.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Report, including the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing in Item 8 of this Report, the risk factors appearing in Item 1A of this Report, and the disclaimer regarding forward-looking statements appearing at the beginning of Item 1 of this Report. Pursuant to instruction 1 of the instructions to paragraph 303(b) of Regulation S-K, discussion of the results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, has been omitted. Such omitted discussion can be found under Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 18, 2021.
Overview
On December 20, 2020, the Company entered into the Merger Agreement with Lockheed Martin and Mizar Sub, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin, pursuant to which each share of common stock of the Company would have been automatically converted into the right to receive cash in an amount equal to $51.00 per share, adjusted from $56.00 following the payment of a one-time cash dividend of $5.00 per share paid in March 2021 and the Company would have become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin.
On January 25, 2022, the FTC filed a complaint against the Company and Lockheed Martin in the FTC’s administrative court and a complaint in U.S. federal court seeking a preliminary injunction to stop the FTC Litigation. On February 13, 2022, Lockheed Martin notified the Company that it had elected to terminate the Merger Agreement. On February 14, 2022, pursuant to the parties’ joint motion, the administrative complaint and the U.S. federal court complaint were dismissed.
A summary of the significant financial highlights for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, which management uses to evaluate our operating performance and financial condition, is presented below.
_________
* We provide Non-GAAP measures as a supplement to financial results presented in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of the Non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures is presented later in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis under the heading "Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
Our business outlook is affected by both increasing complexity in the global security environment and continuing worldwide economic pressures, including those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. A significant component of our strategy in this environment is to focus on protecting our employees' health and safety, delivering excellent performance to our customers, driving improvements and efficiencies across our operations, and creating value through the enhancement and expansion of our business.
Some of the significant challenges we face are as follows: uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions taken by governments, companies, and individuals in response, including the efficacy, distribution and approval of vaccines and booster shots, vaccine mandates, dependence upon U.S. government programs and contracts, future reductions or changes in U.S. government spending in our markets, environmental matters, capital structure, underfunded pension plan, and cyber security. In addition, uncertainty regarding the ongoing litigation involving directors, deliberation and dialogue regarding director nominations, and other internal governance matters pose challenges to the Company because these issues distract management from their day-to-day responsibilities and disrupt our normal business operations.
COVID-19
During 2020, there was minimal adverse impact to our financial results and operations as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak. The safety and welfare of our employees remains our top priority, and throughout the year, we have continued to
operate within our established safety protocols, which include selected and site-specific work and travel restrictions, in addition to other measures intended to reduce the spread of COVID-19. We have also continued to evaluate new opportunities to protect our employees. Although we have not experienced significant absenteeism or supply chain disruption, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our future financial results depends on future developments which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information and COVID-19 variants which may emerge and impact the severity of the pandemic and the actions being taken to contain and treat it, including the efficacy, distribution and approval of vaccines and booster shots, vaccine mandates and other indirect effects that may come as a result of actions taken by governments, companies, and individuals in response to the pandemic and its economic impact.
We continue to be considered an essential business by the U.S. and state governments and continue to operate as such during the COVID-19 pandemic. We are taking a variety of measures to maintain the availability and functionality of our critical infrastructure, to promote the safety and security of our employees and to support the communities in which we operate. In making decisions regarding our operations, we take into account public and private sector policies and initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, such as the adoption of mask-wearing protocols, enhanced cleaning protocols and health monitoring, as well as the imposition of travel limitations, the promotion of social distancing, and the adoption of work-from-home requirements for employees where practicable. All of these policies and initiatives could impact our operations.
Due to the evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, corresponding U.S. government policies, vaccine mandates, and the uncertainty relating to vaccination rates and vaccine efficacy against new COVID-19 variants, we are not able at this time to estimate its full impact on our financial results and operations.
The CARES Act was enacted on March 27, 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the negative impacts that it is having on the global economy and U.S. companies. The CARES Act includes various financial measures to assist companies, including temporary changes to income and non-income-based tax laws. Through these provisions, as of December 31, 2021, we have delayed $21.2 million of payroll tax payments that otherwise would have been paid in 2020. Additionally, in accordance with the provisions of the CARES Act, we accelerated depreciation on qualified improvement property placed in service after December 31, 2017 for income tax purposes.
See impact of The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 ("ARPA") on our retirement benefit plans below.
Major Customers
The principal end user customers of our products and technology are primarily agencies of the U.S. government. Since a majority of our sales are, directly or indirectly, to the U.S. government, funding for the purchase of our products and services generally follows trends in U.S. aerospace and defense spending. However, individual U.S. government agencies, which include the military services, NASA, the Missile Defense Agency, and the prime contractors that serve these agencies, exercise independent purchasing power within "budget top-line" limits. Therefore, sales to the U.S. government are not regarded as sales to one customer, but rather each contracting agency is viewed as a separate customer.
The following table summarizes end user net sales to the U.S. government and its agencies, including net sales to significant customers disclosed below:
The following table summarizes net sales by principal end user in 2021:
The following table summarizes the percentages of net sales for significant programs, all of which are included in the U.S. government sales and are comprised of multiple contracts:
The following table summarizes customers that represented more than 10% of net sales, each of which involves sales of several product lines and programs:
Industry Update
Information concerning our industry appears in Part I, Item 1. Business under the caption "Industry Overview."
Environmental Matters
Our policy is to conduct our businesses with due regard for the preservation and protection of the environment. We devote a significant amount of resources and management attention to environmental matters and actively manage our ongoing processes to comply with environmental laws and regulations. We are involved in the remediation of environmental conditions that resulted from generally accepted manufacturing and disposal practices at certain plants in the 1950s and 1960s. In addition, we have been designated a PRP with other companies at third party sites undergoing investigation and remediation.
Estimating environmental remediation costs is difficult due to the significant uncertainties inherent in these activities, including the extent of remediation required, changing governmental regulations and legal standards regarding liability, evolving technologies and the long period of time over which most remediation efforts take place. We:
•accrue for costs associated with the remediation of environmental pollution when it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and when our proportionate share of the costs can be reasonably estimated; and
•record related estimated recoveries when such recoveries are deemed probable.
In addition to the costs associated with environmental remediation discussed above, we incur expenditures for recurring costs associated with managing hazardous substances or pollutants in ongoing operations which totaled $10.4 million in 2021.
The following table summarizes our recoverable amounts, environmental reserves, and range of liability, as of December 31, 2021:
_____
(1)Excludes the receivable from Northrop of $40.5 million as of December 31, 2021, related to environmental costs already paid (and therefore not reserved) by us in prior years and reimbursable under our agreement with Northrop.
Capital Structure
We have a substantial amount of debt for which we are required to make interest and principal payments. Interest on long-term financing is not a recoverable cost under our U.S. government contracts. As of December 31, 2021, we had $461.3 million of debt outstanding.
Pension Plan
As of the last measurement date at December 31, 2021, the pension assets, projected benefit obligations, and unfunded pension obligation were $1,005.0 million, $1,279.3 million, and $274.3 million, respectively. We estimate that 87% of our unfunded pension obligation as of December 31, 2021, is related to our U.S. government contracting business, Aerojet Rocketdyne.
The ARPA that was signed into law on March 11, 2021, provided funding relief to sponsors of defined benefit pension plans. In line with provisions of ARPA, we expect to make cash contributions of approximately $15 million to our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan in 2022. We generally are able to recover contributions related to our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan as allowable costs on our U.S. government contracts, but there are differences between when we contribute to our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan under pension funding rules and when it is recoverable under CAS.
The COVID-19 pandemic and resulting global disruptions have continued to cause significant economic uncertainty and volatility in financial markets which could adversely impact the funded status of our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan. The funded status of our pension plan is impacted by the investment experience of the plan assets, by any changes in U.S. law, and by changes in the statutory interest rates used by the tax-qualified pension plan in the U.S. to calculate funding requirements. Accordingly, if the performance of our plan assets does not meet our assumptions, if there are changes to the Internal Revenue Service regulations or other applicable law or if other actuarial assumptions are modified, our future contributions to our underfunded pension plan could be higher than we expect.
Cyber Security
We routinely defend against various cyber and other security threats against our defenses to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of our information technology infrastructure, supply chain, business or customer information and other threats. We are also subject to similar security threats at customer sites that we operate and manage as a contractual requirement.
The threats we face range from attacks common to most industries to more advanced and persistent, highly organized adversaries, insider threats and other threat vectors targeting us and other defense and aerospace companies; because we protect national security information. In addition, cyber threats are evolving, growing in their frequency and include, but are not limited to, malicious software, destructive malware, attempts to gain unauthorized access to data, disruption or denial of service attacks, and other electronic security breaches that could lead to disruptions in mission critical systems, unauthorized release of confidential, personal or otherwise protected information (ours or that of our employees, customers or partners), and corruption of data, networks or systems. We also could be impacted by cyber threats or other disruptions or vulnerabilities found in products we use or in our partners’ or customers’ systems that are used in connection with our business.
We continue to assess our information technology systems and are engaged in cooperative efforts with our customers, suppliers, and subcontractors to seek to minimize the impact of cyber threats, other security threats or business disruptions.
Results of Operations
Net Sales
Primary reason for change. The increase in net sales was primarily driven by the GBSD and ATACMS programs partially offset by declines on the THAAD and RS-68 programs.
Cost of Sales (exclusive of items shown separately below)
Primary reason for change. Cost of sales as a percentage of net sales was comparable with the prior year period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense ("SG&A")
Primary reason for change. The decrease in SG&A expense was driven by stock-based compensation primarily as a result of the impact of changes in the fair value of the stock appreciation rights. For detailed information about stock-based compensation refer to Note 9(e) in the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Depreciation and Amortization
Primary reason for change. The decrease in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to the completion of amortization expense for a significant portion of the customer related intangible assets associated with the acquisition of the Rocketdyne Business from United Technologies Corporation in 2013.
Other Expense, Net
Primary reason for change. The increase in other expense, net was primarily due to an increase of $10.8 million in unusual items related to Merger costs. For detailed information about unusual expenses refer to Note 11 in the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Loss on Debt
Primary reason for change. In 2021, we settled $154.1 million of our 2¼% Notes as a result of receiving conversion notices from the noteholders. The principal amount of $154.1 million was settled in cash and the conversion premium was settled in 2.9 million common shares. We incurred a pre-tax charge of $10.5 million in 2021, associated with the settlement of the 2¼% Notes.
Interest Income
Primary reason for change. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to lower average cash balances and market rates.
Interest Expense
Primary reason for change. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to (i) the settlement of $154.1 million of our 2¼% Notes in 2021, and (ii) lower average obligations on our Senior Credit Facility.
Income Tax Provision
In 2021, our effective tax rate was 26.3%. Our effective tax rate differed from the 21% statutory federal income tax rate primarily due to state income taxes, uncertain tax positions, and certain expenditures which are permanently not deductible for tax purposes, offset by R&D credits, excess tax benefits related to our stock-based compensation and deductible premiums paid upon the redemption of a portion of our convertible debt.
As of December 31, 2021, the liability for uncertain income tax positions was $20.0 million. Due to the uncertainty regarding the timing of potential future cash flows associated with these liabilities, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period in which these liabilities might be paid.
In 2020, our effective tax rate was 23.6%. Our effective tax rate differed from the 21% statutory federal income tax rate primarily due to state income taxes, uncertain tax positions, and certain expenditures which are permanently not deductible for tax purposes, offset by R&D credits and excess tax benefits related to our stock-based compensation.
Retirement Benefits Expense
Primary reason for change. The decrease in retirement benefits expense was primarily due to lower interest costs on the benefit obligation, partially offset by higher actuarial losses in the current period as a result of a decrease in the discount rate used to calculate the benefit obligation at December 31, 2020.
We estimate that our retirement benefits expense will be approximately $1 million in 2022. Additionally, we estimate the CAS recoverable amounts related to the retirement benefits plans to be approximately $38 million in 2022. See "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Retirement Benefit Plans" for more information about our accounting practices with respect to retirement benefits.
Operating Segment Information
We evaluate our operating segments based on several factors, of which the primary financial measure is segment performance. Segment performance represents net sales less applicable costs, expenses and provisions for unusual items relating to the segment. Excluded from segment performance are: corporate income and expenses, interest expense, interest income, income taxes, and unusual items not related to the segment. We believe that segment performance provides information useful to investors in understanding our operational performance.
Aerospace and Defense Segment
Primary reason for change. The increase in net sales was primarily driven by the GBSD and ATACMS programs partially offset by declines on the THAAD and RS-68 programs.
The decrease in segment margin was primarily driven by costs associated with the Merger. For detailed information about costs associated with the Merger, refer to Note 11 in the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Our contracts are largely categorized as either "fixed-price" (largely used by the U.S. government for production-type contracts) or "cost-reimbursable" (largely used by the U.S. government for development-type contracts). Fixed-price contracts present the risk of unreimbursed cost overruns, potentially resulting in lower than expected contract profits and margins. This risk
is generally lower for cost-reimbursable contracts which, as a result, generally have a lower margin. The following table summarizes the percentages of net sales by contract type:
During 2021, we had $31.2 million of net favorable changes in contract estimates on operating results before income taxes compared with net favorable changes of $45.1 million during 2020.
Real Estate Segment
Primary reason for change. During 2021, we recognized net sales of $6.2 million associated with an industrial land sale which resulted in a pre-tax gain of $2.3 million. During 2020, net sales and segment performance consisted primarily of rental property operations.
Backlog
As of December 31, 2021, our total remaining performance obligations, also referred to as backlog, totaled $6.8 billion. We expect to recognize approximately 34%, or $2.3 billion, of the remaining performance obligations as sales over the next twelve months, an additional 28% the following twelve months, and 38% thereafter. The following table summarizes backlog:
Total backlog includes both funded backlog (unfilled orders for which funding is authorized, appropriated and contractually obligated by the customer) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding has not been appropriated). Indefinite delivery and quantity contracts and unexercised options are not reported in total backlog. Backlog is subject to funding delays or program restructurings/cancellations which are beyond our control.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDAP, Adjusted Net Income, and Adjusted EPS
We provide the Non-GAAP financial measures of our performance called Adjusted EBITDAP, Adjusted Net Income, and Adjusted EPS. We use these metrics to measure our operating and total Company performance. We believe that for management and investors to effectively compare core performance from period to period, the metrics should exclude items that are not indicative of, or are unrelated to, results from our ongoing business operations such as retirement benefits (pension and postretirement benefits), significant non-cash expenses, the impacts of financing decisions on earnings, and items incurred outside the ordinary, ongoing and customary course of our business. Accordingly, we define Adjusted EBITDAP as GAAP net income adjusted to exclude interest expense, interest income, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, retirement benefits net of amounts that are recoverable under our U.S. government contracts, and unusual items which we do not believe are reflective of such ordinary, ongoing and customary activities. Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS exclude retirement benefits net of amounts that are recoverable under our U.S. government contracts and unusual items which we do not believe are reflective of such ordinary, ongoing and customary activities. Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS do not represent, and should not be considered an alternative to, net income or diluted EPS as determined in accordance with GAAP.
_________
(1) The income tax impact is calculated using the federal and state statutory rates in the corresponding year.
Free Cash Flow
We also provide the Non-GAAP financial measure of Free Cash Flow. Free Cash Flow is defined as cash flow from operating activities less capital expenditures. Free Cash Flow should not be considered in isolation as a measure of residual cash flow available for discretionary purposes or as an alternative to cash flows from operations presented in accordance with GAAP. We use Free Cash Flow, both in presenting our results to stakeholders and the investment community, and in our internal evaluation and management of the business. Management believes that this financial measure is useful to investors because it provides supplemental information to assist them in viewing the business using the same tools that management uses to evaluate progress in achieving our goals. The following table summarizes Free Cash Flow:
Because our method for calculating these Non-GAAP measures may differ from other companies’ methods, the Non-GAAP measures presented above may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. These measures are not recognized in accordance with GAAP, and we do not intend for this information to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for GAAP measures.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and availability under the Senior Credit Facility coupled with cash generated from our future operations will provide sufficient funds to meet our operating plan for the next twelve months. As of December 31, 2021, we had $700.4 million of cash and cash equivalents as well as $622.2 million of available borrowings under our Senior Credit Facility. However, there are a number of factors that could positively or negatively impact our liquidity position, including:
•effects of the termination of the proposed merger with Lockheed Martin;
•reductions, delays or changes in U.S. government spending;
•cost overruns on the Company's contracts that require the Company to absorb excess costs;
•issuance or repurchase of debt or equity securities;
•potential funding of pension liabilities either voluntarily or as required by law or regulation;
•compliance with covenants and other terms and conditions related to our financing arrangements;
•environmental claims related to the Company's current and former businesses and operations;
•reductions in the amount recoverable from environmental claims;
•changes or clarifications to current tax law;
•impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition; and
•risks and uncertainties detailed in Item 1A of our Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash and Cash Equivalents and Short Term Investments
Our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities consist of cash, time deposits, money market funds, and investment grade corporate debt securities. Our investment policy and strategy are focused on preservation of capital and supporting our liquidity requirements. Changes in U.S. interest rates affect the interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, and the market value of those securities. Our strategy is focused on the preservation of capital and supporting our liquidity requirements that meet high credit quality standards, as specified in our investment policy approved by the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
We continually evaluate opportunities to sell additional equity or debt securities, obtain credit facilities, obtain finance and operating lease arrangements, enter into financing obligations, repurchase common stock, pay dividends, or repurchase, refinance, or otherwise restructure our debt for strategic reasons or to further strengthen our financial position.
As of December 31, 2021, our combined balance of cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash decreased by $449.1 million to $703.4 million from a balance of $1,152.5 million as of December 31, 2020.
The cash provided by operating activities in 2021 of $199.6 million was primarily due to cash provided by net income adjusted for non-cash items offset by a decrease in our net contract liabilities primarily due to a decrease in contract advances and an increase in unbilled receivables.
The cash used in investing activities in 2021 of $39.2 million was primarily related to $37.3 million of cash used for capital expenditures and $1.9 million of net investments in marketable securities.
Cash used in financing activities in 2021 was $609.5 million primarily resulting from (i) cash payments of $428.8 million for the Pre-Closing Dividend; (ii) debt cash payments of $182.6 million (see table below); and (iii) $1.9 million of net cash provided from our equity plans.
The following table summarizes our debt principal activity:
Senior Credit Facility
The Senior Credit Facility matures on September 20, 2023, and consists of (i) a $650.0 million revolving line of credit (the "Revolver") and (ii) a $350.0 million Term Loan. The Term Loan and any borrowings under the Revolver bear interest at LIBOR plus an applicable margin ranging from 175 to 250 basis points based on our leverage ratio (the "Consolidated Net Leverage Ratio") measured at the end of each quarter. In addition to interest, we must pay certain fees including (i) letter of credit fees ranging from 175 to 250 basis points per annum on the amount of issued but undrawn letters of credit and eurocurrency rate loans and (ii) commitment fees ranging from 30 to 45 basis points per annum on the unused portion of the Revolver. The Term Loan amortized at a rate of 7.5% per annum as of December 31, 2021, and increasing to 10.0% per annum from December 31, 2022, to be paid in equal quarterly installments with any remaining amounts, along with outstanding borrowings under the Revolver, due on the maturity date. The Company was in compliance with its financial and non-financial covenants as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We have contractual obligations and commitments in the form of debt obligations, operating leases, certain other liabilities, and other commitments. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
________
(1) Holders may convert their 2¼% Notes at their option from January 1, 2022, through March 31, 2022, because our closing stock price exceeded $33.80 for at least 20 days in the 30 day period prior to December 31, 2021. We have a stated intention to cash settle the principal amount of the 2¼% Notes with the conversion premium to be settled in common shares. Accordingly, the 2¼% Notes are classified as a current liability as of December 31, 2021.
(2) Includes interest on variable debt calculated based on interest rates at December 31, 2021.
(3) The payments presented above are expected payments for the next 10 years. The payments for postretirement medical and life insurance benefits reflect the estimated benefit payments of the plans using the provisions currently in effect. The obligation related to postretirement medical and life insurance benefits is actuarially determined on an annual basis. A substantial portion of these amounts are recoverable through our contracts with the U.S. government.
(4) Purchase obligations represent open purchase orders and other commitments to suppliers, subcontractors, and other outsourcing partners for equipment, materials, and supplies in the normal course of business. These amounts are based on volumes consistent with anticipated requirements to fulfill purchase orders or contracts for product deliveries received, or expected to be received, from customers. A substantial portion of these amounts are recoverable through our contracts with the U.S. government.
(5) The conditional asset retirement obligations presented are related to our Aerospace and Defense segment and are allowable costs under our contracts with the U.S. government.
We expect to make cash contributions of approximately $15 million to our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan in 2022. We generally are able to recover contributions related to our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan as allowable costs on our U.S. government contracts, but there can be differences between when we contribute to our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan under pension funding rules and recover it under CAS.
As part of our ongoing business, we have not participated in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, as is defined in rules promulgated by the SEC, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. See Note 8(d) in the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report for information relating to our off-balance sheet risk.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared with GAAP, which require management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates are based on historical experience and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. We believe that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. We believe the following critical accounting policies are affected by significant estimates, assumptions or judgments used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The areas most affected by our accounting policies and estimates are revenue recognition, retirement benefit plans, environmental remediation costs and recoveries, and income taxes. Except for income taxes, which are not allocated to our operating segments, these areas affect the financial results of our business segments.
Revenue Recognition
In our Aerospace and Defense segment, the majority of our revenue is earned from long-term contracts to design, develop, and manufacture aerospace and defense products, and provide related services, for our customers, including the U.S. government, major aerospace and defense prime contractors, and the commercial sector. Each customer contract defines our distinct performance obligations and the associated transaction price for each obligation. A contract may contain one or multiple performance obligations. In certain circumstances, multiple contracts with a customer are required to be combined in determining the distinct performance obligation. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contracted transaction price to each performance obligation based upon the relative standalone selling price, which represents the price at which we would sell the promised good or service separately to the customer. We determine the standalone selling price based upon the facts and circumstances of each obligated good or service. The majority of our contracts have no observable standalone selling price since the associated products and services are customized to customer specifications. As such, the standalone selling price generally reflects our forecast of the total cost to satisfy the performance obligation plus an appropriate profit margin.
Contract modifications are routine in the performance of our long-term contracts. Contracts are often modified to account for changes in contract specifications or requirements. In most instances, contract modifications are for goods or services that are not distinct, and, therefore, are accounted for as part of the existing contract.
We recognize revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied. The majority of our aerospace and defense performance obligations are satisfied over time either as the service is provided, or as control transfers to the customer. Transfer of control is evidenced by our contractual right to payment for work performed to date plus a reasonable profit on contracts with highly customized products that we have no alternative use for. We measure progress on substantially all our performance obligations using the cost-to-cost method, which we believe best depicts the transfer of control of goods and services to the customer. Under the cost-to-cost method, we record revenues based upon costs incurred to date relative to the total estimated cost at completion. Contract costs include labor, material, overhead, and general and administrative expenses, as appropriate.
Recognition of revenue and profit on long-term contracts requires the use of assumptions and estimates related to the total contract value, the total cost at completion, and the measurement of progress towards completion for each performance obligation. Due to the nature of the programs, developing the estimated total contract value and total cost at completion for each performance obligation requires the use of significant judgment.
The contract value of long-term contracts may include variable consideration, such as incentives, awards, or penalties. The value of variable consideration is generally determined by contracted performance metrics, which may include targets for cost, performance, quality, and schedule. We include variable consideration in the transaction price for the respective performance obligation at either estimated value, or most likely amount to be earned, based upon our assessment of expected performance. We record these amounts only to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved.
We evaluate the contract value and cost estimates for performance obligations at least quarterly and more frequently when circumstances significantly change. Factors considered in estimating the work to be completed include, but are not limited to: labor productivity, the nature and technical complexity of the work to be performed, availability and cost volatility of materials, subcontractor and vendor performance, warranty costs, volume assumptions, anticipated labor agreements, inflationary trends, schedule and performance delays, availability of funding from the customer, and the recoverability of costs incurred outside the original contract included in any estimates to complete. When our estimate of total costs to be incurred to satisfy a performance obligation exceeds the expected revenue, we recognize the loss immediately. When we determine that a change in estimates has an impact on the associated profit of a performance obligation, we record the cumulative positive or negative adjustment to the statement of operations. Changes in estimates and assumptions related to the status of certain long-term contracts may have a material effect on our operating results. The following table summarizes the impact of the changes in significant contract accounting estimates on our Aerospace and Defense segment operating results:
See Note 1 in the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report for additional information.
Retirement Benefit Plans
We discontinued future benefit accruals for our defined benefit pension plans in 2009. We provide medical and life insurance benefits to certain eligible retired employees, with varied coverage by employee group. Annual charges are made for the cost of the plans, including interest costs on benefit obligations, and net amortization and deferrals, increased or reduced by
the return on assets. We also sponsor a defined contribution 401(k) plan and participation in the plan is available to all employees.
Retirement benefits are a significant cost of doing business and represent obligations that will be ultimately settled far in the future and therefore are subject to estimates. We generally are able to recover cash contributions related to our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan as allowable costs on our U.S. government contracts, but there is a lag between when we contribute cash to our tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan under pension funding rules and recover it under our U.S. government contracts. Our pension and medical and life insurance benefit obligations and related costs are calculated using actuarial concepts in accordance with GAAP. We are required to make assumptions regarding such variables as the expected long-term rate of return on assets and the discount rate applied to determine the retirement benefit obligations and expense (income) for the year.
The following table presents the assumptions to determine the benefit obligations:
The following table presents the assumptions to determine the retirement benefits expense (income):
____
* Not applicable as our medical and life insurance benefits are unfunded.
The discount rate represents the current market interest rate used to determine the present value of future cash flows currently expected to be required to settle pension obligations. Based on market conditions, discount rates can experience significant variability. Changes in discount rates can significantly change the liability and, accordingly, the funded status of the pension plan. The assumed discount rate represents the market rate available for investments in high-quality fixed income instruments with maturities matched to the expected benefit payments for pension and medical and life insurance benefit plans.
The expected long-term rate of return on assets represents the rate of earnings expected in the funds invested, and funds to be invested, to provide for anticipated benefit payments to plan participants. We evaluated the historical investment performance, current and expected asset allocation, and, with input from our external advisors, developed best estimates of future investment performance.
Market conditions and interest rates significantly affect assets and liabilities of our pension plans. Pension accounting permits market gains and losses to be deferred and recognized over a period of years. This "smoothing" results in the creation of other accumulated income or loss which will be amortized to pension costs in future years. The accounting method we utilize recognizes one-fifth of the unamortized gains and losses in the market-related value of pension assets and all other gains and losses including changes in the discount rate used to calculate the benefit obligation each year. Investment gains or losses for this purpose are the difference between the expected return and the actual return on the market-related value of assets which smoothes asset values over three years. Although the smoothing period mitigates some volatility in the calculation of annual pension costs, future pension costs are impacted by changes in the market value of assets and changes in interest rates.
The following table summarizes the effects of a one-percentage-point change in key assumptions on the projected benefit obligations as of December 31, 2021, and on retirement benefits expense for 2021:
Environmental Reserves and Estimated Recoveries
We accrue for costs associated with the remediation of environmental contamination when it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred, and when our costs can be reasonably estimated. In most cases, only a range of reasonably probable
costs can be estimated. In establishing the reserves, the most probable estimated amount is used when determinable, and the minimum amount is used when no single amount in the range is more probable. Environmental reserves include the costs of completing remedial investigation and feasibility studies, remedial and corrective actions, regulatory oversight costs, the cost of operation and maintenance of the remedial action plan, and employee compensation costs for employees who are expected to devote a significant amount of time to remediation efforts. Calculation of environmental reserves is based on the evaluation of currently available information with respect to each individual environmental site and considers factors such as existing technology, presently enacted laws and regulations, and prior experience in remediation of contaminated sites. Such estimates are based on the expected costs of investigation and remediation and the likelihood that other potentially responsible parties will be able to fulfill their commitments at sites where we may be jointly or severally liable.
The following table summarizes our environmental reserve activity in 2021 (in millions):
The $35.3 million of environmental reserve additions in 2021 was primarily due to the following items: (i) $13.7 million of additional operations and maintenance for treatment facilities; (ii) $13.2 million of remediation related to operable treatment units; and (iii) $8.4 million related to other environmental clean-up matters.
At the time a liability is recorded for future environmental costs, we record an asset for estimated future recoveries that are estimable and probable. Some of our environmental costs are eligible for future recovery in the pricing of our products and services to the U.S. government and under existing third party agreements. We consider the recovery probable based on the Global Settlement, U.S. government contracting regulations, and our long history of receiving reimbursement for such costs.
The following table summarizes the activity in the current and non-current recoverable amounts from the U.S. government and Northrop in 2021 (in millions):
The activity for recoveries is commensurate with the activity associated with the environmental reserve activity.
The expenses associated with adjustments to the environmental reserves are recorded as a component of other expense, net in the consolidated statements of operations. Expenses associated with adjustments to the environmental reserves incurred throughout 2021 totaled $4.1 million.
Income Taxes
We file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return for the Company and our 100% owned consolidated subsidiaries. The deferred tax assets and/or liabilities are determined by multiplying the differences between the financial reporting and tax reporting bases for assets and liabilities by the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when such differences are recovered or settled. The effect on deferred taxes of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period of the enactment date of the change.
The carrying value of our deferred tax assets is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient taxable income in the future. A valuation allowance is required when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. A review of all available positive and negative evidence is considered, including our past and future performance, the market environment in which we operate, the utilization of tax attributes in the past, the length of carryback and carryforward periods, and evaluation of potential tax planning strategies.
We believe that certain positions may be challenged by taxing authorities. Settlement of any challenge can result in no change, a complete disallowance, or a partial adjustment reached through negotiations or litigation. Our tax reserves reflect the difference between the tax benefit claimed on tax returns and the amount recognized in the financial statements. The accounting standards provide guidance for the recognition and measurement in financial statements of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The evaluation of a tax position is a two-step process, the first step being recognition. We determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon tax examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation, based on only the technical merits of the position. The technical merits of a tax position are derived from both statutory and judicial authority (legislation and statutes, legislative intent, regulations, rulings, and case law) and their applicability to the facts and circumstances of the tax position. If a tax position does not meet the more likely than not recognition threshold, the benefit of that position is not recognized in the financial statements. The second step is measurement. A tax position that meets the more likely than not recognition threshold is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate resolution with a taxing authority. As the examination process progresses with tax authorities, adjustments to tax reserves may be necessary to reflect taxes payable upon settlement. Tax reserve adjustments related to positions
impacting the effective tax rate affect the provision for income taxes. Tax reserve adjustments related to positions impacting the timing of deductions impact deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 in the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report for information relating to our discussion of the effects of recent accounting pronouncements.