Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto that appear elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. See “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of certain risks associated with our business. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements do not include the potential impact of any mergers, acquisitions, divestitures or other events that may be announced after the date hereof.
Overview
We provide solutions to power and protect digital experiences. The key factors that influence our financial success are our ability to build on recurring revenue commitments for our security and performance offerings, increase media traffic on our network, effectively manage the prices we charge for our solutions, develop new products and carefully manage our capital spending and other expenses. The purpose of this discussion and analysis section is to provide material information relevant to an assessment of our financial condition and results of operations from management’s perspective, including to describe and explain key trends, events and other factors that impacted our reported results and that are reasonably likely to impact our future performance.
Revenue
For most of our solutions, our customers commit to contracts having terms of a year or longer, which allows us to have a consistent and predictable base level of revenue. In addition to a base level of revenue, we are also dependent on media customers where usage of our solutions is more variable. As a result, our revenue is impacted by the amount of media and software download traffic we serve on our network, the rate of adoption of gaming, social media and video platform offerings, the timing and variability of customer-specific one-time events and geopolitical, economic and other developments that impact our customers' businesses. Seasonal variations that impact traffic on our network, such as holiday-related activities, can cause revenue fluctuations from quarter to quarter. Over the longer term, our ability to expand our product portfolio and to effectively manage the prices we charge for our solutions are key factors impacting our revenue growth.
We have observed the following trends related to our revenue in recent years:
•Increased sales of our security solutions have made a significant contribution to revenue growth. We plan to continue to invest in this area with a focus on further enhancing our product portfolio and extending our go-to-market capabilities, particularly in certain markets and through our channel partners.
•We have experienced increases in the amount of traffic delivered for customers that use our solutions for video, gaming downloads and social media. During 2020, we saw a dramatic increase in traffic growth on our network related to the shutdowns and restrictions from the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, pandemic. Primarily as a result of the rollback of many pandemic-related restrictions, we have seen the rate of traffic growth moderate during 2021. We do not expect the events of 2020, and its impact to our revenue growth rates, to repeat in the foreseeable future.
•The prices paid by some of our customers have declined due to competition and contract renewals. During 2021 as compared to 2020, we experienced a decline in revenue from website and application delivery solutions due to the above factors, particularly in the U.S. commerce vertical. While we have increased committed recurring revenue from our solutions by upselling incremental solutions to our existing customers and adding new customers to offset the negative trends, we expect revenue challenges from our website and application performance solutions to continue in 2022.
•Revenue from our international operations has been growing at a faster pace than from our U.S. operations, particularly in terms of traffic, new customer acquisition and cross-selling of incremental solutions. Because we publicly report in U.S. dollars, if the dollar strengthens, our reported revenue results will be negatively impacted. Conversely, a weaker dollar would benefit our reported results.
•We have experienced variations in certain types of revenue from quarter to quarter. In particular, we typically experience higher revenue in the fourth quarter of each year for some of our solutions as a result of holiday season activity. In addition, we experience quarterly variations in revenue attributable to, among other things, the nature and timing of software and gaming releases by our customers; whether there are large live sporting or other events or situations that impact the amount of media traffic on our network; and the frequency and timing of purchases of custom solutions or licensed software.
Expenses
Our level of profitability is also impacted by our expenses, including direct costs to support our revenue such as bandwidth and co-location costs. We have observed the following trends related to our profitability in recent years:
•Our profitability improved in 2021 and 2020 as compared to prior periods due to higher overall revenue as well as the effects of cost savings and efficiency initiatives we have undertaken. We have also benefited from lower travel expenses because of pandemic-related shutdowns and restrictions. We will need to continue to undertake efforts intended to improve the efficiency of operations to manage our expense growth and profitability.
•Network bandwidth costs represent a significant portion of our cost of revenue. Historically, we have been able to mitigate increases in these costs by reducing our network bandwidth costs per unit and investing in internal-use software development to improve the performance and efficiency of our network. Our total bandwidth costs may increase in the future as a result of expected higher traffic levels and serving more traffic from higher cost regions. We will need to continue to effectively manage our bandwidth costs to maintain current levels of profitability.
•Co-location costs are also a significant portion of our cost of revenue. By improving our internal-use software and managing our hardware deployments to enable us to use servers more efficiently, we have been able to manage the growth of co-location costs. We expect to continue to scale our network in the future and will need to continue to effectively manage our co-location costs to maintain current levels of profitability.
•Network build-out and supporting service costs represent another significant portion of our cost of revenue. These costs include maintenance and supporting services incurred as we continue to build-out our global network. We have seen these costs increase in 2021 and 2020, as a result of our network expansion and pricing pressure from vendors. As we continue to invest in our network, we will need to effectively manage our network build-out and supporting costs.
•Our employees are core to the operations of our business, and payroll and related costs, including stock-based compensation, is one of our largest expenses. It is important to the success of operations that we offer competitive compensation packages. However, we need to ensure we continue to focus on the right investments and maintain operational efficiencies to mitigate the cost of talent. We plan to continue to hire employees in support of our strategic initiatives, including through our anticipated acquisition, but do not expect overall headcount to increase significantly in 2022.
•Depreciation expense related to our network equipment also contributes to our overall expense levels. During 2021, as compared to 2020, we saw higher depreciation expense due to accelerated deployment of equipment in 2020 to help meet the increased traffic demands arising during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We plan to continue to invest in our network in 2022 which will further increase our capital expenditures and resulting depreciation expense.
Acquisitions
In February 2022, we announced our intention to acquire Linode Limited Liability Company, or Linode, for approximately $900.0 million, net of cash acquired and subject to post-closing adjustments. Linode is an infrastructure-as-a-service platform provider that allows for developer-friendly cloud computing capabilities. The acquisition is intended to enhance our edge computing services by creating a unique cloud platform to build, run and secure applications from the cloud to the edge. The acquisition is expected to close in March 2022. Linode has approximately 250 employees, and the acquisition is expected to be accretive to our earnings per share in 2022.
In October 2021, we acquired Guardicore Ltd., or Guardicore, for $610.4 million in cash. Guardicore's micro-segmentation solution is designed to limit user access to only those applications that are authorized to communicate with each other, thereby limiting the spread of malware and protecting the flow of enterprise data across the network. Guardicore has approximately 270 employees, and the acquisition is expected to be dilutive to our earnings per share at least through 2022.
Reorganization
We are currently organized and operate in one reportable and operating segment: providing cloud services for delivering, optimizing and securing content and business applications over the internet. Effective on March 1, 2021, we reorganized into two groups, both of which utilize the Akamai Intelligent Edge Platform and our global sales organization: the Security Technology Group and the Edge Technology Group. These groups are aligned with our product offerings. Revenue from the Security Technology Group was previously reported as revenue from Cloud Security Solutions, and revenue from the Edge Technology Group was previously reported as revenue from content delivery network services and all other solutions. The Security Technology Group includes solutions that are designed to keep infrastructure, websites, applications and users safe, while the Edge Technology Group includes solutions that enable business online, including media delivery, web performance and edge computing solutions.
Remote Work
We have a rigorous process for assessing whether any office can reopen (and remain open) based on local government regulations, local health trends and business needs. For most locations, our facilities are expected to be closed to employees whose job responsibilities do not require in-office work. We have begun to selectively and safely reopen offices in a limited capacity for employees who would prefer to work from one of our offices. Safety protocols include, but are not limited to, mandatory training, personal protective equipment, reduced capacity, social distancing, an increased cleaning schedule and, in certain jurisdictions, vaccination requirements and/or testing protocols. We have a rigorous process for assessing whether any office can reopen (and remain open) based on local government regulations, local health trends and business needs. Except for employees whose job responsibilities require in-office work, none of our employees are required to fully return to the office, even those that are currently open. In addition, we plan to roll out our FlexBase program in May 2022, which will allow the more than 90% of our workforce designated as flexible to choose whether they want to work from an Akamai office or their home office, even after we decide it is safe to open all of our offices in light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our operations have not been significantly disrupted by the shift to remote working. While we have incurred and expect to continue to incur expenses associated with enabling remote work, reconfiguring work spaces to help ensure the safety and well-being of employees accessing our locations and re-thinking our facility footprint and the way we utilize office space, we do not currently believe those costs will materially impact our financial condition or results of operations.
Results of Operations
The following sets forth, as a percentage of revenue, consolidated statements of income data for the years indicated:
Revenue
Revenue during the periods presented is as follows (in thousands):
The increase in our revenue in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily the result of continued strong growth in sales of solutions offered by our Security Technology Group. The increase in our revenue in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily the result of higher media traffic volumes due in part to behavioral changes prompted by the COVID-19 pandemic and continued strong growth in sales of our Security Technology Group solutions.
The increases in Security Technology Group revenue for 2021 as compared to 2020, and 2020 as compared to 2019, were due to growth across our security products portfolio, including Bot Manager, Kona Site Defender, Prolexic and our access control product suite.
The decrease in Edge Technology Group revenue for 2021 as compared to 2020 was due to reduction in sales of application performance solutions, partially offset by growth in edge application solutions. The increase in Edge Technology Group revenue for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to strong traffic growth, driven by video and gaming, over-the-top, or OTT, as well as strong growth in our edge applications solutions stemming from behavior changes from the COVID-19 pandemic. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in sales of website and application performance solutions.
Revenue derived in the U.S. and internationally during the periods presented is as follows (in thousands):
The U.S. revenue growth rates for 2021 and 2020 were positively impacted by the increase in traffic on our network in 2021 and 2020, including from our U.S.-based large internet platform customers.
Internationally, during 2021 and 2020, we continued to see strong revenue growth from our operations in the Asia-Pacific region. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates positively impacted our revenue by $28.8 million in 2021 as compared to 2020, and negatively impacted our revenue by $1.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, approximately 47% of our revenue was derived from our operations located outside of the U.S., compared to 44% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 41% for the year ended December 31, 2019. No single country outside of the U.S. accounted for 10% or more of revenue during any of these periods.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consisted of the following for the periods presented (in thousands):
The increases in cost of revenue for 2021 as compared to 2020, and 2020 as compared to 2019, was primarily due to increased investment in our network, mostly incurred in 2020, to support current and anticipated future traffic growth, which resulted in increases to amounts paid for network build-out and supporting services, higher depreciation costs of our network equipment and increases to expenses related to our co-location facilities. Bandwidth fees also increased during these periods due to growth in the amount of traffic served on our network.
During 2022, we anticipate cost of revenues to increase compared to 2021, in particular amortization of internal-use software, depreciation of network equipment and payroll and related costs, due to continued investments in our network, as well as our recent and expected acquisitions. We plan to continue to focus our efforts on managing our operating margins, including continuing to manage our bandwidth, co-location and network build-out costs.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consisted of the following for the periods presented (in thousands):
The increases in research and development expenses for 2021 as compared to 2020 were due to increased payroll and related costs, including stock-based compensation, primarily due to headcount growth, the redeployment of some employees to research and development functions from sales and marketing activities as part of our March 2021 reorganization and as a result of employees joining us through acquisitions.
The increases in research and development expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019 were due to growth in payroll and related costs as a result of merit increases and headcount growth to support investments in new product development and network scaling. These increases were partially offset by increases in capitalized salaries and related costs due to continued investment in internal-use software deployed on our network.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred, other than certain internal-use software development costs eligible for capitalization. Capitalized development costs consist of payroll and related costs for personnel and external consulting expenses involved in the development of internal-use software used to deliver our services and operate our network. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we capitalized $32.2 million, $35.7 million and $33.7 million, respectively, of stock-based compensation. These capitalized internal-use software development costs are amortized to cost of revenue over their estimated useful lives, which is generally two years, but can be up to seven years based on the software developed and its expected useful life.
We expect research and development costs to increase in 2022 to support our innovation initiatives and incremental headcount due to hiring for our strategic investments and our employees acquired through our recent and anticipated acquisitions.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consisted of the following for the periods presented (in thousands):
The decreases in sales and marketing expenses for 2021 as compared to 2020 were due to decreased payroll and related costs, including stock-based compensation, primarily as a result of headcount reductions due to the establishment of a unified global sales organization and elimination of duplicative roles as a result of our March 2021 reorganization. In connection with this, some employees who previously supported the sales organization were redeployed in March 2021 to our research and development function to focus our investments to improve security, performance, scalability and innovation across our solutions.
The decreases in sales and marketing expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019 were a result of the restrictions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic that resulted in the cancellation or postponement of in-person marketing events and led to a decline in travel expenses such as airfare, lodging and other costs related to in-person customer events and meetings.
We expect sales and marketing costs to increase in 2022 as compared to 2021, due our recent and anticipated acquisitions. However, we plan to continue to carefully manage costs in an effort to manage our operating margins and to refine and optimize our go-to-market efforts.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consisted of the following for the periods presented (in thousands):
The increase in general and administrative expenses for 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to increased payroll and related costs, including stock-based compensation, as a result of annual merit increases and headcount growth, partially offset by a decrease in an endowment contribution to the Akamai Foundation in 2020 that did not recur in 2021.
The increase in general and administrative expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to:
•an endowment contribution to the Akamai Foundation in 2020, which did not occur in 2019, to support the Foundation's increased charitable initiatives;
•expansion of company infrastructure throughout 2019, including moving into our new corporate headquarters in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which increased facilities-related costs and depreciation and amortization in 2020; and
•a reduction to license patent fees as a result of our litigation with Limelight Networks, Inc., or Limelight, that did not recur in 2020.
The increases in general and administrative expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019 were also partially offset by a decrease in amounts paid to professional service providers for advisory services as well as a legal settlement charge in 2019 that did not recur in 2020.
General and administrative expenses for 2021, 2020 and 2019 are broken out by category as follows (in thousands):
Global functions expense includes payroll, stock-based compensation and other employee-related costs for administrative functions, including finance, purchasing, order entry, human resources, legal, information technology and executive personnel, as well as third-party professional service fees. Infrastructure expense includes payroll, stock-based compensation and other employee-related costs for our network infrastructure functions, as well as facility rent expense, depreciation and amortization
of facility and IT-related assets, software and software-related costs, business insurance and taxes. Our network infrastructure function is responsible for network planning, sourcing, architecture evaluation and platform security. Other expense includes acquisition-related costs, provision for doubtful accounts, legal settlements, the endowment contribution to the Akamai Foundation, transformation costs and the licensing of a patent.
During 2022, we expect payroll and related costs of our general and administrative functions to increase as compared to 2021 as a result of headcount growth to support the operations of the business, but we plan to continue to carefully manage costs in an effort to manage our operating margins.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets
The increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets for 2021 as compared to 2020, as well as 2020 as compared to 2019, was the result of amortization of assets related to our recent acquisitions.
Based on acquired intangible assets as of December 31, 2021, future amortization is expected to be $48.1 million, $43.5 million, $38.9 million, $35.8 million and $31.0 million for the years ending December 31, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026, respectively. We anticipate that these amortization amounts will increase in future periods as a result of our anticipated acquisition of Linode, which is expected to close in late March 2022.
Restructuring Charge
The restructuring charge in 2021 was primarily the result of management's actions initiated in the fourth quarter of 2020 to better position us to become more agile in delivering our solutions. The restructuring charge for this action includes severance and related expenses for certain headcount reductions and software charges for software not yet placed into service that will not be implemented due to this action. In addition to the 2020 action, additional charges were incurred in 2021, related to management’s plans to launch its new FlexBase program in May 2022. The restructuring charge incurred for this program in 2021 includes impairments of lease-related assets for certain facilities that are no longer needed. These restructuring charges were partially offset by the release of a lease obligation for a facility previously exited as part of management actions initiated in late 2019.
The restructuring charge in 2020 was primarily the result of the management actions initiated in the fourth quarter of 2020, and the associated severance and related expenses and software charges that resulted from the action. In addition, an $8.7 million impairment of lease-related assets was incurred during 2020 to exit leased facilities related to a 2019 action, which allowed us to focus on investment with the potential to accelerate new revenue growth.
The restructuring charge in 2019 was primarily the result of the management actions initiated in 2019, and associated severance and related expenses due to headcount reductions and software charges for software not yet placed into service that was not implemented due to this action.
We do not expect material additional restructuring charges related to our prior actions. We are continuing to evaluate our facility footprint in light of our FlexBase program, including our plans and ability to sublease space, but we do not currently believe such charges will materially impact our financial condition or results of operation.
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on invested cash balances and marketable securities. The decrease to interest income for 2021 as compared to 2020, and 2020 as compared to 2019, was primarily the result of investing in marketable securities having lower rates of return due to lower interest rates. We expect interest income to decrease in 2022 as a result of an anticipated lower cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance due to our planned acquisition of Linode in March 2022.
Interest expense is related to our debt transactions, which are described in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. The increase to interest expense for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to the August 2019 issuance of $1,150.0 million in par value of convertible senior notes due 2027, or 2027 Notes, which bear regular interest of 0.375%, but have an effective interest rate of 3.1% due to the conversion feature. As a result of our adoption of new guidance for accounting for convertible senior notes on January 1, 2022 (see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K), we expect interest expense to decrease in 2022 as a result of the elimination of the amortization of debt discounts.
Other income (expense), net primarily represents net foreign exchange gains and losses mainly due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations on intercompany and other non-functional currency transactions. Other income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 also includes gains from the sale of equity investments of $3.7 million and $7.2 million, respectively. Other income (expense), net may fluctuate in the future based on changes in foreign currency exchange rates or other events.
Provision for Income Taxes
The increase in the provision for income taxes for 2021 as compared to 2020 was mainly due to an increase in profitability and a decrease in the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation. These amounts were partially offset by an increase in foreign income taxed at lower rates, a decrease in state taxes, a decrease in the revaluation of certain foreign income tax liabilities due to foreign exchange rate fluctuations and the release of certain tax reserves related to the expiration of local statutes of limitations.
The decrease in the provision for income taxes for 2020 as compared to 2019 was mainly due to a decrease in intercompany sales of intellectual property, a decrease in the valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets related to state tax credits and an increase in foreign income taxed at lower rates. These amounts were partially offset by an increase in profitability and the release of certain tax reserves related to the expiration of local statues of limitations.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our effective income tax rate was lower than the federal statutory tax rate due to foreign income taxed at lower rates, the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation and the benefit of U.S. federal, state and foreign research and development credits. These amounts were partially offset by non-deductible stock-based compensation and state taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our effective income tax rate was lower than the federal statutory tax rate due to foreign income taxed at lower rates, the impact of the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation and the benefit of U.S. federal, state and foreign research and development credits. These amounts were partially offset by non-deductible stock-based compensation, state taxes and the valuation allowance recorded against tax credits and foreign net operating loss carryforwards.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our effective income tax rate was lower than the federal statutory tax rate due to the release of certain tax reserves related to the expiration of local statutes of limitations, foreign income taxed at lower rates, the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation and the benefit of the U.S. federal, state and foreign research and development credits. These amounts were partially offset by the valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets related to state tax credits, non-deductible executive compensation, an intercompany sale of intellectual property and state income taxes.
Our effective income tax rate may fluctuate between fiscal years and from quarter to quarter due to items arising from discrete events, such as tax benefits from the disposition of employee equity awards, tax law changes and settlements of tax audits and assessments. Our effective income tax rate is also impacted by, and may fluctuate in any given period because of, the composition of income in foreign jurisdictions where tax rates differ depending on the local statutory rates.
Refer to Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would impact the effective income tax rate in the next 12 months and the potential impact that current litigation related to an adverse audit finding could have on our results of operations.
Loss from Equity Method Investment
During 2019, we began recognizing our share of earnings from our investment with Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, or MUFG, in a joint venture, Global Open Network, Inc., or GO-NET. GO-NET intended to operate a blockchain-based online payment network. In February 2022, MUFG, the majority owner of GO-NET, announced it was preparing to suspend the operations of GO-NET. We recorded a loss of $13.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which included an $11.0 million impairment to reduce the Company's investment to its fair value due to a modified business plan and continued negative projected cash flows. We recorded a loss of $14.0 million and $1.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019, respectively, which reflects our share of the losses incurred by GO-NET during those years. We expect to record additional losses in 2022 as GO-NET winds down its operations. However, we do not expect those losses to be more than our remaining investment on December 31, 2021 of $7.5 million.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to providing financial measurements based on generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or GAAP, we provide additional financial metrics that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, or non-GAAP financial measures. Management uses non-GAAP financial measures, in addition to GAAP financial measures, to understand and compare operating results across accounting periods, for financial and operational decision making, for planning and forecasting purposes, to measure executive compensation and to evaluate our financial performance. These non-GAAP financial measures are non-GAAP income from operations, non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP net income, non-GAAP net income per share, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, capital expenditures and impact of foreign currency exchange rates, as discussed below.
Management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures reflect our ongoing business in a manner that allows for meaningful comparisons and analysis of trends in the business, as they facilitate comparing financial results across accounting periods and to those of peer companies. Management also believes that these non-GAAP financial measures enable investors to evaluate our operating results and future prospects in the same manner as management. These non-GAAP financial measures may exclude expenses and gains that may be unusual in nature, infrequent or not reflective of our ongoing operating results.
The non-GAAP financial measures do not replace the presentation of our GAAP financial measures and should only be used as a supplement to, not as a substitute for, our financial results presented in accordance with GAAP.
The non-GAAP adjustments, and our basis for excluding them from non-GAAP financial measures, are outlined below:
•Amortization of acquired intangible assets - We have incurred amortization of intangible assets, included in our GAAP financial statements, related to various acquisitions we have made. The amount of an acquisition's purchase price allocated to intangible assets and term of its related amortization can vary significantly and are unique to each acquisition; therefore, we exclude amortization of acquired intangible assets from our non-GAAP financial measures to provide investors with a consistent basis for comparing pre- and post-acquisition operating results.
•Stock-based compensation and amortization of capitalized stock-based compensation - Although stock-based compensation is an important aspect of the compensation paid to our employees, the grant date fair value varies based on the stock price at the time of grant, varying valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions and the variety of award types. This makes the comparison of our current financial results to previous and future periods difficult to interpret; therefore, we believe it is useful to exclude stock-based compensation and amortization of capitalized stock-based compensation from our non-GAAP financial measures in order to highlight the performance of our core business and to be consistent with the way many investors evaluate our performance and compare our operating results to peer companies.
•Acquisition-related costs - Acquisition-related costs include transaction fees, advisory fees, due diligence costs and other direct costs associated with strategic activities. In addition, subsequent adjustments to our initial estimated amounts of contingent consideration and indemnification associated with specific acquisitions are included within acquisition-related costs. These amounts are impacted by the timing and size of the acquisitions. We exclude acquisition-related costs from our non-GAAP financial measures to provide a useful comparison of our operating results to prior periods and to our peer companies because such amounts vary significantly based on the magnitude of our acquisition transactions and do not reflect our core operations.
•Restructuring charges - We have incurred restructuring charges from programs that have significantly changed either the scope of the business undertaken by us or the manner in which that business is conducted. These charges include severance and related expenses for workforce reductions, impairments of long-lived assets that will no longer be used in operations (including right-of-use assets, other facility-related property and equipment and internal-use software) and termination fees for any contracts cancelled as part of these programs. We exclude these items from our non-GAAP financial measures when evaluating our continuing business performance as such items vary significantly based on the magnitude of the restructuring action and do not reflect expected future operating expenses. In addition, these charges do not necessarily provide meaningful insight into the fundamentals of current or past operations of our business.
•Amortization of debt discount and issuance costs and amortization of capitalized interest expense - In August 2019, we issued $1,150 million of convertible senior notes due 2027 with a coupon interest rate of 0.375%. In May 2018, we issued $1,150 million of convertible senior notes due 2025 with a coupon interest rate of 0.125%. In February 2014, we issued $690 million of convertible senior notes due 2019 with a coupon interest rate of 0%. The imputed interest rates of these convertible senior notes were 3.10%, 4.26% and 3.20%, respectively. This is a result of the debt discounts recorded for the conversion features that are required to be separately accounted for as equity under GAAP, thereby reducing the carrying values of the convertible debt instruments. The debt discounts are amortized as interest expense together with the issuance costs of the debt. The interest expense excluded from our non-GAAP results is comprised of these non-cash components and is excluded from management's assessment of our operating performance because management believes the non-cash expense is not representative of ongoing operating performance.
•Gains and losses on investments - We have recorded gains and losses from the disposition, changes to fair value and impairment of certain investments. We believe excluding these amounts from our non-GAAP financial measures is useful to investors as the types of events giving rise to these gains and losses are not representative of our core business operations and ongoing operating performance.
•Legal settlements - We have incurred losses related to the settlement of legal matters. We believe excluding these amounts from our non-GAAP financial measures is useful to investors as the types of events giving rise to them are not representative of our core business operations.
•Endowment of Akamai Foundation - We have incurred expenses to endow the Akamai Foundation, a private corporate foundation dedicated to encouraging the next generation of technology innovators by supporting math and science education. Our first endowment was in 2018 to enable a permanent endowment for the Akamai Foundation to allow it to expand its reach. In the fourth quarter of 2020 we supplemented the endowment to enable specific initiatives to increase diversity in the technology industry. We believe excluding these amounts from non-GAAP financial measures is useful to investors as these infrequent and nearly one-time expenses are not representative of our core business operations.
•Transformation costs - We have incurred professional services fees associated with internal changes that are designed to improve operating margins and that are part of a discrete planned transformation program intended to significantly change the manner in which business is conducted. We believe excluding these amounts from our non-GAAP financial measures is useful to investors as the types of events and activities giving rise to them occur infrequently and are not representative of our core business operations and ongoing operating performance.
•Income and losses from equity method investment - We record income or losses on our share of earnings and losses from our equity method investment. We exclude such income and losses because we do not direct control over the operations of the investment and the related income and losses are not representative of our core business operations.
•Income tax effect of non-GAAP adjustments and certain discrete tax items - The non-GAAP adjustments described above are reported on a pre-tax basis. The income tax effect of non-GAAP adjustments is the difference between GAAP and non-GAAP income tax expense. Non-GAAP income tax expense is computed on non-GAAP pre-tax income (GAAP pre-tax income adjusted for non-GAAP adjustments) and excludes certain discrete tax items (such as recording or releasing of valuation allowances), if any. We believe that applying the non-GAAP adjustments and their related income tax effect allows us to highlight income attributable to our core operations.
The following table reconciles GAAP income from operations to non-GAAP income from operations and non-GAAP operating margin for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The following table reconciles GAAP net income to non-GAAP net income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The following table reconciles GAAP net income per diluted share to non-GAAP net income per diluted share for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except per share data):
(1) Shares used in non-GAAP per diluted share calculations have been adjusted for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, for the benefit of our note hedge transactions. During 2021 and 2020, our average stock price was in excess of $95.10, which is the initial conversion price of our convertible senior notes due in 2025. See further discussion below.
(2) May not foot due to rounding.
Non-GAAP net income per diluted share is calculated as non-GAAP net income divided by diluted weighted average common shares outstanding. GAAP diluted weighted average common shares outstanding are adjusted in non-GAAP per share calculations for the shares that would be delivered to us pursuant to the note hedge transactions entered into in connection with the issuance of our convertible senior notes. Under GAAP, shares delivered under hedge transactions are not considered offsetting shares in the fully-diluted share calculation until they are delivered. However, we would receive a benefit from the note hedge transactions and would not allow the dilution to occur, so management believes that adjusting for this benefit provides a meaningful view of net income per share. Unless our weighted average stock price is greater than $95.10, the initial conversion price of the convertible senior notes due 2025, or $116.18, the initial conversion price of the convertible senior notes due 2027, there will be no difference between our GAAP and non-GAAP diluted weighted average common shares outstanding.
We consider Adjusted EBITDA to be another important indicator of the operational strength and performance of our business and a good measure of our historical operating trends. Adjusted EBITDA eliminates items that we do not consider to be part of our core operations. We define Adjusted EBITDA as GAAP net income excluding the following items: interest income; income taxes; depreciation and amortization of tangible and intangible assets; stock-based compensation; amortization of capitalized stock-based compensation; acquisition-related costs; restructuring charges; gains and losses on legal settlements; costs incurred related to endowment contributions to the Akamai Foundation; transformation costs; foreign exchange gains and losses; interest expense; amortization of capitalized interest expense; certain gains and losses on investments; gains and losses from equity method investments; and other non-recurring or unusual items that may arise from time to time. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA stated as a percentage of revenue.
The following table reconciles GAAP net income to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Impact of Foreign Currency Exchange Rates
Revenue and earnings from our international operations have historically been an important contributor to our financial results. Consequently, our financial results have been impacted, and management expects they will continue to be impacted, by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. For example, when the local currencies of our foreign subsidiaries weaken, generally our consolidated results stated in U.S. dollars are negatively impacted.
Because exchange rates are a meaningful factor in understanding period-to-period comparisons, management believes the presentation of the impact of foreign currency exchange rates on revenue and earnings enhances the understanding of our financial results and evaluation of performance in comparison to prior periods. The dollar impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates presented is calculated by translating current period results using monthly average foreign currency exchange rates from the comparative period and comparing them to the reported amount. The percentage change at constant currency presented is calculated by comparing the prior period amounts as reported and the current period amounts translated using the same monthly average foreign currency exchange rates from the comparative period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through public and private sales of debt and equity securities and cash generated by operations. As of December 31, 2021, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, which primarily consisted of corporate bonds and U.S. government agency obligations, totaled $2.2 billion. Factoring in our outstanding convertible senior notes of $2.3 billion, our net cash at December 31, 2021 was in a negative position of $133.8 million. We place our cash investments in instruments that meet high-quality credit standards, as specified in our investment policy. Our investment policy also limits the amount of our credit exposure to any one issue or issuer and seeks to manage these assets to achieve our goals of preserving principal and maintaining adequate liquidity at all times.
Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are dependent upon changes in, among other things, working capital items such as accounts receivable, deferred revenue, accounts payable and various accrued expenses, as well as changes
in our capital and financial structure due to common stock repurchases, debt repayments and issuances, acquisitions, purchases and sales of marketable securities and similar events. We believe that our strong balance sheet and cash position are important competitive differentiators that provide the financial stability and flexibility to enable us to continue to make investments at opportune times.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $346.4 million held in accounts outside the U.S. The U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act establishes a territorial tax system in the U.S., which provides companies with the potential ability to repatriate earnings with minimal U.S. federal income tax impact. As a result, our liquidity is not expected to be materially impacted by the amount of cash and cash equivalents held in accounts outside the U.S.
The following table summarizes current and long-term material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021, which we expect to fund primarily with operating cash flows (in thousands):
(1) Excludes $67.2 million of obligations for operating leases that have not yet commenced. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for additional information.
In accordance with the authoritative guidance for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, as of December 31, 2021, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $23.1 million, including $7.2 million of accrued interest and penalties. We believe that it is reasonably possible that $4.8 million of our unrecognized tax benefits will be recognized by the end of 2022. The settlement period for the remaining amount of the unrecognized tax benefits is unknown.
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
The increase in cash provided by operating activities for 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to increased profitability in 2021 and timing of payments from customers.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to increased profitability in 2020 and timing of vendor payments. The increase was partially offset by the timing of payments from customers.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
The decrease in cash used in investing activities in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily driven by a decrease in purchases of marketable securities, as we did not reinvest our matured securities in order to fund our acquisition of Guardicore in October 2021. The decrease was also attributable to a reduction of purchases of property and equipment as we slowed expansion of our network, as compared to 2020. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in cash paid for acquired businesses in 2021, due to the size of the acquisition completed in 2021, as compared to 2020.
The decrease in cash used in investing activities in 2020 as compared to 2019 was driven by a decrease in purchases of marketable securities. During 2019 we invested some of the proceeds from our August 2019 issuance of convertible senior notes in marketable securities, which increased our purchases in that year and did not recur in 2020. The decrease in cash used in investing activities in 2020 as compared to 2019 was partially offset by an increase in purchases of property and equipment during 2020 to support the increase in traffic we experienced on our network and expect to continue to experience in the future.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
The increase in cash used in financing activities in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily the result of increased share repurchases. Effective November 1, 2018, our board of directors authorized a $1.1 billion share repurchase program through December 31, 2021. In October 2021, our board of directors authorized a new $1.8 billion share repurchase program, effective January 1, 2022 through December 31, 2024. Our goals for the share repurchase programs are to offset the dilution created by our employee equity compensation programs over time and provide the flexibility to return capital to shareholders as business and market conditions warrant, while still preserving our ability to pursue other strategic opportunities.
The change in net cash used in financing activities during 2020 as compared to 2019 was due to the net proceeds received from our August 2019 issuance of our convertible senior notes and related bond hedge and warrant transaction. The increase was partially offset by the repayment of our convertible senior notes that were due in February 2019 and a decrease in shares repurchased under our repurchase programs.
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, we repurchased 4.7 million, 2.0 million and 4.0 million shares of our common stock, respectively, at an average price per share of $109.97, $98.53 and $82.90, respectively.
Convertible Senior Notes
In August 2019, we issued $1,150.0 million in par value of convertible senior notes due 2027 and entered into related convertible note hedge and warrant transactions. We have used and expect to continue to use the net proceeds of the offering for
share repurchases, working capital and general corporate purposes, including potential acquisitions and other strategic transactions.
In May 2018, we issued $1,150.0 million in par value of convertible senior notes due 2025 and entered into related convertible note hedge and warrant transactions. We used a portion of the net proceeds to repay at maturity all of our $690.0 million outstanding aggregate principle amount of convertible senior notes due in 2019. In addition, we have used and expect to continue to use the remaining net proceeds of the offering for share repurchases, working capital and general corporate purposes, including potential acquisitions and other strategic transactions.
In February 2014, we issued $690.0 million in par value of convertible senior notes due 2019 and entered into related convertible note hedge and warrant transactions. We repaid the full $690.0 million in principal amount of the notes in cash in February 2019, as the notes matured and no conversions occurred.
The terms of the notes and the hedge and warrant transactions are discussed more fully in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Revolving Credit Facility
In May 2018, we entered into a $500.0 million, five-year revolving credit agreement, or the Credit Agreement. Borrowings under the facility may be used to finance working capital needs and for general corporate purposes. The facility provides for an initial $500.0 million in revolving loans. Under specified circumstances, the facility can be increased to up to $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest, at our option, at a base rate plus a spread of 0.00% to 0.25% or an adjusted LIBOR rate plus a spread of 0.875% to 1.25%, in each case with such spread being determined based on our consolidated leverage ratio specified in the Credit Agreement. Regardless of what amounts, if any, are outstanding under the Credit Agreement, we are also obligated to pay an ongoing commitment fee on undrawn amounts at a rate of 0.075% to 0.15%, with such rate being based on our consolidated leverage ratio specified in the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default. Principal covenants include a maximum consolidated leverage ratio and a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio. There were no outstanding borrowings under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
Liquidity Outlook
Based on our present business plan, we expect our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances and our forecasted cash flows from operations to be sufficient to meet our foreseeable cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Our foreseeable cash needs, in addition to our recurring operating costs, include our expected capital expenditures, investments in information technology, our anticipated acquisition of Linode, other potential strategic acquisitions, anticipated share repurchases, lease and purchase commitments and settlements of other long-term liabilities. In particular, our anticipated acquisition of Linode will require approximately $900.0 million, net of cash acquired and subject to post-close adjustments. We plan to fund the acquisition of Linode with cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities on hand. We also have access to our Credit Agreement, should we require additional resources to fund the acquisition of Linode or other recurring operating costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have entered into indemnification agreements with third parties, including vendors, customers, landlords, our officers and directors, shareholders of acquired companies, joint venture partners and third parties to which we license technology. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by a third party due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement or our negligence. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with the authoritative guidance for guarantor’s accounting and disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of indebtedness of others. See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion of these indemnification agreements. The fair value of guarantees issued or modified during 2021 and 2020 was determined to be immaterial.
Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for information regarding recent and newly adopted accounting pronouncements.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Overview
Our MD&A is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. These principles require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, cash flow and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates include those related to revenue recognition, accounts receivable and related reserves, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, capitalized internal-use software development costs, goodwill and acquired intangible assets, income tax reserves, impairment and useful lives of long-lived assets and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results may differ from these estimates. For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Definitions
We define our critical accounting policies as those policies that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Our estimates are based upon assumptions and judgments about matters that are highly uncertain at the time an accounting estimate is made and applied and require us to assess a range of potential outcomes.
Review of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Revenue Recognition
Our contracts with customers sometimes include promises to transfer multiple services to a customer. Determining whether services are distinct performance obligations often requires the exercise of judgment by management. Advanced features that enhance a main product or service and are highly interrelated are generally not considered distinct; rather, they are combined with the service they relate to into one performance obligation. Different determinations related to combining services into performance obligations could result in differences in the timing and amount of revenue recognized in a period.
Determination of the standalone selling price, or SSP, also requires the exercise of judgment by management. SSP is based on observable inputs such as the price we charge for the service when sold separately, or the discounted list price per management’s approved price list. In cases where services are not sold separately or price list rates are not available, a cost-plus-margin approach or adjusted market approach is used to determine SSP. Changes to SSP could result in differences in the allocation of transaction price among performance obligations, which could result in differences in the timing and amount of revenue recognized in a period.
From time to time, we enter into contracts to sell services or license technology to unrelated enterprises at or about the same time that we enter into contracts to purchase products or services from the same enterprises. Consideration payable to a customer is reviewed as part of the transaction price. If the payment to the customer does not represent payment for a distinct service, revenue is recognized only up to the net amount of consideration after customer payment obligations are considered. Different determinations on whether a payment represents a distinct service could result in differences in the amount of revenue recognized.
We may also resell the licenses or services of third parties. If we are acting as an agent in an arrangement with a customer to provide third party services, the transaction price reflects only the net amount to which we will be entitled, after accounting for payments made to the third party responsible for satisfying the performance obligation. Different determinations on whether we are acting as an agent or a principal could change the amount of revenue recognized.
Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves
Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amounts and do not bear interest. In addition to trade accounts receivable, our accounts receivable balance includes unbilled accounts that represent revenue recorded for customers that is typically billed within one month. We record allowances against our accounts receivable balance, primarily for current expected credit losses. Increases and decreases in the allowance for current expected credit losses are included as a component of general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of income.
Estimates are used in determining our allowance for current expected credit losses using historical loss rates for the previous twelve months as well as expectations about the future where we have been able to develop forecasts to supports our estimates. In addition, the allowance for current expected credit losses considers outstanding balances on a customer-specific, account-by-account basis. We assess collectability based upon a review of customer receivables from prior sales with collection issues where we no longer believe that the customer has the ability to pay for services previously provided. We also perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers. If such an evaluation indicates that payment is no longer reasonably assured for services provided, any future services provided to that customer will result in the creation of a cash basis reserve until we receive consistent payments.
Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities
We measure the fair value of our financial assets and liabilities at the end of each reporting period. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. We have certain financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value (principally cash equivalents and short- and long-term marketable securities) that have been classified as Level 1, 2 or 3 within the fair value hierarchy. Fair values determined by Level 1 inputs utilize quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that we can access at the reporting date. Fair values determined by Level 2 inputs utilize data points other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly. Fair values determined by Level 3 inputs are based on unobservable data points for the asset or liability.
Marketable securities are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value below cost basis is determined to be other-than-temporary. We periodically evaluate whether a decline in fair value below cost basis is other-than-temporary by considering available evidence regarding these investments including, among other factors, the duration of the period that, and extent to which, the fair value is less than cost basis; the financial health of, and business outlook for, the issuer, including industry and sector performance and operational and financing cash flow factors; overall market conditions and trends; and our intent and ability to retain our investment in the security for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in market value. Once a decline in fair value is determined to be other-than-temporary, a write-down is recorded and a new cost basis in the security is established. Assessing the above factors involves inherent uncertainty. Write-downs, if recorded, could be materially different from the actual market performance of marketable securities in our portfolio if, among other things, relevant information related to our investments and marketable securities was not publicly available or other factors not considered by us would have been relevant to the determination of impairment.
Impairment and Useful Lives of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets and acquired intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events that would trigger an impairment review include a change in the use of the asset or forecasted negative cash flows related to the asset. When such events occur, we compare the carrying amount of the asset to the undiscounted expected future cash flows related to the asset. If this comparison indicates that impairment is present, the amount of the impairment is calculated as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset. If a readily determinable market price does not exist, fair value is estimated using discounted expected cash flows attributable to the asset. The estimates required to apply this accounting policy include forecasted usage of the long-lived assets, the useful lives of these assets and expected future cash flows. Changes in these estimates could materially impact results from operations.
Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, as of December 31, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We have concluded that we have one reporting unit and that our chief operating decision maker is our chief executive officer and the executive management team. We have assigned the entire balance of goodwill to our one reporting unit. The fair value of the reporting unit was based on our market capitalization as of each of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and it was substantially in excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit at each date.
Acquired intangible assets consist of completed technologies, customer relationships, trademarks and trade names, non-compete agreements and acquired license rights. We engaged third party valuation specialists to assist us with the initial measurement of the fair value of acquired intangible assets. Acquired intangible assets, other than goodwill, are amortized over their estimated useful lives based upon the estimated economic value derived from the related intangible assets.
Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes is comprised of a current and a deferred portion. The current income tax provision is calculated as the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current year. The deferred income tax provision is calculated for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards by using expected tax rates in effect in the years during which the differences are expected to reverse or the carryforwards are expected to be realized.
We currently have net deferred tax assets, comprised of net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards and deductible temporary differences. Our management periodically weighs the positive and negative evidence to determine if it is more-likely-than-not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. In determining our net deferred tax assets and valuation allowances, annualized effective tax rates and cash paid for income taxes, management is required to make judgments and estimates about domestic and foreign profitability, the timing and extent of the utilization of NOL carryforwards, applicable tax rates, transfer pricing methodologies and tax planning strategies. Judgments and estimates related to our projections and assumptions are inherently uncertain; therefore, actual results could differ materially from our projections.
We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our income tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of our tax reserves contains assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the costs of the ultimate tax liability or benefit from these matters may be more or less than the amount that we estimated.
Uncertainty in income taxes is recognized in our consolidated financial statements using a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained based on technical merit, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that we believe has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation
We issue stock-based compensation awards including stock options, restricted stock units and deferred stock units. We measure the fair value of these awards at the grant date and recognize such fair value as expense over the vesting period. We have selected the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock option awards and the Monte Carlo simulation model to determine the fair value of market-based restricted stock unit awards. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires judgment, including estimating the expected life of the stock awards and the volatility of the underlying common stock. Our assumptions may differ from those used in prior periods. Changes to the assumptions may have a significant impact on the fair value of stock-based awards, which could have a material impact on our financial statements. Judgment is also required in estimating the number of stock-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. Should our actual forfeiture rates differ significantly from our estimates, our stock-based compensation expense and results of operations could be materially impacted. In addition, for awards that vest and become exercisable only upon achievement of specified performance conditions, we make judgments and estimates each quarter about the probability that such performance conditions will be met or achieved. Changes to the estimates we make from time to time may have a significant impact on our stock-based compensation expense and could materially impact our results of operations.
Capitalized Internal-Use Software Costs
We capitalize salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, of employees and consultants who devote time to the development of internal-use software development projects, as well as interest expense related to our senior convertible notes. Capitalization begins during the application development stage, once the preliminary project stage has been completed. If a project constitutes an enhancement to previously-developed software, we assess whether the enhancement creates additional functionality to the software, thus qualifying the work incurred for capitalization. Once the project is available for general release, capitalization ceases and we estimate the useful life of the asset and begin amortization. We periodically assess whether triggering events are present to review internal-use software for impairment. Changes in our estimates related to internal-use software would increase or decrease operating expenses or amortization recorded during the period.