Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Sports Ventures Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Recent Developments
On January 25, 2022, we entered into the Prime Focus Business Combination Agreement with Prime Focus World, PF Overseas, Prime Focus 3D and our sponsor. The Prime Focus Business Combination Agreement provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions thereof, the following transactions will occur as part of the Prime Focus Business Combination: (i) the Company and the stockholders of Prime Focus World will consummate the Prime Focus Company Exchange, pursuant to which the Company will acquire from the Prime Focus World stockholders, and the Prime Focus World stockholders will transfer, convey and deliver to the Company, all of the ordinary and preferred shares of Prime Focus World issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the Prime Focus Company Exchange, and each Prime Focus World stockholder shall receive, in consideration for such transfer, conveyance and delivery of each Prime Focus World share, a number of Class A ordinary shares equal to such Prime Focus World stockholder’s portion of the consideration to which such Prime Focus World stockholder is entitled in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement and (ii) effective as of the time of the Prime Focus Company Exchange, any outstanding options to purchase Prime Focus World shares shall be exchanged for options to purchase Class A ordinary shares of the Company, as further described in the Prime Focus Business Combination Agreement.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. The only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and following the initial public offering activities necessary to identifying a target company for and consummating an initial business combination, including the Prime Focus Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generated and will continue to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account and will recognize unrealized gains or losses from changes in the fair values of our warrant liability. We incurred and will continue to incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $4,935,531 which consisted of an unrealized gain of $7,098,895 from the change in the fair value of our derivative warrant liabilities and interest earned on our investments of $26,577, partially offset by general and administrative expense of $1,531,939 and transaction costs associated with the derivative warrant liabilities of $658,002.
For the period from September 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $7,260, which consisted of incorporation expenses of $7,260.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 8, 2021, we consummated an initial public offering of 23,000,000 units at $10.00 per public unit, at $10.00 per public unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 660,000 placement units, at a price of $10.00 per placement unit. Each placement unit consists of one Class A ordinary share, and one-third redeemable warrant, each whole warrant entitling the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share, generating gross proceeds of $6,600,000.
Following the closing of our initial public offering on January 8, 2021, $230,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net offering proceeds of the sale of the Units in our initial public offering and the sale of the placement units was placed in the trust account and invested in U.S. government securities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the trust account of $230,026,577 consisting of money market funds. Income on the balance in the trust account may be used to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the trust account to pay our taxes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the trust account of $440,475 available for working capital needs. All remaining cash held in the trust account is generally unavailable for use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in an initial business combination, pay tax obligations or to redeem ordinary shares.
We anticipate that the cash outside of the trust account as of December 31, 2021 and loans from the initial shareholders, our officers and directors, or their respective affiliates, will be sufficient to allow management to operate the company for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of these financial statements, assuming that an initial business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of an initial business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the trust account, and any additional working capital loans from the initial shareholders, our officers and directors, or their respective affiliates, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,221,369. Net income of $4,935,531 was impacted by an unrealized non-cash gain on the change in the fair value of our warrant liability of $7,098,895, net increases in operating assets and liabilities of $310,570 and interest earned on our trust account of $26,577, partially offset by transaction costs allocated to the warrant liability of $658,002.
For the period September 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $7,260 was offset by an increase in operating liabilities.
With funds raised from our initial public offering, we invested $230,000,000 as our investing activities.
We raised $231,661,844 from financing activities including $229,566,057 proceeds from the sale of our public units, net of offering costs from our initial public offering and $6,600,000 proceeds from the issuance of placement units, partially offset be $4,600,000 in payments for underwriting discounts.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We have engaged underwriters as advisors in connection with our initial business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our shareholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with the potential business combination, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for the initial business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the initial business combination. We will pay the marketing fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of our initial public offering, including any proceeds from the full or partial exercise of the over-allotment option.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Going Concern
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We have until January 8, 2023 to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate the Prime Focus Business Combination, or if the Prime Focus Business Combination is not consummated, an initial business combination by this time. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 8, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term.
The holders of the (i) founder shares, which were issued in a private placement prior to the closing of our initial public offering, (ii) placement warrants which were issued in a private placement simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering and the placement shares underlying such placement warrants, and (iii) placement warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans will have registration rights to require us to register a sale of any of its securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
On January 8, 2021, we paid a fixed underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, $4,600,000 in the aggregate, in connection with our initial public offering. Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5%, or $8,050,000, of the gross proceeds of our initial public offering upon the completion of the Prime Focus Business Combination or another initial business combination.
Risk and Uncertainties
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus (the “COVID-19 outbreak”). In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our financial position will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and related advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our financial position may be materially adversely affected. Additionally, our ability to complete an initial business combination may be materially adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19 outbreak or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit our ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company’s personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate an initial business combination in a timely manner. Our ability to consummate an initial business combination may also be dependent on the ability to raise additional equity and debt financing, which may be impacted by the COVID-19 outbreak and the resulting market downturn.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the warrants and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the Warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to our own ordinary shares and whether the holders of the Warrants could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the Warrants and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the Warrants are outstanding. For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, liability-classified warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of such warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
We account for Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, 23,000,000 and 0 shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity (deficit) section of our balance sheets.
Net Income per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The 7,886,667 potential ordinary shares for outstanding warrants to purchase our shares were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net income per ordinary share is the same as basic net income per ordinary share for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt -- debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging --Contracts in Entity’ Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’ Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.