ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and the related notes thereto contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See also the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Information” on page ii of this Report.
The following discussion highlights the results of operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition, as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described, and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of the statements of financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis are based on the audited financial statements contained in this Report, which we have prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. You should read the discussion and analysis together with such financial statements and the related notes thereto.
Overview and Plan of Operation
Akoustis® is an emerging commercial product company focused on developing, designing, and manufacturing innovative RF filter solutions for the wireless industry, including for products such as smartphones and tablets, network infrastructure equipment, WiFi Customer Premise Equipment (“CPE”) and defense applications. Filters are critical in selecting and rejecting signals, and their performance enables differentiation in the modules defining the RF front-end (“RFFE”). Located between the device’s antenna and its digital backend, the “RFFE” is the circuitry that performs the analog signal processing and contains components such as amplifiers, filters and switches. We have developed a proprietary microelectromechanical system (“MEMS”) based bulk acoustic wave (“BAW”) technology and a unique manufacturing process flow, called “XBAW”, for our filters produced for use in RFFE modules. Our XBAWTM filters incorporate optimized high purity piezoelectric materials for high power, high frequency and wide bandwidth operation. We own and/or have filed applications for patents on the core resonator device technology, manufacturing facility and intellectual property (“IP”) necessary to produce our RF filter designs and operate as a “pure-play” RF filter supplier, aligning with the front-end module manufacturers that seek to acquire high performance filters to expand their module businesses.
Our initial RF filter designs target ultra-high band, sub 7 GHz 5G, WiFi and defense bands and we expect our filter solutions will address problems (such as loss, bandwidth, power handling, and isolation) created by this growing number of frequency bands in the RFFE of mobile devices, infrastructure and premise equipment. We have prototyped, sampled and begun commercial shipments of our single-band low-loss BAW filter designs for 5G frequency bands and 5GHz and 6 GHz WiFi bands, which are suited to competitive BAW solutions and historically cannot be addressed with low-band, lower power handling surface acoustic wave (“SAW”) technology.
We plan to pursue RF filter design and R&D development agreements and potentially joint ventures with target customers and other strategic partners, although we cannot guarantee we will be successful in these efforts. These types of arrangements may subsidize technology development costs and qualification, filter design costs, and offer complementary technology and market intelligence and other avenues to revenue. However, we intend to retain ownership of our core XBAW technology, intellectual property, designs, and related improvements. We expect to pursue development of catalog designs for multiple customers and to offer such catalog products in multiple sales channels.
Additionally, through RFMi, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Akoustis, Inc., the Company makes sales of complementary SAW resonators, RF filters, crystal (Xtal) resonators and oscillators, and ceramic products branded as “RFMi” products.
Please see Item 1. Business for more information.
Business Environment and Current Trends
Impact of COVID-19
Although the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is unknown, in an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, we have taken proactive, precautionary action, including when warranted by state and local guidelines. Our actions continue to evolve in response to new government measures and scientific knowledge regarding COVID-19. In an effort to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, governments around the world have also enacted various measures, including orders to close all businesses not deemed “essential,” isolate residents to their homes or places of residence, and practice social distancing when engaging in essential activities. These measures have impacted the method and timing of certain business meetings and deliverables to certain customers, as well as our ability to obtain certain materials, equipment and services from suppliers.
These actions and the global health crisis caused by COVID-19 have negatively impacted business activity across the globe. We observed declining demand and price reductions in the electronics industry as business and consumer activity has decelerated. Additionally, COVID-19 has contributed to some of the delays we have observed in certain suppliers’ shipment of materials necessary for us to manufacture our products and in certain vendors’ ability to deliver equipment for installation at our facilities. In particular, the recent government-mandated COVID-19 containment measures, including mass quarantines, in China have impacted supply shipments and created ongoing risk and uncertainty. When COVID-19 is demonstrably contained, we anticipate that its effects on global commerce will subside; however, the timing and extent of this is uncertain.
We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions altering our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and stakeholders, or as required by federal, state, or local authorities. It is not clear what the ultimate effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our customers, employees, and prospects, or on our financial results for fiscal year 2023 or beyond.
Semiconductor Shortages and Supply Chain Issues
The global silicon semiconductor industry is experiencing a shortage in supply and difficulties in ability to meet customer demand. This shortage has led to an increase in lead-times of production of semiconductor chips and components. As our business depends in significant part upon manufacturers of products requiring semiconductors, as well as the current and anticipated production of these products, we have sought to manage the impact of supply shortages though carefully maintaining and increasing key inventory levels. In some cases, we have incurred higher costs to secure available inventory, or have extended our purchase commitments or placed non-cancellable orders with suppliers, which introduces inventory risk if our forecasts and assumptions are inaccurate. We believe the global supply chain challenges and their adverse impact on our business and financial results will persist into calendar year 2023. We expect these constrained supply conditions to increase our costs of goods sold and increase uncertainty with respect to the timing of delivery of specific customer orders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of our control. As a result, they are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, our management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical operations, our future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, our observance of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate.
Revenue Recognition
Application of the revenue recognition guidance requires a significant number of judgments and estimates, which may impact the amount and timing of revenue recognition and related disclosures. Refer to Note 3, "Summary of significant accounting policies" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information regarding our revenue recognition policies, significant judgements, and estimates.
Derivative Liability
The Company evaluates its options, warrants, convertible notes, and other contracts, if any, to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with paragraph 815-10-05-4 and Section 815-40-25 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is marked-to-market each balance sheet date and recorded as either an asset or a liability. The change in fair value is recorded in the consolidated statement of operations as other income or expense. Upon conversion, exercise or cancellation of a derivative instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the date of conversion, exercise, or cancellation and then the related fair value is reclassified to equity.
In circumstances where the embedded conversion option in a convertible instrument is required to be bifurcated and there are also other embedded derivative instruments in the convertible instrument that are required to be bifurcated, the bifurcated derivative instruments are accounted for as a single, compound derivative instrument.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Equity instruments that are initially classified as equity that become subject to reclassification are reclassified to liability at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date. Derivative instrument liabilities will be classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument is expected within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
The Company adopted Section 815-40-15 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“Section 815-40-15”) to determine whether an instrument (or an embedded feature) is indexed to the Company’s own stock. Section 815-40-15 provides that an entity should use a two-step approach to evaluate whether an equity-linked financial instrument (or embedded feature) is indexed to its own stock, including evaluating the instrument’s contingent exercise and settlement provisions.
The Company utilizes a Monte Carlo simulation to compute the fair value of the derivative liability and to mark to market the fair value of the derivative at each balance sheet date. The Company records the change in the fair value of the derivative as other income or expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
The Company utilizes the with-and-without method, a form of the income approach model to compute the fair value of its embedded derivatives associated with its convertible notes. The fair value of the embedded derivatives represents the difference in the present value of anticipated cash flows assuming the feature is present as compared to a security without the same feature. The Company records the change in the fair value of the derivative as other income or expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
Fair Value of the Acquired Intangible Assets
We perform valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed on each acquisition accounted for as a business combination and allocate the purchase price of each acquired business to our respective assets and liabilities. Acquired intangible assets include developed technology, customer relationships and tradenames. We use various valuation techniques to value these intangibles assets, with the primary technique being a discounted cash flow analysis. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make various assumptions, estimates and judgements including projected revenue, gross margins, operating costs, growth rates, useful lives and discount rates. We believe our assumptions, estimates, and judgements to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as additional information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method which approximates the pattern in which the economic benefits of such assets are expected to be consumed.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations are presented for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021.
Year Ended June 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended June 30, 2021
Revenue
The Company recorded revenue of $15.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to $6.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase of $8.8 million was primarily due to an increase in RF product revenue of $9.7 million or 258%, which includes revenue from sales of RFMi products. Partially offsetting this increase was a decrease in non-recurring engineering services of $1.0 million.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue includes direct labor, material, net realizable value (NRV) adjustments, and facility costs primarily associated with foundry services revenue, manufacturing of filter products and engineering services. The Company recorded cost of revenue of $19.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to $10.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The $8.8 million increase is primarily due to costs associated with RF product revenue which increased by $7.9 million, which includes cost of revenue from sales of RFMi products.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses were $35.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 and were $11.6 million, or 48% higher than the prior year amount for the same period of $24.1 million. Personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, were $18.1 million compared to $13.1 million in the prior year period, an increase of $5.0 million or 37.8%. Facility costs, including depreciation, of $7.1 million primarily associated with the NY Facility were $2.7 million higher than the prior period. Lastly, R&D material costs were $4.2 million higher than the prior period.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses include salaries and wages for executive and administrative staff, stock-based compensation, professional fees, insurance costs and other general costs associated with the administration of our business. G&A expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 were $20.7 million, which is an increase of $7.4 million compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. Year-over-year changes within G&A expenses include an increase in employee compensation (including stock-based compensation) of $2.5 million as well as increased general expenses of $5.1 million, primarily professional fees and intangible amortization.
Other Income/(Expense)
Other expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 were $0.5 million compared to other expenses of $2.8 million in fiscal year 2021. The $2.3 million decrease was primarily due to a decrease in interest expense of $5.1 million which was offset by a decrease in income related to forgiveness of debt of $1.6 million and changes in contingent liabilities and derivative liabilities resulting in expense of $1.1 million.
Net Loss
The Company recorded a net loss of $59.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to a net loss of $44.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The year-over-year incremental loss of $14.9 million, or 33.7%, was primarily driven by an increase in cost of revenue of $8.8 million, higher R&D and G&A personnel costs, including stock based compensation of $7.5 million, an increase in R&D/Fabrication supplies of $4.2 million, an increase in facility costs of $2.7 million as well as increases in general expenses of $4.9 million. These increases were partially offset by an increase in revenue of $8.7 million and reduction of other expenses of $2.3 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
The Company’s short-term and long-term liquidity requirements primarily arise from funding (i) research and development expenses, (ii) general and administrative (“G&A”) expenses including salaries, bonuses, commissions and stock-based compensation, (iii) working capital requirements, (iv) business acquisitions and investments we may make from time to time, including potential performance based payments related to our acquisition of RFMi, and (v) interest and principal payments related to our $44.0 million aggregate principal amount of outstanding convertible notes. Additionally, in the near-term, the Company makes capital expenditures in connection with the expansion of the capacity of its manufacturing facility in Canandaigua, New York.
The Company has incurred losses and negative cash flow from operations since inception. Our operations thus far have been funded primarily with sales of equity and debt securities, as well as contract research and government grants, foundry services and engineering services. We expect our operating expenditures to continue to increase to support future growth of our manufacturing capabilities and expansion of our product offerings, as well as an increase in research and development and headcount costs to support this growth. We believe we currently have sufficient resources to fund operations and planned investments for at least the next twelve months. However, until we are able to generate sufficient cash flow from operations to achieve and maintain profitability and meet our obligations as they come due, we may need to raise additional capital to support our business. We recently completed an offering of convertible notes resulting in net proceeds to the Company of $43.7 million and have access to an at-the-market offering program pursuant to which we may sell up to $50 million of Common Stock. As of the date of this Annual Report, the Company had sold $2.0 million of Common Stock under such at-the-market offering program and previously announced that it was suspending sales under the at-the-market offering program in light of market conditions. If, in the future, the Company determines to resume sales under the at-the-market offering program, it intends to notify investors by the filing of a Current Report on Form 8-K or other public announcement.
The Company had $80.5 million of cash on hand as of June 30, 2022, which reflects a decrease of $7.8 million compared to $88.3 million as of June 30, 2021. The $7.8 million decrease is primarily due to $45.3 million of cash used in operating activities, cash used for purchases of machinery and equipment of $27.7 million and cash used for investment in subsidiary of $7.6 million. Offsetting these cash uses was cash proceeds from issuance of common stock of $27.6 million and net received from convertible note issuance of $43.7 million.
Financing Activities
On May 8, 2020, the Company entered into an ATM Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement with BofA Securities, Inc. and Piper Sandler& Co. (each, a “Sales Agent” and, together, the “Sales Agents”), which was amended on February 19, 2021 (as amended, the “2020 Sales Agreement”). As of March 31, 2022, the Company had sold all $100.0 million of its shares available to be sold pursuant to the 2020 Sales Agreement.
On May 2, 2022, the Company entered into an ATM Sales Agreement with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc., Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, and Roth Capital Partners, LLC pursuant to which the Company may sell from time-to-time shares of its common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50,000,000 (the “2022 Equity Offering Program”). The Company announced on May 25, 2022 that it was suspending sales under the 2022 Equity Offering Program in light of the current market conditions. If, in the future, the Company determines to resume sales pursuant to the 2022 Equity Offering Program, it intends to notify investors by the filing of a Current Report on Form 8-K or other public announcement.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, the Company sold 4,178,318 shares of Common Stock under the 2020 Equity Offering Program and 2022 Equity Offering Program for proceeds of approximately $28.2 million, net of approximately $0.4 million of compensation paid to the sales agents, but excluding transaction expenses. These amounts include a total of 533,922 shares of the Company’s common stock sold during the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2022 under the 2022 Equity Offering Program at a weighted average price to the public of $3.88 per share through the 2022 Equity Offering Program for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $2.0 million, after deducting compensation paid to the sales agents of $0.1 million and other expenses.
On June 9, 2022, the Company issued $44.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 6.0% Convertible Senior Notes due 2027 (the “Notes”) guaranteed by its wholly-owned subsidiary, Akoustis, Inc. The Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture (the “Indenture”), dated June 9, 2022, among the Company, the Guarantor and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee. The Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.0% per year until maturity on June 15, 2027, payable semi-annually beginning on December 15, 2022. At the Company’s option, interest may be paid in cash and/or shares of the Company’s common stock. The initial conversion rate for the Notes is 212.3142 shares of common stock (subject to adjustment as provided in the Indenture) per $1,000 principal amount of the Notes, which is equal to an initial conversion price of approximately $4.71 per share.
Balance Sheet and Working Capital
June 30, 2022 Compared to June 30, 2021
As of June 30, 2022, the Company had current assets of $91.7 million made up primarily of cash on hand of $80.5 million. As of June 30, 2021, current assets were $93.2 million comprised primarily of cash on hand of $88.3 million.
Property, Plant and Equipment was $51.2 million as of June 30, 2022 as compared to a balance of $30.7 million as of the year ended June 30, 2021. The $20.5 million year-over-year increase is primarily due to the purchase of equipment for the NY facility of $27.4 million offset by depreciation of $6.9 million.
Total assets as of June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021 were $161.3 million and $125.0 million, respectively. The $36.3 million increase is primarily due to an increase in property, plant and equipment as well as increase in intangible assets, including goodwill, related to the acquisition of RFMi.
Current liabilities as of June 30, 2022 were $12.4 million and increased year-over-year by $5.2 million which was primarily due to increases accounts payable and accrued expenses, primarily due to increases in production activities and, employee compensation accruals and professional fee accruals.
Long-term liabilities totaled $45.5 million as of June 30, 2022, compared to $0.3 million for the prior year period. The increase of approximately $45 million was primarily due to the net proceeds from the issuance of the convertible debt of $43.7 million.
Stockholders’ equity was $103.4 million as of June 30, 2022, compared to $117.4 million as of June 30, 2021. Additional paid-in-capital (“APIC”) was $310.2 million as of June 30, 2022 and increased by $45 million compared to June 30, 2021. The year-over-year increase was primarily due to an increase from net proceeds of $27.6 million for the issuance of common stock during the year, common stock issued for services in the amount of $10.2 million, and common stock issued for the acquisition of a subsidiary of $6.2 million. The $14.0 million decrease in stockholders’ equity consisted of the $45 million increase in APIC reduced by the $59 million net loss recorded for the year ended June 30, 2022.
Cash Flow Analysis
Year Ended June 30, 2022 Compared to the Year Ended June 30, 2021
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $45.2 million during the year ended June 30, 2022 and $29.4 million for the 2021 comparative period. The $17.4 million year-over-year increase in cash used was attributable to higher operating expenses associated with the ramp up of development and commercialization activities (primarily R&D personnel and material costs), higher spend on G&A costs for support personnel and professional fees.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $34.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $12.5 million for the comparative year ended June 30, 2021. The $22.4 million year-over-year increase was primarily due to increased spend on R&D and manufacturing equipment of $15.2 million and $7.6 million in cash used for investment in subsidiary.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $72.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 versus $85.8 million for the 2021 comparative period. The $13.5 million decrease was due to a reduction in proceeds from issuance of common stock offset by an increase in proceeds from convertible debt compared to the prior period.