Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes that appear in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ substantially and adversely from those referred to herein due to a number of factors, including, but not limited to, those described below and in Item 1A “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
On September 1, 2021, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding common stock of Thaihot Investment Company US Limited, which owns 100% of the common stock of Alliance HealthCare Services, Inc. (“Alliance”), through our wholly owned indirect subsidiary Akumin Corp. (the “Alliance Acquisition”). Alliance is a leading national provider of radiology and oncology solutions to hospitals, health systems and physician groups. With the acquisition of Alliance, we provide fixed-site outpatient diagnostic imaging services through a network of approximately 200 owned and/or operated imaging locations; and outpatient radiology and oncology services and solutions to approximately 1,000 hospitals and health systems across 46 states. Our imaging procedures include magnetic resonance imaging (“MRI”), computerized tomography (“CT”), positron emission tomography (“PET” and “PET/CT”), ultrasound, diagnostic radiology (X-ray),
mammography and other related procedures. Our cancer care services include a full suite of radiation therapy and related offerings.
We are significantly diversified across business lines, geographies, modality offerings and reimbursement sources. The diversity of our business provides a number of advantages, including having no material revenue concentration with any health system or hospital customer and no material concentration with any commercial payor.
We currently operate in two reportable business segments: radiology and oncology. The following table summarizes our revenues by segment as a percentage of total revenue:
Revenues consist primarily of net patient fees received from various payors and patients based on established contractual billing rates, less allowances for contractual adjustments and implicit price concessions. Revenues are also derived directly from hospitals and healthcare providers.
The following table summarizes the components of our revenues by payor category:
Summary of Factors Affecting Our Performance
Pricing
Continued expansion of health maintenance organizations, preferred provider organizations and other managed care organizations have influence over the pricing of our services because these organizations can exert great control over patients’ access to our services and reimbursement rates for accessing those services.
Competition
The market for outpatient diagnostic imaging and oncology services is highly competitive. We compete principally on the basis of our reputation, our ability to provide multiple modalities at many of our centers, the location of our centers and the quality of our outpatient diagnostic imaging and oncology services. We compete locally with groups of individual healthcare providers, established hospitals, clinics and other independent organizations that own and operate imaging and radiation therapy equipment.
We also face competition from other outpatient diagnostic imaging companies and oncology service providers in acquiring outpatient diagnostic imaging and oncology centers, which makes it more difficult to find attractive products on acceptable terms. Accordingly, we may not be able to acquire rights to additional outpatient diagnostic imaging and oncology centers on acceptable terms.
Our multi-modality imaging offering provides a one-stop-shop
for patients and referring physicians and diversifies our revenue sources. Our scalable and integrated operating platform is expected to create value from future acquisitions, cost efficiencies and organic growth.
Seasonality
We experience seasonality in the revenues and margins generated for our services. First and fourth quarter revenues are typically lower than those from the second and third quarters. First quarter revenue is affected primarily by fewer calendar days and inclement weather, typically resulting in fewer patients being scanned or treated during the period. Fourth quarter revenues are affected by holiday and client and patient vacation schedules, resulting in fewer scans or treatments during the period. The variability in margins is higher than the variability in revenues due to the fixed nature of our costs. We also experience fluctuations in our revenues and margins due to acquisition activity and general economic conditions, including recession or economic slowdown.
Industry Trends
Our revenue is impacted by changes to U.S. healthcare laws, our partners’ and contractors’ healthcare costs, and/or reimbursement rates by payors.
Acquisitions and New Facilities
The timing of acquisitions and the opening of new fixed-site facilities impacts our revenue and the comparability of our results from period to period. The following table shows the number of our radiology diagnostic imaging sites and oncology radiation therapy sites:
Recent Developments
Alliance Acquisition
On September 1, 2021, we acquired Alliance for a total purchase price of $785.6 million. The acquisition included Alliance’s ownership interests in its joint ventures, which had a fair value of $212.0 million on the acquisition date. The acquisition was financed with (i) cash on hand, (ii) $340.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of unsecured notes, (iii) $10.4 million of proceeds from the issuance of 3,500,000 shares of our common stock, (iv) $375.0 million of proceeds from a private offering of 7.5% senior secured notes, and (v) the issuance of 14,223,570 shares of our common stock to the seller.
Financing Transactions
On February 11, 2021, we completed a private offering of $75.0 million aggregate principal amount of additional 7.0% senior secured notes due November 2025. These notes were offered as additional notes under the same indenture as the previously issued 2025 Senior Notes and will be treated as a single series with the 2025 Senior Notes. The proceeds were used to partially fund acquisitions with any unused proceeds to be used for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
On August 9, 2021, we completed an offering of $375.0 million of aggregate principal amount of 7.5% senior secured notes due August 1, 2028 (the “2028 Senior Notes”). The proceeds of the offering were used to fund the Alliance Acquisition.
On September 1, 2021, Stonepeak purchased $340.0 million principal amount of unsecured notes of Akumin Corp., our wholly owned indirect subsidiary (the “Stonepeak Notes”), together with warrants to purchase 17,114,093 shares of our common stock (the “Stonepeak Warrants”) and 3,500,000 shares of our common stock for total cash consideration of $10.4 million. No consideration was paid for the Stonepeak Warrants. The proceeds of this offering were used to fund the Alliance Acquisition.
Additional 2021 Acquisitions
On May 1, 2021, we acquired six outpatient diagnostic imaging centers in Florida for aggregate cash consideration of $34.1 million and share consideration of $3.0 million through issuance of 974,999 shares of our common stock.
On May 1, 2021, we acquired one outpatient diagnostic imaging center in South Florida for cash consideration of $0.8 million.
On June 1, 2021, we acquired three outpatient diagnostic imaging centers in Massachusetts for cash consideration of $0.5 million.
COVID-19
Commencing during the first quarter of 2020 and continuing through the present, a pandemic relating to the novel coronavirus known as COVID-19
occurred causing significant financial market disruption and social dislocation. The pandemic is dynamic, with various cities, counties, states and countries around the world responding or having responded in different ways to address and contain the outbreak, including the declaration of a global pandemic by the World Health Organization, a National State of Emergency in the United States, and state and local executive orders and ordinances forcing the closure of non-essential
businesses and persons not employed in or using essential services to “stay at home” or “shelter in place.” At this stage, while there are signs of improvement, we are uncertain as to how long the pandemic, or a more limited epidemic, will last, what regions will be most affected, to what extent containment measures will be applied, or the nature and timing of possible vaccinations. Imaging and radiation therapy centers are healthcare facilities and are generally considered an essential service with the expectation that they continue to operate during the pandemic.
We instituted several realignment and cost containment measures to respond to the drop in volume that resulted from the COVID-19
pandemic and related government orders. Our cost containment measures included the temporary closure of certain of our imaging centers to consolidate volume to nearby centers and reduced operating hours at the remainder of our imaging centers, with the highest number of centers closed in mid-April
2020. At that same time, we furloughed or laid off a portion of our workforce, reduced work hours for our hourly personnel and reduced salaries of employees, as well as negotiated deferral of certain costs due to landlords and other vendors.
In light of the improving business environment, we gradually increased our workforce during 2021. Effective January 1, 2021, all reduced salaries had been returned to normal levels. Clinical operations have resumed to normal operating hours as patient volumes allow and substantially all of the clinics that had temporarily closed due to the COVID-19
pandemic have resumed normal operations. If the future economic or legislative environment related to the COVID-19
pandemic again leads to weakened business volume, we might re-institute
cost containment measures similar to those described above in order to preserve our liquidity.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The results for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the results of Alliance for four months since the date of acquisition.
Revenues
The following table summarizes our revenues by segment:
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $421.1 million and increased by $175.5 million, or 71%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase includes $155.2 million of revenues contributed by Alliance since the date of acquisition. The remaining increase in revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $9.7 million revenue contribution from other acquisitions completed in 2021.
The following table summarizes statistical information regarding our radiology scan volumes and oncology patient starts:
Cost of Operations, excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Cost of operations, excluding depreciation and amortization, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $359.7 million and increased by $154.1 million, or 75%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase includes $123.2 million of costs incurred by Alliance since the date of acquisition. The following table summarizes the components of our cost of operations, excluding depreciation and amortization, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Employee Compensation
Employee compensation for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $164.1 million and increased by $80.0 million, or 95%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase includes $65.4 million of costs incurred by Alliance since the date of the acquisition. The remaining increase was driven by the other acquisitions completed during 2021 and the easing of the cost containment measures taken in 2020 in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. See “Recent Developments - COVID-19”
above.
Third-Party Services and Professional Fees
Third-party services and professional fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $63.3 million and increased by $33.1 million, or 110%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase includes $27.2 million of costs incurred by Alliance since the date of the acquisition. The remaining increase in these fees was due to the easing of the cost containment measures taken in 2020 in response to the COVID-19
pandemic and increased professional fees.
Reading Fees
Reading fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $42.8 million and increased by $5.0 million, or 13%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. Our reading fees are primarily based on the volume of procedures performed. The increase in reading fees was driven by the other acquisitions completed during 2021 and an increase in same-store volumes.
Rent and Utilities
Rent and utilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $37.2 million and increased by $7.0 million, or 23%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by rent and utilities incurred by Alliance since the date of the acquisition. Rent and utilities are largely a fixed cost.
Administrative Expenses
Administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $24.7 million and increased by $12.4 million, or 102%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by administrative expenses incurred by Alliance since the date of the acquisition.
Medical Supplies and Other Expenses
Medical supplies and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $27.7 million and increased by $16.6 million, or 148%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by medical supplies and other expenses incurred by Alliance since the date of the acquisition.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $44.9 million and increased by $27.8 million, or 163%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to $26.0 million of depreciation and amortization for Alliance since the date of the acquisition.
Other Operating Losses
Other operating losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $0.6 million compared to $4.1 million of other operating gains for the year ended December 31, 2020. The other operating gains in 2020 included a $5.5 million gain on the revaluation of an acquisition earn-out
liability that was fully repaid in 2021.
Other Expense (Income)
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $62.6 million and increased by $29.8 million, or 91%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to the interest associated with the 2028 Senior Notes and Stonepeak Notes that were issued during 2021 in connection with the acquisition of Alliance.
Acquisition-related costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $20.2 million compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to $13.6 million of costs related to the Alliance Acquisition.
Settlement and related recoveries for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $0.5 million compared to $2.3 million of settlement and related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020. The settlement and related costs in 2020 consist primarily of a $0.8 million settlement of a government investigation related predominately to historical reimbursements paid under federal healthcare programs to certain of our subsidiaries and $1.1 million for various settlement costs related to certain of our vendors.
Other non-operating
gains for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $4.0 million compared to other non-operating
losses of $22.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The other non-operating
gains in 2021 consist primarily of a $3.4 million gain on the conversion of a debt investment to an equity investment. The other non-operating
losses in 2020 consist primarily of an $18.3 million loss on extinguishment of debt and a $4.2 million loss on settlement of an interest rate cap derivative.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $30.4 million compared to income tax expense of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The income tax benefit in 2021 includes a $15.5 million reversal of the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets that had been previously established based on management’s prior year determination that it was more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax assets would not be realized in the future. In connection with the acquisition of Alliance in 2021, management recorded deferred tax liabilities that provided sufficient evidence regarding future taxable income and, accordingly, recorded a release of a portion of the valuation allowance recorded in prior years.
Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8.5 million and increased by $5.9 million from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase includes $6.5 million attributable to Alliance since the date of acquisition.
Non-GAAP
Financial Measures
We use various measures of financial performance based on financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe, in addition to GAAP measures, certain non-GAAP
measures are useful for investors for a variety of reasons. Such non-GAAP
measures include earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) and Adjusted EBITDA. Our management regularly communicates EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA and their interpretation of such results to our board of directors. We also compare actual periodic Adjusted EBITDA against internal targets as a key factor in determining cash incentive compensation for executives and other employees, largely because we view Adjusted EBITDA results as indicative of how our radiology and oncology businesses are performing and being managed.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, acquisition-related costs, settlement and related costs (recoveries), financial instruments revaluation and related losses (gains), loss on extinguishment of debt, severance and related costs, restructuring charges, asset impairments, other losses (gains), deferred rent expense and one-time
adjustments. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP
financial measures used as analytical indicators by us and the healthcare industry to assess business performance and are measures of leverage capacity and ability to service debt. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net income, cash flows generated by operating, investing or financing activities or other financial statement data presented in the consolidated financial statements as indicators of financial performance or liquidity. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP and are therefore susceptible to varying methods of calculation and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table reconciles EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure:
In 2020, we had a single reportable segment, which was outpatient diagnostic imaging. As a result of the acquisition of Alliance in 2021, we operate in two reportable segments: radiology and oncology. We are not able to present comparable Adjusted EBITDA by segment for the year ended December 31, 2020, as it is impracticable to do so. The following table summarizes our Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 by segment:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash generated from operations, public and private sales of debt and equity securities, and bank borrowings. The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows and the ending balance of our cash and cash equivalents:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted of a net loss of $34.8 million adjusted for certain non-cash
items and changes in certain operating assets and liabilities. The net loss of $34.8 million includes $20.2 million of acquisition-related costs primarily due to the acquisition of Alliance and three additional businesses during 2021. The primary non-cash
charges included in the net loss are $44.9 million of depreciation and amortization and $15.5 million of non-cash
interest expense, partially offset by a deferred income tax benefit of $30.4 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions, contributed $20.6 million of operating cash driven by a $12.3 million decline in accounts receivable.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $779.2 million, an increase of $770.2 million from the prior year. Cash used for business acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $758.1 million, driven primarily by cash used to acquire Alliance of $722.4 million (net of the cash acquired). In addition, purchases of property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $17.9 million, an increase of $12.5 million from the prior year. For additional information on the Alliance Acquisition and other acquired businesses, see Note 4 to Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $766.1 million compared to $11.4 million for the prior year. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 included $781.0 million of proceeds from long-term debt (net of issuance costs) and $9.2 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock (net of issuance costs), partially offset by distributions paid to noncontrolling interests of $11.5 million and principal payments on long-term debt and finance leases of $10.3 million. The proceeds from long-term debt and the issuance of common stock were used primarily to finance the Alliance Acquisition. For additional information regarding the details of our long-term debt and the financing of the Alliance Acquisition, see Note 8 to Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity Outlook
Cash and cash equivalents were $48.4 million as of December 31, 2021. In addition, we have a revolving credit facility under which we may borrow up to $55.0 million for working capital and other general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2021, there were no borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and expected future cash flow from operations will provide sufficient funds to finance our operations for at least the next twelve months. However, it is possible that we may need to supplement our existing sources of liquidity to finance our activities beyond the next twelve months and there can be no assurance that sources of liquidity will be available to us at that time.
We also have access to an additional $349.6 million of debt financing through August 2024, provided certain conditions are met, to finance mutually agreed upon organic growth and future acquisition opportunities.
For additional information regarding our revolving credit facility and the additional borrowing available for future acquisitions, see Note 8 to Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For a description of contractual obligations, such as debt, finance leases and operating leases, see Note 8, Note 9 and Note 10 to Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, including the current economic environment, in making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. We believe the accounting policies described below to be our most critical accounting policies. These accounting policies are affected significantly by judgments, assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies.
We have other significant accounting policies that do not generally require subjective estimates or judgments or would not have a material impact on our results of operations. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our revenues are derived from net patient fees received from various payors and patients themselves based on established contractual billing rates, less allowances for contractual adjustments and implicit price concessions. Revenues are also derived directly from hospitals and healthcare providers.
We recognize revenue in the period in which performance obligations are satisfied by providing services to customers. We record the amount of revenue that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those services. We apply the following five-step model in order to determine this amount: (i) identification of the contract with a customer; (ii) identification of the promised services in the contract and determination of whether they represent performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
Patient Fee Payors
Our patient fee revenues are generated from freestanding facilities that we manage and operate. We submit billings and collect fees directly from the patients and third-party payors. Our performance obligations are to provide outpatient medical services to patients, such as diagnostic services, radiation therapy, or the provision of goods and services during a patient visit. Revenues are recorded during the period the obligations to provide medical services are satisfied. Performance obligations for medical services are generally satisfied over a period of less than one day. The contractual relationships with patients, in most cases, also involve a third-party payor (Medicare, Medicaid, managed care health plans, attorneys, employers and commercial insurance companies, including plans offered through the health insurance exchanges) and the transaction prices for the services provided are dependent upon the terms provided by (Medicare and Medicaid) or negotiated with (managed care health plans and commercial insurance companies) the third-party payors. The payment arrangements with third-party payors for the services we provide to the related patients typically specify payments at amounts less than standard charges and generally provide for payments based upon predetermined rates per diagnostic services or discounted fee-for-service
rates. Uninsured patients are billed based on established patient fee schedule or fees negotiated. Management continually reviews the contractual estimation process to consider and incorporate updates to laws and regulations and the frequent changes in contractual terms resulting from contract renegotiations and renewals.
Revenue recorded is based upon the estimated amounts we expect to be entitled to receive from patients and third-party payors. Estimates of contractual adjustments under managed care and commercial insurance plans are based upon the payment terms specified in the related contractual agreements, negotiated rates and historical and expected payment patterns. Revenues related to uninsured patients, uninsured copayment, and deductible amounts for patients who have healthcare coverage may have discounts applied (uninsured discounts and contractual discounts). We also record estimated implicit price concessions (based primarily on historical collection experience) related to uninsured accounts to record self-pay
revenues at the estimated amounts ultimately expected to be collected. We consider readily available information when preparing estimates.
Hospital and Healthcare Providers
Our hospital and healthcare provider revenues are derived from services provided under an outsourced contract arrangement with hospitals, physician groups and other healthcare providers. Under these outsourced service contracts, we provide medical services to patients at a fixed site facility or mobile unit. We typically bundle our services in providing diagnostic imaging or radiation therapy services, staffing, supplies and other patient related administrative tasks depending on the customers’ needs. The majority of our contracts have a single performance obligation, as a series of distinct services that are substantially the same are provided and are transferred with the same pattern to the customer. We bill customers on a fee per procedure, percentage of collections, or fixed-payment methodology. Service fees based on fee per procedure and fixed-payment methodology are negotiated and agreed upon by both parties. We do not have a business practice of accepting less than contractual amounts. Any amounts not collected do not represent implicit price concessions and instead are due to general credit risk; therefore, we treat the allowance for doubtful accounts related to these arrangements as bad debt expense, which is recorded in operating expenses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. For service fees based on a percentage of collections, we receive payment after the hospital and other healthcare provider customers are paid by third-party payors and patients. Revenue is recognized over time as medical services are provided and the measurement of the transaction price is generally consistent with the methodology used with patient fee payors.
Accounts Receivable
Substantially all of our accounts receivable are due from health insurance providers (including Medicare and Medicaid), hospitals, other healthcare providers and patients, located throughout the U.S. A significant portion of our services are provided directly to patients or pursuant to long-term contracts with hospitals and other healthcare providers. Estimated credit losses are provided for in our consolidated financial statements.
Accounts receivable are reported at realizable value, net of allowances for price concessions and doubtful accounts, which are estimated and recorded in the period the related revenue is recorded. Implicit price concessions are recorded as a reduction in revenue with an offsetting amount reducing the carrying value of the receivable. We have a standardized approach to estimate and review the collectability of our receivables based on a number of factors, including the age of the receivable balances. Changes to the allowance for doubtful accounts estimates are recorded as an adjustment to bad debt expense within operating expenses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Receivables deemed to be uncollectible are charged against the allowance for doubtful accounts at the time such receivables are written-off.
Business Combinations
Acquisitions of entities over which we exercise control are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. The assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination are recorded at their estimated fair values on the date of acquisition. The difference between the purchase price amount and the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill if it exceeds the estimated fair value and as a bargain purchase gain if it is below the estimated fair value. Non-controlling
interests in the acquired company are measured at their fair value. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment, often utilizes independent valuation experts and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions with respect to the timing and amounts of future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, market prices and asset lives, among other items. The judgments made in the determination of the estimated fair value assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as the estimated useful life of each asset and the duration of each liability, can materially impact the financial statements in periods after acquisition, such as through depreciation and amortization expense.
Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but instead tested for impairment at least annually at the reporting unit level. We perform an annual impairment test in the fourth quarter for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more-likely-than-not
reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. Such indicators include a significant decline in expected future cash flows due to changes in company-specific factors or the broader business climate.
In evaluating goodwill for impairment, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not
the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude it is more-likely-than-not
the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we conduct a quantitative goodwill impairment test. First, for each reporting unit, we compare its estimated fair value with its net book value. If the estimated fair value exceeds its net book value, goodwill is deemed not to be impaired, and no further testing is necessary. If the estimated fair value does not exceed its net book value, goodwill is deemed to be impaired. We record an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value.
The quantitative impairment analysis utilizes two primary approaches to calculate the fair value of the reporting unit: the discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method and the Guideline Public Company (“GPC”) method.
Under the DCF method, fair value is measured as the present worth of anticipated future net cash flows generated by a business. In a multi-period model, net cash flows attributable to a business are forecast for an appropriate period and then discounted to present value using an appropriate discount rate. In a single-period model, net cash flow or earnings for a normalized period are capitalized to reach a determination of present value. The methods, key assumptions, degree of uncertainty associated with the key assumptions, and the potential events or changes in circumstances that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the key assumptions with respect to the reporting unit are the estimated future net cash flows generated and the discount rate applied to capture the associated risks. The ability to achieve anticipated future net cash flows is subject to numerous assumptions and risks, including company-specific risks such as the ability to maintain and grow revenues, maintain or improve operating margins, control costs and anticipate working capital requirements. The anticipated future net cash flows are also dependent on industry-level factors, such as the impact of legislation, patient volumes, cost-reimbursement levels, and continued availability of qualified doctors and other medical professionals who are necessary to staff our operations, among other potential impacts.
Under the GPC method, value is estimated by comparing the subject company to similar companies with publicly-traded ownership interests. Guideline companies are selected based on comparability to the subject company, and valuation multiples are calculated and applied to subject company operating data. The key assumption used in connection with the GPC method focuses on identifying guideline companies that operate in the same (or similar) line of business as the reporting units with the same (or similar) operating characteristics. Eligible companies are selected based on Global Industry Classification Standard codes, Standard Industrial Classification codes, company descriptions, and industry affiliations. Considered factors include relative risk, profitability and growth considerations of the reporting unit relative to the guideline companies. Value estimates for the reporting unit involve using multiples of market value of invested capital excluding cash to revenue and earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Valuations derived using the GPC method rely on information primarily obtained from available industry market data and publicly available filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In evaluating indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not
the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude it is more-likely-than-not
the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, we conduct a quantitative impairment test, which consist of a comparison of the fair value to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
Long-Lived Assets with Finite Lives
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment and purchased intangible assets subject to amortization (i.e., customer contracts and trade names), are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to undiscounted future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is computed using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, applying enacted statutory tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Future income tax benefits are recognized only to the extent that the realization of such benefits is considered to be more likely than not. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability and establish a valuation allowance, when it is more likely than not that such deferred tax assets will not be recoverable, based on historical taxable income, projected future taxable income, and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences.
Derivatives
The valuation of derivatives is complex and requires significant estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The following summarizes the critical accounting policies related to our significant derivatives.
Warrants
We review the terms of warrants to purchase our common stock to determine whether the warrants should be classified as liabilities or shareholders’ equity in our consolidated balance sheets. In order for a warrant to be classified in shareholders’ equity, the warrant must be (i) indexed to the company’s equity and (ii) meet the conditions for equity classification.
If a warrant does not meet the conditions for shareholders’ equity classification, it is carried on the consolidated balance sheets as a warrant liability measured at fair value, with subsequent changes in the fair value of the warrant recorded in other non-operating
losses (gains) in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. If a warrant meets both conditions for equity classification, the warrant is initially recorded, at its relative fair value on the date of issuance, in shareholders’ equity in the consolidated balance sheets, and the amount initially recorded is not subsequently remeasured at fair value.
The fair value of the Stonepeak Warrants at the date of issuance was determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model based on management estimates and assumptions. We determined the Stonepeak Warrants should be classified in shareholders’ equity. The relative fair value of the Stonepeak Warrants on the issuance date, net of allocated transaction costs, was $21.0 million, and is included in common stock in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. The initial carrying value of the Stonepeak Warrant will not be remeasured in future periods.
Embedded Derivatives
We review the terms of debt and equity financing transactions to identify whether there are any embedded derivatives that require separation from the related host financial instrument. Any such embedded derivatives are presented at fair value in the consolidated balance sheets, with changes in fair value recorded in other non-operating
losses (gains) in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Determination of whether a contract provision constitutes an embedded derivative requires significant management judgment. We separate an embedded provision in a debt or equity contract in which management determines that (i) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative provision are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host instrument, (ii) the host instrument itself is not carried at fair value in the consolidated balance sheets, and (iii) the embedded provision would meet the definition of a derivative financial instrument if it were issued on a standalone basis.
We identified an embedded derivative related to a change of control redemption election provision included in the Stonepeak Notes and have determined that it should be separated from the Stonepeak Notes and initially and subsequently be reported as a liability and measured at fair value. Determining the fair value of the change of control redemption election embedded derivative requires significant management estimates and judgment. The fair value of the change of control redemption election liability was determined using a probability weighted scenario analysis regarding a potential change of control during the seven years from initiation date. The fair value of the change of control redemption election of $7.5 million as of December 31, 2021 was recorded as an embedded derivative liability and included in other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet. See further discussion regarding the change of control redemption election embedded derivative in Note 8 to Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.