Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those in the Annual Report, as referred to in the section titled “Risk Factors.” Please also see the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are an innovative life sciences technology company delivering spatial biology solutions focused on transforming discovery and clinical research. Our mission is to deliver a revolutionary new class of spatially derived biomarkers that empower life sciences researchers to better understand disease and clinicians to improve patient outcomes. Spatial biology refers to a rapidly evolving technology that enables academic and biopharma scientists to detect and map the distribution of cell types and biomarkers across whole tissue samples at single-cell resolution, enabling advancements in their understanding of disease progression and patient response to therapy. Through our PhenoCycler™ (formerly CODEX®) and PhenoImager™ (formerly Phenoptics™) platforms, reagents, software and services, we offer end-to-end solutions to perform tissue analysis and spatial phenotyping across the full continuum from discovery through translational and clinical research.
Our spatial biology solutions measure cells and proteins by providing biomarker data in its spatial context while preserving tissue integrity. Biomarkers are objective measures that capture what is happening in a cell or tissue at a given moment. Current genomic and proteomic methods, such as next-generation sequencing (NGS), single-cell analysis, flow cytometry and mass spectrometry, are providing meaningful data but require the destruction of the tissue sample for analysis. While valuable and broadly adopted, these approaches allow scientists to analyze the biomarkers and cells that comprise the tissue but do not provide the fundamental information about tissue structure, cellular interactions and the localized measurements of key biomarkers. Furthermore, current non-destructive tissue analysis and histological methods provide some limited spatial information, but only measure a minimal number of biomarkers at a time and require expert pathologist interpretation. Our platforms address these limitations by providing end-to-end solutions that enable researchers to quantitatively interrogate a large number of biomarkers and cell types across a tissue section at single cell resolution. The result is a detailed and computable map of the tissue sample that thoroughly captures the underlying tissue dynamics and interactions between key cell types and biomarkers, a process now referred to as spatial phenotyping. We believe that we are the only business with the breadth of platform capabilities that enable researchers to do a deep exploratory and discovery study, and then further advance and scale their research through the translational and clinical phases, leading to a better understanding of human biology, disease progression and response to therapy.
We offer distinct stand-alone as well as integrated platforms for spatial phenotyping, designed to serve the unique needs of our customers in the discovery, translational and clinical markets. The PhenoCycler (formerly CODEX), is an ultra-high parameter and cost-effective platform ideally suited for discovery high-plex research. The PhenoImager platforms (formerly Phenoptics), which includes the newly introduced Fusion instrument and HT instrument (formerly Vectra Polaris), provide high-throughput with the automation and robustness needed for translational and clinical applications. Furthermore, the PhenoCycler and the PhenoImager Fusion can be integrated into a combined system, PhenoCycler-Fusion System, to enable spatial discovery at scale. Together, the systems offer seamless and integrated workflow solutions for our customers, including important benefits such as flexible sample types, automated sample processing, scalability, comprehensive data analysis and software solutions and dedicated field and applications support. With these platforms, our customers are performing spatial phenotyping to further advance their understanding of diseases such as cancer, neurological and autoimmune disorders, and many other therapeutic areas.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, revenue from North America accounted for approximately 51% and 47% of our revenue, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, we employed a commercial team of 148 employees, including many with significant industry and technical experience. This total includes field instrument service personnel who are classified in cost of goods sold in our consolidated statements of operations. We follow a direct sales model in North America and EMEA, while selling through third-party distributors and dealers in APAC.
We focus a substantial portion of our resources on research and development, as well as on business development and sales and marketing. Our research and development efforts are geared towards developing new instruments and assay capabilities, as well as new reagent kits, to meet both our customers’ needs and to address new markets. We intend to continue making significant investments in this area for the foreseeable future. We also intend to continue to make investments in building our sales team and marketing our products and services to potential customers.
We generally outsource all of our production manufacturing. Design work, prototyping and pilot manufacturing are performed in-house before outsourcing to third-party contract manufacturers. Our outsourced production strategy is intended to drive cost leverage and scale and avoid the high capital outlays and fixed costs related to constructing and operating a manufacturing facility. The contract manufacturers of our systems and reagent kits are located in the United States and Asia. Certain of our suppliers of components and materials are single source suppliers. We manufacture and assemble certain instrument components in-house.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have financed our operations primarily from the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock, borrowings under our long-term debt agreement, and our IPO. We have incurred net losses in each year since our inception in 2015. Our net losses were $42.9 million and $16.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating
losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including the expansion of our commercial capabilities and organizations;
● market and sell new and existing solutions and services;
● invest in processes and infrastructure to scale our business;
● support research and development to introduce new solutions;
● expand, protect and defend our intellectual property; and
● acquire complementary businesses or technologies to support the growth of our business.
Key factors affecting our results of operations and future performance
There are a number of factors that have impacted, and we believe will continue to impact, our business, results of operations and growth. Our ability to successfully address these factors is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described under the heading “Risk Factors.”
Expansion of our installed base
We are focused on increasing sales of our PhenoCycler and PhenoImager platforms to new and existing customers. Our financial performance has historically been driven by, and will continue to be impacted by, the volume of instrument sales. Additionally, instrument sales are a leading indicator of future recurring revenue from consumables and services. Our operating results and growth prospects will be dependent in part on our ability to increase our instrument installed base as we further penetrate existing markets and expand into, or offer new features and solutions that appeal to, new markets.
We believe our market is still evolving and relatively underpenetrated. As spatial biology is further validated through rapid acceleration of peer-reviewed publications and growing adoption by the life sciences research market, we believe we have an opportunity to significantly increase our installed base. In order to capitalize on this opportunity to drive adoption of our platforms across the entire market, we intend to expand our global sales and marketing organizations, increase the scale of our outbound marketing activities, invest in commercial channel infrastructure and deliver new, market-leading solutions to our customers. In addition, we regularly solicit feedback from our customers in order to enhance our solutions and their applications for life sciences research, which we believe will drive increased adoption of our platforms as they better serve our customers’ needs.
Drive incremental pull through
We believe that expansion of our installed base to new and existing customers will drive an increase in our recurring reagent and instrument service revenue. In addition, as our research and development team identifies and launches new applications and biomarker targets, we expect to increase incremental pull through on our existing and new instrument installed base. Recurring revenue was 38% and 33% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our recurring revenue as a percentage of total product and service revenue will vary based upon new device placements in the period. As our installed base expands, we expect recurring revenue on an absolute basis to increase and become an increasingly important contributor to our revenue.
Improve revenue mix and gross margin
Our revenue is primarily derived from sales of our platforms, consumables, software, and services. Our revenue mix will fluctuate from period-to-period, particularly revenue generated from instrument sales. As our installed base grows, we expect consumables and instrument service revenue to constitute a larger percentage of total revenue.
Our margins are higher for those instruments and consumables that we sell directly to customers compared to those sold through distributors. While we do not currently intend to terminate our distributor relationships, we plan to increase our direct sales capabilities in certain geographies which we believe will improve our gross margins.
Future instrument and consumable selling prices and gross margins may fluctuate due to a variety of factors, including the introduction by others of competing products and solutions. We aim to mitigate downward pressure on our average selling prices by increasing the value proposition offered by our instruments and consumables, primarily by expanding the applications for our devices and increasing the quantity and quality of data that can be obtained using our consumables.
COVID-19 Impact
The global spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the spread of recent variants, continues to evolve, and to date has led to the implementation of various containment efforts. While conditions appear to be improving, particularly as more people get vaccinated, states and counties may re-implement restrictive measures to protect against further spread of any new variants. The impact of this pandemic has been and will likely continue to be extensive in many aspects of society, which has resulted in and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to the global economy, as well as businesses and capital markets around the world.
Impacts in 2020 and 2021 to our business as a result of COVID-19 include disruptions to our manufacturing operations and supply chain caused by facility closures, reductions in operating hours, staggered shifts and other social distancing efforts, decreased productivity and unavailability of materials or components, limitations on our employees’ and customers’ ability to travel, and delays in product installations, trainings or shipments to and from affected countries and within the United States. Our corporate office facility is now open for those who want to work in that space, subject to certain restrictions, but a significant number of our personnel continue to work from home. While we learned during COVID-19 that we can work very effectively in a fully-remote environment, the partial return to in-office work and the potential transition to permanent remote working arrangements for some employees may result in increased costs, decreased efficiency, deterioration of corporate culture, greater exposure to cybersecurity threats, and other operational risks.
Disruptions in our customers’ operations have impacted and may continue to impact our business. For example, laboratory shutdowns and reduced capital spend by our customers have negatively impacted our instrument and reagent sales. We do not yet know the net impact that the COVID-19 pandemic and any future variants of the virus may have on our business and cannot guarantee that it will not be materially negative. Although we continue to monitor the situation and may adjust our current policies as more information and public health guidance become available, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and/or the precautionary measures that we have adopted may create operational and other challenges, any of which could harm our business and results of operations. While we maintain an inventory of finished products and raw materials used in our products, a prolonged pandemic could lead to shortages in the raw materials necessary to manufacture our products. If we experience a prolonged disruption in our manufacturing, supply chains or commercial operations, or if demand for our products is significantly reduced as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we would expect to experience a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects.
Historically, a significant portion of our field sales, customer training events and other application services have been conducted in person, and the rollout of our new products has historically been supported by our participation at industry conferences. As a result of the COVID- 19 pandemic, and the precautionary measures that we have adopted, substantially all of our field sales and professional services activities were conducted remotely for over a year, which resulted in a decrease in our travel expenditures. However, we expect our travel expenditures to increase as COVID-19 restrictions ease, which could negatively impact our financial condition and results of operations. As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we do not yet know the extent of the negative impact of such restrictions and precautionary measures on our ability to attract new customers or retain and expand our relationships with existing customers over the near and long term. The length of time and full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, subject to change and difficult to predict.
License Agreements
In November 2015, we entered into an exclusive (equity) agreement with Stanford, pursuant to which Stanford granted us an exclusive, worldwide, sublicensable (subject to certain requirements) license under certain patent rights to make, use, import and commercialize products for diagnostic, industrial and research and development purposes. We agreed to pay annual license maintenance fees ranging from $20 thousand to $50 thousand for the royalty-bearing license to certain patents. We also issued a total of 91,559 shares of common stock pursuant to the agreement in 2015, which were recorded at fair value at the date of issuance. We are required to pay royalties on net sales of products that are covered by patent rights under the agreement at a rate of 2.25%, subject to reductions and offsets in certain circumstances, as well as a portion of any of our sublicensing income.
In September 2018, in connection with the acquisition of the Phenoptics (now rebranded as PhenoImager) technology from PKI, we entered into a license and royalty agreement with PKI, Cambridge Research, and VisEn Medical Inc., pursuant to which such parties granted us an exclusive, nontransferable, sublicensable (subject to certain conditions) license under certain patent rights and know-how to make, use, import and commercialize PhenoImager products and services. We are required to pay royalties on net sales of products and services that are covered by patent rights under the agreement at a rate ranging from 1.0% to 7.0%.
Key Business Metrics
We regularly review the number of instrument placements and cumulative instrument placement as key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, develop financial projections, and make strategic decisions. We believe that these metrics are representative of our current business; however, we anticipate these will change or may be substituted for additional or different metrics as our business grows.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our instrument placements were as follows:
Our instruments are sold globally to leading biopharma companies and top research institutions and medical centers. Our quarterly instrument placements fluctuate considerably from period-to-period due to the type and size of our customers and their procurement and budgeting cycles. We expect continued fluctuations in our quarterly period-to-period number of instrument placements.
We believe our instrument placements are important metrics to measure our business because together they are driven by our ability to secure new customers and drive adoption of our PhenoCycler and PhenoImager platforms and provide insights into anticipated recurring revenue for consumables and instrument services.
Components of results of operations
Revenue
Product Revenue
We generate product revenue from the sale of our instruments, consumables and software products. Instrument sales accounted for 65% and 71% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Consumables revenue accounted for 32% and 26% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our current instrument offerings include our PhenoCycler and PhenoImager platforms. Our sales process with customers is often long and involves multiple levels of approvals. As a result, the revenue for our platforms can vary significantly from period-to-period and has been, and may continue to be, concentrated in a small number of customers in any given period.
We sell our instruments directly to customers and through distributors. Each of our instrument sales drives various streams of recurring revenue comprised of consumable product sales and instrument services.
Service and Other Revenue
We primarily generate service and other revenue from instrument service, which generally consists of sales of extended service contracts, in addition to installation and training, as well as from our laboratory services operation, where we provide sample testing services to customers utilizing our in-house lab operation.
We offer our customers extended warranty and service plans for our platforms. Our extended warranty and service plans are offered for periods beyond the standard one-year warranty that all customers receive. These extended warranty and service plans generally have fixed fees and terms ranging from one to four additional years. We recognize revenue from the sale of extended warranty and service plans over the respective coverage period, which approximates the service effort provided by us.
We record shipping and handling billed to customers as service and other revenue and the related costs in cost of service and other revenue in the consolidated statement of operations.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, our revenue was comprised of the following sources:
We sell our products globally. We sell directly to end customers in North America and EMEA and we sell through third-party distributors and dealers in the APAC region.
Cost of Goods Sold, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Product cost of revenue primarily consists of costs for finished goods (both instruments and reagents) produced by our contract manufacturers, and associated freight, shipping and handling costs for products shipped to customers, salaries and other personnel costs, and other direct costs related to those sales recognized as product revenue in the period. Cost of goods sold for services and other revenue primarily consists of salaries and other personnel costs, travel related to services provided, costs of servicing equipment at customer sites, and all personnel and related costs for our laboratory services operation.
We expect that our cost of goods sold will increase or decrease to the extent that our revenue increases and decreases and depending on the mix of revenue in any specific period.
Gross profit is calculated as revenue less cost of goods sold. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross profit in future periods will depend on a variety of factors, including market conditions that may impact our pricing, sales mix among instruments, sales mix changes among consumables, excess and obsolete inventories, costs we pay our contract manufacturers for their services, our cost structure for lab service operations relative to volume, and product warranty obligations. Our gross profit in future periods will also vary based upon our channel mix and may decrease based upon our distribution channels.
Gross profit was $34.2 million compared to $25.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating expenses
Research and development. Research and development costs primarily consist of salaries, benefits, engineering/design costs, laboratory supplies, and materials expenses for employees and third parties engaged in research and product development. We expense all research and development costs in the period in which they are incurred.
We plan to continue to invest in our research and development efforts, including hiring additional employees, to enhance existing products and develop new products. As a result, we expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars in future periods. We expect these expenses to vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue.
Selling, general and administrative. Our selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries and benefits for employees in our executive, accounting and finance, legal expenses related to intellectual property, sales and marketing, operations, and human resource functions as well as professional services fees, such as consulting, audit, tax and legal fees, general corporate costs, commercial sales functions, marketing, travel expenses, facilities, IT, and allocated overhead expenses. We expect that our sales, general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars, primarily due to increased headcount to support anticipated growth in the business and due to incremental costs associated with operating as a public company. Additionally, we expect an increase in absolute dollars as we expand our commercial sales, marketing and business development teams, increase our presence globally and increase marketing activities to drive awareness and adoption of our platform. We expect these expenses to vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration. On September 28, 2018, the Company acquired substantially all the assets of the Quantitative Pathology Solutions (“QPS”) division of PKI. As part of the acquisition, on September 28, 2018, the Company entered into a License Agreement with PKI. Under the terms of the License Agreement, the Company agreed to pay PKI certain royalties as a percentage of future sales of products from the QPS division, in exchange for a perpetual license of the right to produce and sell QPS products. This contingent consideration is subject to remeasurement.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses primarily consist of depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of acquired intangibles.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense. Interest expense consists primarily of interest related to borrowings under our debt obligations.
Change in fair value of warrant liability. Prior to our IPO, we classified our outstanding warrant to purchase shares of our Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock as a liability on our balance sheets at its estimated fair value since the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock was classified as temporary equity. At the end of each reporting period, changes in the estimated fair value during the period were recorded as a component of other income (expense). In connection with our IPO, this warrant was adjusted to become a warrant to purchase shares of our common stock and met the criteria to be classified within stockholders’ equity; therefore, the warrant was no longer subject to liability accounting. Accordingly, the fair value of the warrant liability was reclassified to stockholders’ equity.
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt. Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt relates to forgiveness of our Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”) loan, as well as fees incurred to extinguish debt plus any related unamortized debt issuance costs.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net consists primarily of franchise tax and foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
Our benefit (provision) for income taxes consists primarily of foreign taxes and minimal state taxes in the United States. As we expand the scale and scope of our international business activities, any changes in the United States and foreign taxation of such activities may increase our overall provision for income taxes in the future.
Results of operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in the Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Product revenue increased by $11.0 million, or 33%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a $5.8 million increase in consumable revenue resulting from a larger installed base of 697 systems as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 550 systems as of December 31, 2020, a $4.9 million increase in instrument revenue resulting from 147 new system placements during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 118 new system placements for the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as a $0.4 million increase in standalone software products due to incremental software sales completed during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Service and other revenue increased by $1.4 million, or 16%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The growth was primarily due a $1.2 increase from instrument service during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Costs of Goods Sold, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of product revenue increased by $1.9 million, or 15%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of product revenue was primarily driven by costs associated with increased instrument and consumable sales, partially offset by a change of mix in instrument revenue as compared to consumables revenue. Cost of service and other revenue increased by $2.3 million, or 58%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in costs of shipping associated with higher instrument sales, as well as increases in extended warranty costs as there were higher customer renewals due to maturity of the installed base.
Gross profit increased by $8.3 million, or 32%, and gross margin increased by 1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a higher mix of consumables revenue driven by a higher install base. Additionally, the Company recorded a $0.4 million reduction to cost of goods sold in the year ended December 31, 2021, associated with the employee retention credit.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $27.0 million, or 113%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was partially due to a $14.2 million in personnel-related expenses due to an increase in headcount to support the growth in our overall operations in anticipation of and subsequent to our IPO, net of a $2.6 million credit associated with the employee retention credit. Additionally, there was a $7.8 million increase in professional fees and other third-party fees, which are largely incremental costs of operating a public business, including increased marketing, legal, accounting, insurance, and other consulting costs. Remaining increases are due to higher costs in recruiting, facilities, supplies, software licenses and subscriptions, and other related costs.
Research and development
Research and development expense increased by $6.1 million, or 64%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was partially due to a $3.4 million increase in personnel-
related expenses, resulting from increased headcount, net of $1.3 million associated with the employee retention credit, and a $2.1 million increase in lab supplies consumed as the Company ramped up its efforts in anticipation of and subsequent to our IPO.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration increased by $1.6 million, or 299%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to current period remeasurement.
Depreciation and amortization
The $0.9 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily related to an increase in property and equipment as of December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased by $0.4 million, or 14%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased debt levels in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability increased by $2.4 million, or 815%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to current period remeasurement. In connection with our IPO, this warrant was adjusted to become a warrant to purchase shares of our common stock and met the criteria to be classified within stockholders’ equity; therefore, the warrant is no longer subject to liability accounting, and thus no further remeasurement.
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt increased by $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to forgiveness of our PPP Loan in the second quarter of 2021 for $2.5 million, as compared to a $1.7 million loss on extinguishment of the Innovatus Term Loan (as defined below) in 2020.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net increased by $449.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $113.1 million in cash and cash equivalents which were primarily held in U.S. short-term bank deposit accounts.
Since our inception, we have experienced losses and negative cash flows from operations, and as of December 31, 2021, we had a consolidated net loss of$42.9 million and an accumulated deficit of $96.1 million. We have primarily relied on equity and debt financings to fund our operations to date.
We expect to incur additional operating losses in the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in the research and development of our product offerings, commercialize and launch platforms, and expand into new markets. Based on our current business plan, we believe the net proceeds from our IPO, together with our existing cash and cash equivalents and anticipated cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months following the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to our ability to successfully commercialize and launch products, and to achieve a level of sales adequate to support our cost structure. If we are unable to execute on our business plan and adequately fund operations, or if the business plan requires a level of spending in excess of cash resources, we will have to seek additional equity or debt financing. If additional financings are required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects could be adversely affected.
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily from the issuance and sale of our convertible preferred stock and borrowings under long-term debt agreements. In April 2021, we completed our IPO, resulting in the receipt of aggregate proceeds of $138.6 million, net of offering costs, underwriter discounts and commissions of $12.8 million.
Convertible preferred stock financings
Through December 31, 2021, we have raised a total of $60.5 million from the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock, net of costs associated with such financings. Most recently, in 2019 we issued shares of Series D convertible preferred stock for gross proceeds of $25.0 million. All preferred stock converted to common stock immediately prior to our IPO.
Payroll Protection Program loan
During April 2020, we received a $2.48 million small business loan under the Payroll Protection Program, part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, the CARES Act. The PPP Loan was forgiven in June 2021.
Midcap Trust Term Loan
In October 2020, we entered into the Midcap Trust Term Loan, for a $37.5 million credit facility, consisting of a senior, secured term loan to refinance all existing indebtedness with Innovatus (as defined below). We realized $32.5 million in aggregate proceeds as a result of the debt financing. The term of the Midcap Trust Term Loan is interest only for 36-months followed by 24-months of straight-line amortization with a final maturity date of October 27, 2025. Interest on the outstanding balance of the Midcap Trust Term Loan shall be payable monthly in arrears at an annual rate of one-month LIBOR plus 6.35%, subject to a LIBOR floor of 1.50%.
The Midcap Trust Term Loan is subject to a minimum revenue financial covenant measuring our last twelve months trailing revenue, tested on a monthly basis.
The Midcap Trust Term Loan is collateralized by substantially all of our assets. The agreement contains customary negative covenants that limit our ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, grant liens, make investments, repurchase stock, pay dividends, transfer assets and merge or consolidate with any other entity or to acquire all or substantially all the capital stock or property of another entity. The agreement also contains customary affirmative covenants, including requirements to, among other things, deliver audited financial statements. If we default under the Midcap Trust Term Loan and if the default is not cured or waived, the lender could cause any amounts outstanding to be payable immediately. Under certain circumstances, the lender could also exercise its rights with respect to the collateral securing such loans. Moreover, any such default would limit our ability to obtain additional financing, which may have an adverse effect on our cash flow and liquidity.
We were in compliance with all covenants under the Midcap Trust Term Loan as of December 31, 2021.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $29.2 million to $36.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is attributable to a net loss of $42.9 million, offset by non-cash charges of $11.4 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $2.7 million in change in fair value of warrant liability, $4.8 million of depreciation and amortization, $2.1 million in change in fair value of contingent consideration, and $0.4 million of non-cash interest expense, offset by $2.5 million gain on extinguishment of debt.
Investing activities
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities was ($5.1) million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by purchases of property and equipment of $5.1 million.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $137.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In April of 2021, the Company received $138.6 million in net proceeds from our IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid out $1.6 million in contingent consideration as compared to $2.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Remaining changes were immaterial.
Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Interest rate risk
Customer financing exposure. We are indirectly exposed to interest rate risk because many of our customers depend on debt financings to purchase our platforms and systems. An increase in interest rates could make it challenging for our customers to obtain the capital necessary to make such purchases on favorable terms, or at all. Such factors could reduce demand or lower the price we can charge for our platforms and systems, thereby reducing our net sales and gross profit.
Fixed rate debt. In October 2020, we entered into the Midcap Trust Term Loan, which is due in October 2025, and carries a fixed interest rate of 7.85% per annum. If we refinance the Midcap Trust Term Loan or enter into new debt arrangements, interest rates could increase and thereby increase our financing costs and increase our net loss. A hypothetical 100 basis point change in interest rates would not have a material impact on interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Bank deposit, money market and note receivable exposure. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, of $113.4 million, which consisted primarily of bank deposits. The primary objective of our investment is to preserve principal and provide liquidity. These bank deposits generate interest income at variable rates below 1%. A hypothetical 100 basis point decrease in interest rates would not have a material impact on interest income or net loss.
Foreign currency risk
The majority of our revenue has been generated in the United States. As we expand our presence in international markets, to the extent we are required to enter into agreements denominated in a currency other than the U.S. dollar, our results of operations and cash flows may increasingly be subject to fluctuations due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and may be adversely affected in the future due to changes in foreign exchange rates. To date, we have not entered into any hedging arrangements with respect to foreign currency risk. As our international operations grow, we will continue to reassess our approach to manage our risk relating to fluctuations in currency rates.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. Our preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could therefore differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of long-lived assets and goodwill
The Company evaluates its long-lived assets, including demo inventory, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If indications of impairment exist, projected future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset or asset group are compared to the carrying amount to determine whether the asset’s value is recoverable. During this analysis, the Company reevaluates the significant assumptions used in determining the original cost and estimated lives of long-lived assets. Although the assumptions may vary from asset to asset, they generally include operating results, changes in the use of the asset or asset group, cash flows and other indicators of value. The Company then determines whether the remaining useful life continues to be appropriate or whether there has been an impairment of long-lived assets based primarily upon whether expected future undiscounted cash flows are sufficient to support the assets’ or asset groups recovery. If impairment exists, the Company would adjust the carrying value of the asset to fair value, generally determined by a discounted cash flow analysis. If the carrying value of the asset or asset group exceeds such projected undiscounted cash flows, the asset or asset group will be written down to its estimated fair value.
The Company tests goodwill for impairment annually and tests intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable (i.e., upon occurrence of a triggering event). The Company performs its annual impairment review of goodwill on November 1 of each calendar year (and if and when triggering events occur between annual impairment tests).
Revenue recognition
The Company follows ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”).
We derive revenue from two primary sources, product revenue, which is comprised primarily of instrument sales revenue, consumables revenue, and software revenue, as well as service revenue, which is comprised of, service and warranty, and laboratory services revenue. Revenue is recognized net of applicable taxes imposed on the related transaction.
We recognize revenue when we satisfy the performance obligations under the terms of a contract and control of our products and services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive from our customers in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract based on standalone selling price, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once we have transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service.
Our agreements with customers often include multiple performance obligations, which can sometimes be included in separate contracts entered into within a reasonably short period of time. We consider an entire customer arrangement to determine if separate contracts should be considered combined for the purposes of revenue recognition.
In order to determine the stand-alone selling price, we conduct a periodic analysis to determine whether various goods or services have an observable stand-alone selling price as well as to identify significant changes to current stand-alone selling prices. If we do not have an observable stand-alone selling price for a particular good or service, then the stand-alone selling price for that particular good or service is estimated using an approach that maximizes the use of
observable inputs. Our process for determining stand-alone selling price requires judgment and considers multiple factors that are reasonably available and maximizes the use of observable inputs that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each performance obligation. We believe that this method results in an estimate that represents the price we would charge for the product offerings if they were sold separately.
Taxes, such as sales, value-added and other taxes, collected from customers concurrent with revenue generating activities and remitted to governmental authorities are not included in revenue. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are included in cost of sales.
The following describes the nature of our primary types of revenue and the revenue recognition policies and significant payment terms as they pertain to the types of transactions we enter into with our customers.
Product revenue
Product revenue is comprised of three major revenue streams, instrument sales, consumables, and standalone software products. Instrument sales revenue is comprised of sales of PhenoCycler and PhenoImager platforms. Consumables revenue is comprised of reagent kits. We also sell software licenses, both internally developed as well as third-party software. Our standard arrangement with our customers is generally a purchase order or an executed contract. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of title. Payment terms are generally thirty to ninety days from the date of invoicing.
Service and other revenue
Service and other revenue primarily consists of instrument service and warranty, instrument installation and training, and revenue generated by our ABS operation, which provides sample testing services to customers. Our services are provided primarily on a fixed fee basis; from time to time these fixed fee contracts may be invoiced at the outset of the arrangements. We recognize revenue from the sale of an extended warranty, enhanced service warranty arrangements over the respective period, while revenue on installation, training and laboratory services is recognized as the services are performed. For laboratory services, we generally use the cost-to-cost approach to measure the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation because we believe it best depicts the transfer of assets to the customer. Under the cost-to-cost measure approach, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. Revenues are recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. Payment terms are generally thirty to ninety days from the date of invoicing.
The Company records shipping and handling billed to customers as service and other revenue and the related costs in cost of other revenue in the consolidated statement of operations.
Contract assets and contract liabilities
The Company’s contract liabilities consist of upfront payments for service-based warranties on instrument sales. The Company classifies these contract liabilities in deferred revenue as current or noncurrent based on the timing of when the Company expects to service the warranty.
Costs to obtain or fulfill a contract
Under ASC 606, the Company is required to capitalize certain costs to obtain customer contracts and costs to fulfill customer contracts. These costs are required to be amortized to expense on a systemic basis that is consistent with the transfer to the customer of the goods or services to which the asset relates, compared to previously being expensed as incurred. As a practical expedient, the Company recognizes any incremental costs to obtain a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset is one year or less.
Stock-based compensation
We maintain an incentive compensation plan under which incentive stock options and nonqualified stock options are granted primarily to employees, non-employee consultants, and board members. Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. The fair value of stock-based awards to employees is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We record forfeitures as they occur.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Recent accounting pronouncements
For information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
JOBS Act accounting election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this extended transition period, and, as a result, we will not be required to adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies. We intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Smaller reporting company status
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million as of the last trading day of our second quarter and our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. For example, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.