Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (see Part I, Item 1A) for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by any forward-looking statement contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $300.9 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses as we continue our development of, and seek marketing approvals for, our product candidates, commercialize Bylvay for its approved indications, and prepare for and begin the commercialization of any future approved products, and add infrastructure and personnel to support our product development and commercialization efforts and operations as a public company in the United States.
As a commercial-stage company, our revenues, expenses and results of operations are likely to fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We believe that period-to-period comparisons of our results of operations should not be relied upon as indicative of our future performance.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $248.1 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Financial Operations Overview
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our consolidated statements of operations as well as factors that impact those items.
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from the receipt of royalty revenue, upfront or license fees and milestone payments as well as product revenue following our commercial launch of Bylvay. License agreements with commercial partners generally include nonrefundable upfront fees and milestone payments. We recognize revenue on sales of Bylvay when a customer obtains control of the product, which occurs at a point in time and upon delivery, the receipt of which is dependent upon the achievement of specified development, regulatory or commercial milestone events, as well as royalties on product sales of licensed products, if and when such product sales occur, and payments for pharmaceutical ingredient or related procurement services. For these agreements, management applies judgment in the allocation of total agreement consideration to the performance obligations on a reliable basis that reasonably reflects the selling prices that might be expected to be achieved in stand-alone transactions. For additional information about our revenue recognition, refer to Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We commenced our commercial launch of Bylvay for the treatment of pruritus in patients with PFIC ages 3 months or older in the United States in July 2021 after we received FDA approval of Bylvay on July 20, 2021.
We sell Bylvay to a limited number of specialty pharmacies and a specialty distributor which dispense the product directly to patients. The specialty pharmacies and specialty distributor are referred to as our customers. We also sell Bylvay to our customers in the European Union, which includes a limited number of pharmacies. Bylvay was authorized by the European Medicines Agency on July 16, 2021 for the treatment of PFIC in patients 6 months or older. Bylvay was also granted marketing authorization by the UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in September 2021 for the treatment of PFIC in patients 6 months or older.
Product Revenue, Net
The Company recognizes revenue on sales of Bylvay when a customer obtains control of the product, which occurs at a point in time and upon delivery. We provide the right of return to our customers for unopened product for a limited time before and after its expiration date.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), we have written contracts with each of our customers that have a single performance obligation - to deliver products upon receipt of a customer order - and these obligations are satisfied when delivery occurs and the customer receives Bylvay. We evaluate the creditworthiness of each of our customers to determine whether collection is reasonably assured. The wholesale acquisition cost that we charge our customers for Bylvay is adjusted to arrive at our estimated net product revenues by deducting (i) estimated government rebates and discounts related to Medicaid and other government programs, (ii) estimated costs of incentives offered to certain indirect customers including patients, (iii) trade allowances, such as invoice discounts for prompt payment and customer fees, and (iv) allowance for sales returns.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized net sales of Bylvay of approximately $7.0 million. No revenue was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Royalty Revenue
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on a level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized revenue of $18.6 million and $8.3 million, respectively, related to our agreement with EA Pharma. We expect that any future revenue recognized under our license agreement with EA Pharma will fluctuate from quarter to quarter and year to year as a result of royalties for the period from EA Pharma, as well as the uncertain timing of future milestone payments, if any.
In October 2021, Albireo entered into an agreement with Jadeite Medicines Inc. to license, develop and commercialize Bylvay within Japan. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized revenue of $15 million related to an upfront payment which was received in December 2021. We identified 13 promised goods and services under our license agreement but concluded that there was only one performance obligation that was material in the context of the contract under ASC 606. Therefore, we allocated the full amount received against that performance obligation. Currently, Jadeite is commencing bridging and other clinical studies to obtain NDA filings and approval in Japan for PFIC, ALGS, and biliary atresia indications. Future royalty revenue recognized under our license agreement with Jadeite will not commence until after NDA approval. The next anticipated milestone payment will be received upon NDA filings in Japan for Bylvay and the timing of future milestone payments, if any, is uncertain.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue consists of manufacturing and quality headcount costs for sales of Bylvay. Based on our policy to expense costs associated with the manufacture of our products prior to regulatory approval on July 20, 2021, certain of the Bylvay costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 were expensed prior to July 20, 2021 and, therefore, are not included in costs of sales during the current period. These costs expensed prior to regulatory approval were determined to be immaterial after estimating the cost of sales, with or without such costs, compared to the net sales of Bylvay as a whole. Manufacturing costs, which totaled approximately $1.6 million, were not capitalized, and instead were expensed as research and development expenses from 2020 to July 2021.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs (including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation) for employees in research and development functions, costs associated with nonclinical and clinical development services, including clinical trials and related manufacturing costs, third-party contract research organizations, or CROs, and related services and other outside costs, including fees for third-party professional services such as consultants. Our nonclinical studies and clinical studies are performed by CROs. We expect to continue to focus our research and development efforts on nonclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase for the foreseeable future.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs such as fees paid to CROs and others in connection with our nonclinical and clinical development activities and related manufacturing. We do not allocate employee costs or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Successful development of our current and potential future product candidates is highly uncertain. Completion dates and costs for our programs can vary significantly by product candidate and are difficult to predict. As a result, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the costs we will incur in connection with development of any of our product candidates. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs and product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program and product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future clinical trials, our ability to enter into licensing, collaboration and similar arrangements with respect to current or potential future product candidates, the success of research and development programs and our assessments of commercial potential.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs (including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation) for our executive, finance and other administrative employees. In addition, selling, general and administrative expenses include fees for third-party professional services, including consulting, information technology, legal and accounting services. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include marketing expenses related to the commercial launch of Bylvay as well as corporate expenses.
Other Operating Expense (Income), Net
Other operating expense (income), net consists primarily of foreign currency exchange gains or losses associated with revaluation of intercompany loans.
Gain from sale of priority review voucher, net of transaction costs
Gain from sale of priority review voucher, net of transaction costs consists of cash proceeds recorded in connection with the sale of the rare pediatric disease priority review voucher (PRV) received from the FDA in connection with the approval of our product Bylvay.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of non-cash interest expense recorded in connection with the sale of future royalties, related to sales of elobixibat in Japan and Thailand in addition to both cash and non-cash interest expense associated with our note payable. In addition, interest expense, net includes interest income associated with our interest-bearing cash and cash equivalents.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate them on an ongoing basis. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates and judgments. In addition, our reported financial condition and results of operations could vary if new accounting standards are enacted that are applicable to our business.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Due to the commercialization of Bylvay, we implemented accounting policies related to product revenue recognition and inventory. We believe that our accounting policies relating to revenue recognition, inventory, research and development expenses, and accounting for the liability related to sale of future royalties are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. We have identified these policies as critical because they are important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require us to make judgments and estimates on matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in future periods. For more information regarding these policies, you should refer to Note 1 of our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services in accordance with ASC 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with its customers, the Company performs the following five step assessment: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception and once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract, determines which goods and services are performance obligations, and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Product Revenue, Net
The Company recognizes revenue on sales of Bylvay when a customer obtains control of the product, which occurs at a point in time and upon delivery. The Company sells Bylvay to a limited number of specialty pharmacies and a specialty distributor which dispense the product directly to patients. The specialty pharmacies and specialty distributor are referred to as the Company’s customers. The Company also sells Bylvay to its customers in the European Union, which includes a limited number of pharmacies.
The Company provides the right of return to its customers for unopened product for a limited time before and after its expiration date. We currently estimate product returns using available industry data as well as the Company’s visibility into the inventory remaining in the distribution channel.
The Company has written contracts with each of its customers that have a single performance obligation to deliver products upon receipt of a customer order and these obligations are satisfied when delivery occurs and the customer receives Bylvay. The Company evaluates creditworthiness of each of its customers to determine whether collection is
reasonably assured. The wholesale acquisition cost that the Company charges its customers for Bylvay is adjusted to arrive at our estimated net product revenues by deducting components of variable consideration which include (i) estimated government rebates and discounts related to Medicaid and other government programs, (ii) estimated costs of incentives offered to certain indirect customers including patients, (iii) trade allowances, such as invoice discounts for prompt payment and customer fees, and (iv) allowance for sales returns.
Summarized information about changes in the aggregate customer discount accrual related to product sales, excluding co-pay which holds a prepaid balance as detailed in the Other Incentives section below, is as follows (in thousands):
Rebates and Discounts
The Company contracts with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and other government agencies in the U.S. to make Bylvay available to eligible patients. As a result, the Company estimates any rebates and discounts, including chargebacks related to 340b, and deducts these estimated amounts from its gross product revenues at the time the revenues are recognized. The Company’s estimates of rebates and discounts are based on the government mandated discounts, which are statutorily-defined and applicable to these government funded programs and assumptions developed using historical experience with actual payments and redemptions.
The Company contracts with national authorities in Europe to make Bylvay available to eligible patients. In jurisdictions in which final pricing is subject to ongoing negotiations with the government, the Company estimates the rebate expected to be due and deducts these estimated amounts from its gross product revenues at the time the revenues are recognized. The Company’s estimates of such liabilities are based on current invoice pricing and total prior units sold and assumptions developed using benchmarks of Bylvay pricing approved in other relevant European jurisdictions.
Other Incentives
Other incentives that the Company offers to indirect customers include co-pay assistance cards provided by the Company for patients who reside in states that permit co-pay assistance programs. The Company’s co-pay assistance program is intended to reduce each participating patient’s portion of the financial responsibility for Bylvay’s purchase price to a specified dollar amount. The Company estimates the amount of co-pay assistance provided to eligible patients based on the terms of the program when product is dispensed by the specialty pharmacies to the patients. These estimates are based on redemption information provided by third-party claims processing organizations.
Trade Allowances
The Company provides invoice discounts on Bylvay sales to its customers for prompt payment and records these discounts as a reduction to gross product revenues. These discounts are based on contractual terms. The Company also pays fees to its distributors for their services as well as data that they provide to the Company. Prompt payment allowances are recorded in accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheets. The other customer fees are recorded as other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
Trade Receivables, net
Accounts receivable, net related to product sales are recorded in accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheets. An allowance for doubtful accounts is determined based on the Company’s assessment of the credit worthiness and financial condition of its customers, aging of receivables, as well as the general economic environment. Any allowance would reduce the net receivables to the amount that is expected to be collected. Payment terms for U.S. customers are typically 31 - 36 days from receipt of invoice and for European customers are typically 45 days from receipt of invoice.
Contract Revenue and Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments or upfront payment, the Company evaluates whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price, which includes any upfront payments, using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Once the estimated transaction price is established, the associated consideration is allocated to the performance obligations that have been identified in the respective agreement. Milestone payments that are not within the control of the Company or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The Company evaluates factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, the Company reevaluates the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on a level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, the Company recognizes revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
In 2012, the Company entered into a license agreement (the Agreement) with EA Pharma Co., Ltd. (EA Pharma, formerly Ajinomoto Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd.) to develop a select product candidate (elobixibat) for registration and subsequent commercialization in select markets. In conjunction with the Agreement, the Company granted EA Pharma an exclusive license to its intellectual property for development and commercialization activities in the designated field and territories. The Company has completed all of its performance obligations under the Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company is eligible to receive an additional regulatory-based milestone payment under the Agreement of $4.9 million if a specified regulatory event is achieved for elobixibat. The cash payments and any other payments for milestones and royalties from EA Pharma are non-refundable, non-creditable and not subject to set-off.
The Agreement will continue until the last royalty period for any product in the territory, which is defined as the period when there are no remaining patent rights or regulatory exclusivity in place for any products subject to royalties. EA Pharma may terminate the Agreement upon 180 days’ prior written notice to the Company. Either party may terminate the Agreement for the other party’s uncured material breach or insolvency and in certain other circumstances agreed to by the parties.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue consists of manufacturing and quality headcount costs for sales of Bylvay. Based on our policy to expense costs associated with the manufacture of our products prior to regulatory approval on July 20, 2021,
certain of the Bylvay costs during year ended December 31, 2021 were expensed prior to July 20, 2021 and, therefore, are not included in costs of sales during the current period. These costs expensed prior to regulatory approval were determined to be immaterial after estimating the cost of sales, with or without such costs, compared to the net sales of Bylvay as a whole. Manufacturing costs, which totaled approximately $1.6 million, were not capitalized, and instead were expensed as research and development expenses from 2020 to July 2021.
Inventory
We value inventory at cost or, if lower, net realizable value, using the first-in, first-out method. We monitor standard costs on a quarterly basis and update them annually and as necessary to reflect changes in raw material costs and labor and overhead rates. During all periods presented in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, there have been no material adjustments related to a revised estimate of inventory valuations. A change in the estimated timing or amount of demand for our products could result in additional provisions for excess inventory quantities on hand.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs (including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation) for employees in research and development functions, costs associated with nonclinical and clinical development services, including clinical trials and related manufacturing costs, third-party contract research organizations, or CROs, and related services and other outside costs, including fees for third-party professional services such as consultants. Our nonclinical studies and clinical studies are performed by CROs. We expect to continue to focus our research and development efforts on nonclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase for the foreseeable future.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs such as fees paid to CROs and others in connection with our nonclinical and clinical development activities and related manufacturing. We do not allocate employee costs or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Successful development of our current and potential future product candidates is highly uncertain. Completion dates and costs for our programs can vary significantly by product candidate and are difficult to predict. As a result, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the costs we will incur in connection with development of any of our product candidates. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs and product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program and product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future clinical trials, our ability to enter into licensing, collaboration and similar arrangements with respect to current or potential future product candidates, the success of research and development programs and our assessments of commercial potential.
Monetization of Future Royalties
In December 2017, we entered into a royalty interest acquisition agreement (RIAA) with HealthCare Royalty Partners III, L.P. (HCR) pursuant to which we sold to HCR the right to receive all royalties from sales in Japan and sales milestones achieved from any covered territory potentially payable to us under the Agreement, up to a specified maximum “cap” amount of $78.8 million, based on the funds we received from HCR. In January 2018, we received $44.5 million from HCR, net of certain transaction expenses, under the RIAA. On June 8, 2020, the parties entered into an amendment to the RIAA pursuant to which HCR agreed to pay us an additional $14.8 million, net of certain transactions expenses, in exchange for the elimination of the (i) $78.8 million cap amount on HCR’s rights to receive royalties on sales in Japan and sales milestones for elobixibat in certain other territories that may become payable by EA Pharma and (ii) the $15.0 million payable to us if a specified sales milestone is achieved for elobixibat in Japan. We are obligated to make royalty interest payments to HCR under the RIAA only to the extent we receive future Japanese royalties, sales milestones or other specified payments from EA Pharma. Although we sold our rights to receive royalties from the sales of elobixibat in Japan, as a result of our ongoing involvement in the cash flows related to these royalties,
we will continue to account for these royalties as revenue. Upon receipt of the payments from HCR we recorded net cash totaling $59.3 million as a liability related to sale of future royalties (royalty obligation). The royalty obligation will be amortized using the effective interest rate method.
We record estimated royalties due for the current period in accrued other expenses until the payment is received from EA Pharma at which time we then remit payment to HCR. In order to determine the accretion of the royalty obligation, we are required to estimate the total amount of future royalty payments to be received and submitted to HCR. The sum of these amounts less the $59.3 million proceeds we received will be recorded as interest expense over the life of the royalty obligation. At December 31, 2021, our estimate of total interest expense resulted in an annual effective interest rate of approximately 18.1%.
We periodically assess the estimated royalty payments to HCR and to the extent such payments are greater or less than our initial estimates or the timing of such payments is materially different than our original estimates, we will prospectively adjust the accretion of interest on the royalty obligation. There are a number of factors that could materially affect the amount and the timing of royalty payments, most of which are not within our control. Such factors include, but are not limited to, the rate of elobixibat prescriptions, the number of doses administered, the introduction of competing products, manufacturing or other delays, patent protection, adverse events that result in governmental health authority imposed restrictions on the use of the drug products, significant changes in foreign exchange rates as the royalties remitted to HCR are in U.S. dollars while sales of elobixibat are in Japanese yen, and sales never achieving forecasted numbers, which would result in reduced royalty payments and reduced non-cash interest expense over the life of the royalty obligation. To the extent future royalties result in an amount less than the liability, we are not obligated to fund any such shortfall.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Result of Operations
Revenue
Product revenue, net was $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to Bylvay patient sales and initial inventory stocking at specialty pharmacies. Product revenue was $5.3 million in the United States and $1.7 million in international markets. There was no product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Royalty revenue was $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with revenue of $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $10.3 million. The increase relates to higher estimated royalty revenue and an achievement of a milestone in an amount of $8.6 million to be received from EA Pharma for elobixibat for the treatment of chronic constipation.
License revenue was $15.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to cash received related to the upfront fee from the Exclusive Licensing Agreement with Jadeite Medicines for Bylvay in Japan. There was no license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of product revenue was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Following Bylvay approval certain manufacturing and quality headcount costs are now included in cost of product revenue. There were no material costs, as materials related to current product sold were expensed prior to approval. Bylvay was approved during 2021, so there was no cost of product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $82.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $76.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.7 million. The increase in research and development expenses for the 2021 period were principally due to clinical programs and personnel expenses, including stock-based compensation as we continue to increase our headcount and program activities. The increase in program activities related to the ongoing phase 3 clinical trials for Bylvay in biliary atresia and Alagille Syndrome, including an extension study, as well as the Phase 1 study for A3907, and were partially offset by a decrease in Bylvay PFIC expenses related to the completion of the PEDFIC 1 study, elobixibat expenses due to the completion of the elobixibat Phase 2 trial in NASH, and preclinical programs expenses.
The following table summarizes our principal product development programs and the out-of-pocket third-party expenses incurred with respect to each clinical-stage product candidate and our preclinical programs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(1) Other project costs are leveraged across multiple programs.
(2) Other costs include facility, supply, consultant and overhead costs that support multiple programs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $69.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $42.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $27.1 million. The increase is attributable to personnel and related expenses as we continue to increase our headcount from 34 employees at December 31, 2020 to 65 employees at December 31, 2021, and commercialization activities related to Bylvay including our sales force and support for global expansion efforts.
Other operating expense (income), net
Other operating expense (income), net totaled $10.6 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $14.6 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2020, a difference of $25.3 million. The difference primarily relates to changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the two periods.
Gain from sale of priority review voucher, net of transaction costs
Gain from sale of priority review voucher, net of transaction costs totaled $103.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. There was no gain from the sale of priority review voucher, net for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net totaled $13.9 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a difference of $2.6 million. The difference was principally attributable to higher non-cash interest expense recorded in connection with the sale of future royalties related to sales of elobixibat in Japan, in addition to interest expense associated with our note payable.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we commercialize Bylvay and continue the development of and seek regulatory approvals for Bylvay in other indications and for our other product candidates. We are subject to all of the risks applicable to the development of new pharmaceutical products and may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may harm our business. We expect that we will need substantial additional funding to complete development of and potentially commercialize our other product candidates.
Our operations have historically been financed primarily through issuances of equity or convertible debt, upfront fees paid upon entering into license agreements, payments received upon the achievement of specified milestone events under license agreements, grants and venture debt borrowings and the HCR royalty monetization transactions. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, personnel-related costs, third party expenses associated with our research and development programs, including the conduct of clinical trials, and manufacturing-related costs for our other product candidates as well as commercialization and pre-commercialization efforts.
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were approximately $248.1 million.
During the first quarter of 2018, following the Japanese MHLW’s approval of elobixibat for the treatment of chronic constipation in January 2018, we received a $44.5 million payment, net of certain transaction expenses, from HCR under our RIAA. Additionally, this approval triggered a milestone payment to us from EA Pharma of $11.2 million. In June 2020, we entered into an amendment to the RIAA with HCR pursuant to which HCR agreed to pay us an additional $14.8 million, net of certain transaction expenses in exchange for the elimination of the (i) $78.8 million cap amount on HCR’s rights to receive royalties on sales in Japan and sales milestones for elobixibat in certain other territories that may become payable by EA Pharma and (ii) $15.0 million payable to us if a specified sales milestone is achieved for elobixibat in Japan. As of December 31, 2021, we have received approximately $59.3 million in upfront and milestone payments from EA Pharma under a license agreement for the development and commercialization of elobixibat in specified countries in Asia. We are eligible to receive additional amounts of up to $4.9 million under the amended agreement, if a specified regulatory event is achieved for elobixibat. To the extent we receive future Japanese royalties,
sales milestones or other specified payments from EA Pharma, we are obligated to pay those amounts as royalty interest payments to HCR under the RIAA.
In February 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 2,190,750 shares of our common stock under our universal shelf registration statement for net proceeds of approximately $43.0 million.
On May 7, 2020, we filed a new universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3, or the 2020 Form S-3, with the SEC, which was declared effective on May 18, 2020, pursuant to which we registered for sale up to $200.0 million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine. On May 7, 2020, we also entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, with respect to an at-the-market offering program under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. This agreement terminated on September 9, 2020.
On September 14, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 4,000,000 shares of our common stock under this registration statement. We received net proceeds from this offering of approximately $150.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, but before deducting offering expenses. As of December 31, 2021, $40.0 million of securities remain available for issuance under the 2020 Form S-3.
On June 8, 2020, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with several banks and other financial institutions or entities from time to time parties to the Loan and Security Agreement, as lenders, or collectively referred to as the Lender, and Hercules Capital, Inc., in its capacity as administrative agent and collateral agent for itself and Lender (in such capacity, the Agent or Hercules). The Loan and Security Agreement provides for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $80.0 million to be delivered in multiple tranches, (the Term Loans). The tranches consist of (i) a term loan advance to us in an aggregate principal amount of up to $15.0 million, of which (A) we agreed to borrow an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million on the date on which all conditions to the funding of the Term Loans by the Lender were met (the Closing Date), but we did not request that the Lender make an additional term loan advance to us in an aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million prior to December 15, 2020 as permitted under the agreement, (ii) subject to the achievement of certain initial performance milestones, or Performance Milestone I, we have the right to request that the Lender make additional term loan advances to us in an aggregate principal amount of up to $20.0 million from January 1, 2021 through December 15, 2021 in minimum increments of $10.0 million, and (iii) subject to the Lender’s investment committee’s sole discretion, we have the right to request that the Lender make additional term loan advances to us in an aggregate principal amount of up to $45.0 million through March 31, 2022 in minimum increments of $5.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million and an aggregate principal amount of up to $45.0 million remains available for future borrowing through March 31, 2022 subject to approval of the Lender.
Under the Loan and Security Agreement, we also agreed to issue to Hercules warrants to purchase a number of shares of our common stock equal to 1% of the aggregate amount of the Term Loans that are funded, as such amounts are funded. On the Closing Date, we issued a warrant for 5,311 shares of our common stock. The warrants will be exercisable for a period of seven years from the date of the issuance of each warrant at a per-share exercise price equal to $18.83, subject to certain adjustments as specified in the warrants. The shares of common stock underlying the warrants were subsequently registered on Form S-3 with the SEC, which was declared effective on August 18, 2020.
On February 25, 2021, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which became effective upon filing, pursuant to which we registered for sale an unlimited amount of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine, so long as we continue to satisfy the requirements of a “well-known seasoned issuer” under SEC rules, which we refer to as the 2021 Form S-3. Because we are no longer a well-known seasoned issuer, the 2021 Form S-3 will no longer be available for us to offer and sell securities pursuant to the 2021 Form S-3 following the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. On February 25, 2021, we also entered into a new sales agreement with Cowen, which we refer to as the 2021 Sales Agreement, with respect to an at-the-market offering program under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock
having an aggregate offering price of up to $100.0 million. Subsequently in July 2021, we sold 7,508 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of approximately $0.2 million pursuant to the 2021 Sales Agreement. Since the 2021 Form S-3 is no longer available, unless and until we register the offer and sale of securities pursuant to the 2021 Sales Agreement in the future, we will not be able to make any further sales of securities under the 2021 Sales Agreement.
On August 31, 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell the rare pediatric disease priority review voucher (“PRV”) that we received from the FDA in connection with the approval of the Company’s product Bylvay, for cash proceeds of $105.0 million. On September 28, 2021, we completed our sale of the PRV and received net proceeds of $103.4 million, after deducting commission costs, which was recorded as a gain from sale of priority review voucher, net of transaction costs.
Cash Flows
Years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Operating activities
Cash used in operating activities of $107.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily a result of our $34.0 million net loss from operations and a net decrease in assets and liabilities of $9.7 million. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by decreases in other current and long-term liabilities and prepaid expenses and other current assets, offset by increases in accrued expenses, accounts receivables, net, accounts payable, inventory and other assets. This decrease was offset by non cash items, including $15.9 million of stock-based compensation expense, $12.5 million of accretion of liability related to sale of future royalties and $10.4 million of foreign currency adjustments. Cash used in operating activities of $101.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of our $107.6 million net loss from operations and a net decrease in assets and liabilities of $4.7 million. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by decreases in prepaid expenses and other current assets, decreases in accrued expenses, as well as decreases in other current and long-term liabilities. This decrease was offset by non-cash items, including $14.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, $14.6 million of foreign currency adjustments, and $10.8 million of accretion of liability related to sale of future royalties.
Investing activities
Cash provided by investing activities of $102.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to net proceeds from the sale of the PRV offset by purchases of property and equipment. Cash used in investing activities of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to proceeds from exercise of options. Cash provided by financing activities of $220.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to proceeds from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs of $193.3 million, proceeds from the HCR royalty agreement of $14.8 million, proceeds from the issuance of debt, net of issuance costs of $9.5 million, and proceeds from exercise of options of $2.8 million.
Funding Requirements
Cash used to fund operating expenses is affected by the timing of when we pay expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. During the third quarter of 2021 an additional $103.4 million of net proceeds were received after deducting fees from the recently completed sale of the PRV. An additional $15 million cash upfront fee from the recently announced Japan licensing agreement was received in the fourth quarter of 2021. As a result, cash and cash equivalents are anticipated to be sufficient to fully fund the launches of Bylvay and the next stages of the early asset portfolio. The Company believes that its cash of $248.1 million at December 31, 2021 together with its current Bylvay revenue and operating expense projections will be sufficient to fund its current operating plan into 2024.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
● future revenue from commercial sales of Bylvay for patients with PFIC;
● the costs, design, duration and any potential delays of the pivotal clinical trial of Bylvay in biliary atresia and the pivotal clinical trial of Bylvay in ALGS;
● the scope, number, progress, initiation, duration, cost, results and timing of clinical trials and nonclinical studies of our current or future product candidates;
● whether and to what extent milestone events are achieved under our license agreement with EA Pharma or any potential future licensee or collaborator;
● the outcomes and timing of regulatory reviews, approvals or other actions;
● our ability to obtain marketing approval for our product candidates;
● our ability to establish and maintain additional licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements on favorable terms and whether and to what extent we retain development or commercialization responsibilities under any new licensing, collaboration or similar arrangement;
● the success of any other business, product or technology that we acquire or in which we invest;
● our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio;
● our ability to manufacture any approved products on commercially reasonable terms;
● our ability to build and maintain a sales and marketing organization or suitable third-party alternatives for any approved product;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates and programs that we pursue;
● the current and potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business;
● the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, product candidates and technologies;
● our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel;
● the costs to operate as a public company in the United States, including the need to implement and maintain financial and reporting systems and other internal systems and infrastructure for our business;
● market acceptance of our product candidates, to the extent any are approved for commercial sale; and
● the effect of competing technological and market developments.
We cannot be certain that we will be able to successfully commercialize Bylvay or that we will be able to establish and maintain distribution arrangements. Our failure or the failure of our distributors to successfully commercialize Bylvay could have a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operations. In addition, we cannot be certain that we will be able to successfully complete our pre-commercialization activities or research and development programs or establish licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements for our product candidates. Our failure or the failure of any current or potential future licensee to complete research and development programs for our product candidates could have a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operations.
We expect to continue to incur losses. Our ability to achieve and maintain profitability is dependent upon the successful development, regulatory approval and commercialization of our products and product candidates and achieving a level of revenues adequate to support our cost structure. We may never achieve profitability.
If the conditions for raising capital are favorable, we may seek to finance future cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings or other financings. Additionally, if we need to raise additional capital to fund our operations, complete clinical trials, or potentially commercialize our product candidates, we may likewise seek to finance future cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings or other financings. The necessary funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
We have an effective universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, pursuant to which we registered for sale up to $200.0 million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine. As of December 31, 2021, $40.0 million of securities remain available for issuance under the shelf registration statement, which we refer to as the 2020 Form S-3. On February 25, 2021, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, pursuant to which we registered for sale an unlimited amount of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine, so long as we continue to satisfy the requirements of a “well-known seasoned issuer” under SEC rules, which we refer to as the 2021 Form S-3, including up to $100.0 million of our common stock pursuant to the sales agreement with respect to an at-the-market offering program. As of December 31, 2021, there remained $99.7 million of our common stock available for sale pursuant to the sales agreement. Because we are no longer a well-known seasoned issuer, the 2021 Form S-3 will no longer be available for us to offer and sell securities pursuant to the 2021 Form S-3 following the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities may result in significant dilution to our stockholders, and the terms may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. The incurrence of additional debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt may provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. We may also seek to finance future cash needs through potential future licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements. These arrangements may not be available on acceptable terms or at all, and we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate our development programs or obtain funds through third-party arrangements that may require us to relinquish rights to certain product candidates that we might otherwise seek to develop or commercialize independently.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of obligations under the operating leases, note payable with Hercules and contractual obligations with CROs. The following table summarizes our material contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future years:
(1) For a description of our operating leases, see “Note 5 Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) Represents the note payable with Hercules (including interest at an annual rate equal to Greater of 9.15% and 9.15% plus the prime rate of interest minus 3.25%.). For a description of the note payable with Hercules, see “Note 7 Note Payable” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3) For a description of our contractual obligations with CROs, see “Note 5 Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.