Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes to those statements and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties. Readers are cautioned that forward-looking statements should be read in conjunction with our disclosures in this Form 10-K under the headings: “Forward-Looking Statements” located on page 6 and “Risk Factors” located in Item 1A. The risks and uncertainties described in this Form 10-K are not the only risks facing our Company. Additional risks and uncertainties that we are not presently aware of, or that we currently consider immaterial, may also affect our business operations. Our business, financial condition or results of operations could suffer if the risks are realized.
The trends and results for the year ended December 31, 2021, may not be indicative of future results that may be expected due to uncertainty regarding the COVID-19 pandemic. This pandemic has resulted in widespread impacts on the global economy and on our employees, customers, contractors, and suppliers. There is considerable uncertainty regarding the length of time for which COVID-19 will continue, if new variants will emerge or the extent and duration of measures to try to contain the virus. Additional disclosures in this Form 10-K regarding the impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic are located in Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Overview
Basis of Presentation. We present three reportable segments: Regulated Operations, ALLETE Clean Energy and U.S. Water Services. Our segments were determined in accordance with the guidance on segment reporting. We measure performance of our operations through budgeting and monitoring of contributions to consolidated net income by each business segment.
Regulated Operations includes our regulated utilities, Minnesota Power and SWL&P, as well as our investment in ATC, a Wisconsin-based regulated utility that owns and maintains electric transmission assets in portions of Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota and Illinois. Minnesota Power provides regulated utility electric service in northeastern Minnesota to approximately 150,000 retail customers. Minnesota Power also has 15 non-affiliated municipal customers in Minnesota. SWL&P is a Wisconsin utility and a wholesale customer of Minnesota Power. SWL&P provides regulated utility electric, natural gas and water service in northwestern Wisconsin to approximately 15,000 electric customers, 13,000 natural gas customers and 10,000 water customers. Our regulated utility operations include retail and wholesale activities under the jurisdiction of state and federal regulatory authorities. (See Note 4. Regulatory Matters.)
ALLETE Clean Energy focuses on developing, acquiring, and operating clean and renewable energy projects. ALLETE Clean Energy currently owns and operates, in seven states, more than 1,300 MW of nameplate capacity wind energy generation that is contracted under PSAs of various durations. In addition, ALLETE Clean Energy currently has approximately 200 MW of wind energy facilities under contract to be sold to others. ALLETE Clean Energy also engages in the development of wind energy facilities to operate under long-term PSAs or for sale to others upon completion.
U.S. Water Services provided integrated water management for industry by combining chemical, equipment, engineering and service for customized solutions to reduce water and energy usage, and improve efficiency. In March 2019, the Company sold U.S. Water Services to a subsidiary of Kurita Water Industries Ltd.
Corporate and Other is comprised of BNI Energy, our coal mining operations in North Dakota; our investment in Nobles 2, an entity that owns and operates a 250 MW wind energy facility in southwestern Minnesota; South Shore Energy, our non-rate regulated, Wisconsin subsidiary developing NTEC, an approximately 600 MW proposed combined-cycle natural gas-fired generating facility; ALLETE Properties, our legacy Florida real estate investment; other business development and corporate expenditures; unallocated interest expense; a small amount of non-rate base generation; approximately 4,000 acres of land in Minnesota; and earnings on cash and investments.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Overview (Continued)
ALLETE is incorporated under the laws of Minnesota. Our corporate headquarters are in Duluth, Minnesota. Statistical information is presented as of December 31, 2021, unless otherwise indicated. All subsidiaries are wholly-owned unless otherwise specifically indicated. References in this report to “we,” “us” and “our” are to ALLETE and its subsidiaries, collectively.
2021 Financial Overview
The following net income discussion summarizes a comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020. The trends and results for the year ended December 31, 2021 may not be indicative of future results due to uncertainty regarding the COVID-19 pandemic. (See Overview.)
Net income attributable to ALLETE in 2021 was $169.2 million, or $3.23 per diluted share, compared to $174.2 million, or $3.35 per diluted share, in 2020. Net income in 2021 included South Shore Energy’s sale of a portion of its interest in NTEC to Basin Electric Cooperative. The closing of the transaction between South Shore Energy and Basin resulted in the recognition of an approximately $8.5 million after-tax gain, or $0.16 per share, related to prior development costs and risks incurred. Net income in 2021 also included an approximately $5 million after-tax, or $0.10 per share, negative impact related to ALLETE Clean Energy’s Diamond Spring wind energy facility due to an extreme winter storm event in the southwest United States in February 2021. This winter storm event caused volatility in power prices in the regional power market resulting in losses being incurred under one of the facility’s power sales agreements during portions of the winter storm event. Additionally, net income in 2021 included a $3.6 million after-tax, or $0.07 per share, charge resulting from the MPUC’s decision to order refunds in Minnesota Power’s fuel adjustment clause filing covering the period July 2018 through December 2019. Net income in 2020 included margins of $10.2 million after-tax, or $0.20 per share, in Regulated Operations for sales under a 100 MW PSA which expired in April 2020. Net income in 2020 also included reserves for interim rates of $8.3 million after-tax, or $0.16 per share, for the refund of interim rates collected between January 1, 2020, and April 30, 2020. Earnings per share dilution in 2021 was $0.03 due to additional shares of common stock outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Regulated Operations net income attributable to ALLETE was $129.1 million in 2021, compared to $136.3 million in 2020. Net income at Minnesota Power was lower than 2020 primarily due to: lower margins from Other Power Suppliers resulting primarily from the expiration of a PSA; higher operating and maintenance, property tax and depreciation expenses; and a reserve for refunds resulting from the MPUC’s decision to order refunds in Minnesota Power’s fuel adjustment clause filing covering the period July 2018 through December 2019. These negative impacts were partially offset by increased earnings related to the GNTL; and higher kWh sales to retail and municipal customers. Net income in 2020 also included reserves for interim rates of $8.3 million after-tax for the refund of interim rates collected between January 1, 2020, and April 30, 2020. Net income at SWL&P was lower than 2020 primarily due to higher operating expenses. Our after-tax equity earnings in ATC were lower compared to 2020 primarily due to period over period changes in ATC’s estimate of a refund liability related to the FERC decision on MISO return on equity complaints in 2020.
ALLETE Clean Energy net income attributable to ALLETE was $26.3 million in 2021 compared to $29.9 million in 2020. Net income in 2021 included an approximately $5 million after-tax negative impact related to ALLETE Clean Energy’s Diamond Spring wind energy facility due to an extreme winter storm event in the southwest United States in February 2021 as well as lower wind resources at other wind energy facilities. These negative impacts were partially offset by expense management efforts.
Corporate and Other net income attributable to ALLETE was $13.8 million in 2021 compared to $8.0 million in 2020. Net income in 2021 included South Shore Energy’s sale of a portion of its interest in NTEC to Basin Electric Cooperative which resulted in the recognition of an approximately $8.5 million after-tax gain related to prior development costs and risks incurred, higher earnings from our investment in Nobles 2 which commenced operations in December 2020 and higher land sales at ALLETE Properties. These increases were partially offset by higher expenses.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
2021 Compared to 2020
(See Note 13. Business Segments for financial results by segment.)
Regulated Operations
Operating Revenue - Utility increased $240.6 million from 2020 primarily due to higher fuel adjustment clause recoveries, higher kWh sales, increased transmission-related revenue related to the GNTL, higher cost recovery rider revenue and higher FERC formula-based rates. Revenue in 2020 also included reserves for the refund of interim rates collected between January 1, 2020, and April 30, 2020.
Fuel adjustment clause revenue increased $121.3 million due to higher fuel and purchased power costs attributable to retail and municipal customers. (See Fuel, Purchased Power and Gas - Utility.) These increases were partially offset by a $5 million charge resulting from the MPUC’s decision to order refunds in Minnesota Power’s fuel adjustment clause filing covering the period July 2018 through December 2019. (See Note 4. Regulatory Matters.)
Revenue from kWh sales increased $67.6 million from 2020 primarily due to higher sales to commercial and industrial customers as well as other power suppliers. These increases were partially offset by lower revenue related to the expiration of a 100 MW PSA in April 2020. Sales to commercial and industrial customers increased primarily due to improving business conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on customer operations. Many commercial and industrial customers operated at reduced levels or were temporarily closed or idled during 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental responses while business conditions improved in 2021. These higher sales to commercial and industrial customers were partially offset by lower sales to and demand revenue from Verso Corporation which indefinitely idled its paper mill in Duluth, Minnesota in 2020. (See Outlook - Regulated Operations - Industrial Customers and Prospective Additional Load.) Sales to other power suppliers, which are sold at market-based prices into the MISO market on a daily basis or through PSAs of various durations, increased primarily due to additional kWh sales made to mitigate the uncertainty of customers’ energy needs and potential load loss due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
2021 Compared to 2020 (Continued)
Regulated Operations (Continued)
Revenue from electric sales to taconite customers accounted for 33 percent of regulated operating revenue in 2021 (30 percent in 2020). Revenue from electric sales to paper, pulp and secondary wood product customers accounted for 5 percent of regulated operating revenue in 2021 (5 percent in 2020). Revenue from electric sales to pipelines and other industrial customers accounted for 9 percent of regulated operating revenue in 2021 (9 percent in 2020).
Transmission-related revenue increased $17.7 million primarily due to recovery of GNTL expenses resulting from the GNTL being placed into service in June 2020.
Revenue in 2020 included reserves of $11.7 million for the refund of interim rates collected between January 1, 2020, and April 30, 2020. (See Note 2. Regulatory Matters.)
Cost recovery rider revenue increased $9.0 million primarily due to fewer production tax credits recognized by Minnesota Power. If production tax credits are recognized at a level below those assumed in Minnesota Power’s base rates, an increase in cost recovery rider revenue is recognized to offset the impact of lower production tax credits on income tax expense.
Revenue from wholesale customers under FERC formula-based rates increased $5.2 million primarily due to higher rates.
Operating Expenses increased $241.2 million, or 29 percent, from 2020.
Fuel, Purchased Power and Gas - Utility expense increased $203.8 million, or 57 percent, from 2020 primarily due to higher purchased power prices, kWh sales and fuel costs. Fuel and purchased power expense related to our retail and municipal customers is recovered through the fuel adjustment clause.
Transmission Services - Utility expense increased $8.3 million, or 12 percent, from 2020 primarily due to higher MISO-related expense.
Operating and Maintenance expense increased $15.1 million, or 8 percent, from 2020 primarily due to an increase in contract and professional services and materials purchased for generation facilities and higher vegetation management expenses. In addition, 2021 included higher labor and benefit expenses as compared to 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization expense increased $3.8 million, or 2 percent, from 2020 primarily due to additional property, plant and equipment in service resulting from the GNTL being placed into service in June 2020.
Taxes Other than Income Taxes increased $10.2 million, or 20 percent, from 2020 primarily due to higher property tax expense resulting from the GNTL being placed into service in June 2020 as well as higher estimated taxable market values.
Other Income decreased $4.0 million from 2020 primarily due to lower pension and other postretirement plan non-service credits. (See Note 1. Operations and Significant Accounting Policies.)
Income Tax Benefit decreased $2.8 million from 2020 primarily due to fewer production tax credits in 2021 compared to 2020, partially offset by lower pre-tax income.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
2021 Compared to 2020 (Continued)
ALLETE Clean Energy
(a)Represents non-cash amortization of differences between contract prices and estimated market prices on assumed PSAs.
(b)See Note 1. Operations and Significant Accounting Policies.
Operating Revenue increased $7.3 million from 2020 primarily due to revenue from the South Peak and Diamond Spring wind energy facilities which commenced operations in April 2020 and December 2020, respectively, partially offset by the negative impact related to ALLETE Clean Energy’s Diamond Spring wind energy facility due to an extreme winter storm event in the southwest United States in February 2021.
Cost of Sales increased $3.0 million from 2020 due to a reserve for an anticipated loss on sale of ALLETE Clean Energy’s project to repower and sell its Northern Wind project. (See Outlook - ALLETE Clean Energy.)
Operating and Maintenance expense increased $4.1 million, or 11 percent, from 2020 primarily due to operating and maintenance expenses related to the South Peak and Diamond Spring wind energy facilities as well as expense related to the Caddo wind energy facility which commenced operations in December 2021. These increases were offset by expense management efforts.
Depreciation and Amortization expense increased $11.3 million, or 30 percent, from 2020 primarily due to additional property, plant and equipment in service related to the South Peak and Diamond Spring wind energy facilities.
Taxes Other Than Income Taxes increased $3.8 million from 2020 primarily due to higher property tax expense related to the Diamond Spring wind energy facility.
Income Tax Benefit decreased $2.5 million from 2020 primarily due to less production tax credits generated in 2021.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
2021 Compared to 2020 (Continued)
ALLETE Clean Energy (Continued)
Net Loss Attributable to Non-Controlling Interest increased $13.0 million from 2020 primarily due to net losses attributable to non-controlling interest for the Diamond Spring wind energy facility.
Corporate and Other
Operating Revenue increased $2.2 million, or 2 percent, from 2020 primarily due to higher land sales at ALLETE Properties in 2021, partially offset by lower revenue at BNI Energy, which operates under cost-plus fixed fee contracts, as a result of lower expenses and fewer tons sold in 2021 compared to 2020.
Net Income Attributable to ALLETE was $13.8 million in 2021 compared to $8.0 million in 2020. Net income in 2021 included South Shore Energy’s sale of a portion of its interest in NTEC to Basin Electric Cooperative which resulted in the recognition of an approximately $8.5 million after-tax gain related to prior development costs and risks incurred, higher earnings from our investment in Nobles 2 which commenced operations in December 2020 and higher land sales at ALLETE Properties. These increases were partially offset by higher expenses. Net income at BNI Energy was $7.5 million in 2021 compared to net income of $7.3 million in 2020. Net income at ALLETE Properties was $1.9 million in 2021 compared to net income of $0.4 million in 2020.
Income Taxes - Consolidated
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the effective tax rate was a benefit of 24.3 percent (benefit of 32.4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020). The effective tax rate for 2021 was a lower benefit primarily due to fewer production tax credits generated in 2021. (See Note 10. Income Tax Expense.)
2020 Compared to 2019
The comparison of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is included in Management's Discussion in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make various estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements. These estimates and assumptions may be revised, which may have a material effect on the Consolidated Financial Statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions. These policies are discussed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors on a regular basis. We believe the following policies are most critical to our business and the understanding of our results of operations.
Regulatory Accounting. Our regulated utility operations are subject to accounting standards for the effects of certain types of regulation. These standards require us to reflect the effect of regulatory decisions in our financial statements. Regulatory assets represent incurred costs that have been deferred as they are probable for recovery in customer rates. Regulatory liabilities represent obligations to make refunds to customers and amounts collected in rates for which the related costs have not yet been incurred. The Company assesses quarterly whether regulatory assets and liabilities meet the criteria for probability of future recovery or deferral. This assessment considers factors such as, but not limited to, changes in the regulatory environment and recent rate orders to other regulated entities under the same jurisdiction. If future recovery or refund of costs becomes no longer probable, the assets and liabilities would be recognized in current period net income or other comprehensive income. (See Note 4. Regulatory Matters.)
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Critical Accounting Policies (Continued)
Pension and Postretirement Health and Life Actuarial Assumptions. We account for our pension and other postretirement benefit obligations in accordance with the accounting standards for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans. These standards require the use of several important assumptions, including the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, the discount rate and mortality assumptions, among others, in determining our obligations and the annual cost of our pension and other postretirement benefits. In establishing the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, we determine the long-term historical performance of each asset class and adjust these for current economic conditions while utilizing the target allocation of our plan assets to forecast the expected long-term rate of return. Our pension asset allocation as of December 31, 2021, was approximately 49 percent equity securities, 48 percent fixed income and 3 percent real estate. Our postretirement health and life asset allocation as of December 31, 2021, was approximately 70 percent equity securities, 29 percent fixed income and 1 percent private equity. Equity securities consist of a mix of market capitalization sizes with domestic and international securities. In 2021, we used weighted average expected long-term rates of return of 6.50 percent in our actuarial determination of our pension expense and 5.85 percent in our actuarial determination of our other postretirement expense. The actuarial determination uses an asset smoothing methodology for actual returns to reduce the volatility of varying investment performance over time. We review our expected long-term rate of return assumption annually and will adjust it to respond to changing market conditions. A one-quarter percent decrease in the expected long-term rate of return would increase the annual expense for pension and other postretirement benefits by approximately $2.0 million, pre-tax.
The discount rate is computed using a bond matching study which utilizes a portfolio of high quality bonds that produce cash flows similar to the projected costs of our pension and other postretirement plans. In 2021, we used weighted average discount rates of 2.87 percent and 2.70 percent in our actuarial determination of our pension and other postretirement expense, respectively. We review our discount rates annually and will adjust them to respond to changing market conditions. A one-quarter percent decrease in the discount rate would increase the annual expense for pension and other postretirement benefits by approximately $1.7 million, pre-tax.
The mortality assumptions used to calculate our pension and other postretirement benefit obligations as of December 31, 2021, considered a modified PRI-2012 mortality table and MP-2021 mortality projection scale. (See Note 11. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans.)
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We review our long-lived assets for indicators of impairment in accordance with the accounting standards for property, plant and equipment on a quarterly basis.
In accordance with the accounting standards for property, plant and equipment, if indicators of impairment exist, we test our long-lived assets for recoverability by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to the undiscounted future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. Cash flows are assessed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows. The undiscounted future net cash flows are impacted by trends and factors known to us at the time they are calculated and our expectations related to: management’s best estimate of future sales prices; holding period and timing of sales; method of disposition; and future expenditures necessary to maintain the operations.
Taxation. We are required to make judgments regarding the potential tax effects of various financial transactions and our ongoing operations to estimate our obligations to taxing authorities. These tax obligations include income taxes and taxes other than income taxes. Judgments related to income taxes require the recognition in our financial statements of the largest tax benefit of a tax position that is “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained on audit. Tax positions that do not meet the “more-likely-than-not” criteria are reflected as a tax liability in accordance with the accounting standards for uncertainty in income taxes. We record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets to the extent it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We are subject to income taxes in various jurisdictions. We make assumptions and judgments each reporting period to estimate our income tax assets, liabilities, benefits and expenses. Judgments and assumptions are supported by historical data and reasonable projections. Our assumptions and judgments include the application of tax statutes and regulations, and projections of future federal taxable income, state taxable income, and state apportionment to determine our ability to utilize NOL and credit carryforwards prior to their expiration. Significant changes in assumptions regarding future federal and state taxable income or a change in tax rates could require new or increased valuation allowances which could result in a material impact on our results of operations.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Outlook
ALLETE is an energy company committed to earning a financial return that rewards our shareholders, allows for reinvestment in our businesses, and sustains growth. The Company has a long-term objective of achieving consolidated average annual earnings per share growth within a range of 5 percent to 7 percent.
ALLETE is predominately a regulated utility through Minnesota Power, SWL&P, and an investment in ATC. ALLETE’s strategy is to remain predominately a regulated utility while investing in ALLETE Clean Energy and its Corporate and Other businesses to complement its regulated businesses, balance exposure to the utility’s industrial customers, and provide potential long-term earnings growth. ALLETE expects net income from Regulated Operations to be approximately 75 percent of total consolidated net income in 2022. Over the next several years, the contribution of ALLETE Clean Energy and our Corporate and Other businesses to net income is expected to increase as ALLETE grows these operations. ALLETE expects its businesses to provide regulated, contracted or recurring revenues, and to support sustained growth in net income and cash flow.
Regulated Operations. Minnesota Power’s long-term strategy is to be the leading electric energy provider in northeastern Minnesota by providing safe, reliable and cost-competitive electric energy, while complying with environmental permit conditions and renewable energy requirements. Keeping the cost of energy production competitive enables Minnesota Power to effectively compete in the wholesale power markets and minimizes retail rate increases to help maintain customer viability. As part of maintaining cost competitiveness, Minnesota Power intends to reduce its exposure to possible future carbon and GHG legislation by reshaping its generation portfolio, over time, to reduce its reliance on coal. Minnesota Power has a goal of delivering 100 percent carbon-free energy by 2050. (See EnergyForward.) We will monitor and review proposed environmental regulations and may challenge those that add considerable cost with limited environmental benefit. Minnesota Power will continue to pursue customer growth opportunities and cost recovery rider approvals for transmission, renewable and environmental investments, as well as work with regulators to earn a fair rate of return.
Regulatory Matters. Entities within our Regulated Operations segment are under the jurisdiction of the MPUC, FERC, PSCW and NDPSC. See Note 4. Regulatory Matters for discussion of regulatory matters within these jurisdictions.
2022 Minnesota General Rate Case. On November 1, 2021, Minnesota Power filed a retail rate increase request with the MPUC seeking an average increase of approximately 18 percent for retail customers. The rate filing seeks a return on equity of 10.25 percent and a 53.81 percent equity ratio. On an annualized basis, the requested final rate increase would generate approximately $108 million in additional revenue. In orders dated December 30, 2021, the MPUC accepted the filing as complete and authorized an annual interim rate increase beginning January 1, 2022, with approximately $80 million expected to be collected in cash and approximately $8 million of interim rates for residential customers deferred with a final determination on recovery at the end of the rate case.
Minnesota Power Land Sales. In August 2020, Minnesota Power filed a petition with the MPUC for approval to sell land that surrounds several reservoirs on its hydroelectric system and is no longer required to maintain its operations. The land has an estimated value of approximately $100 million, and Minnesota Power proposed to credit ratepayers the net proceeds from the sales in a future rate case or through its renewable resources rider to mitigate future rate increases. In an order dated November 18, 2021, the MPUC authorized the land sales and directed the net proceeds to be refunded to ratepayers subject to certain conditions and required compliance filings.
Wisconsin General Rate Case. SWL&P expects to file its next general rate case in 2022. The PSCW granted an extension request made by SWL&P to delay filing its next general rate case until on or before December 20, 2022. SWL&P requested the extension primarily due to impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Outlook (Continued)
Industrial Customers and Prospective Additional Load
Industrial Customers. Electric power is one of several key inputs in the taconite mining, paper, pulp and secondary wood products, pipeline and other industries. Approximately 47 percent of our regulated utility kWh sales in 2021 (47 percent in 2020 and 54 percent in 2019) were made to our industrial customers. We expect industrial sales of approximately 6.5 million MWh in 2022 (7.2 million MWh in 2021 and 6.2 million in 2020). (See Item 1. Business - Regulated Operations - Electric Sales / Customers.)
Taconite. Minnesota Power’s taconite customers are capable of producing up to approximately 41 million tons of taconite pellets annually. Taconite pellets produced in Minnesota are primarily shipped to North American steel making facilities that are part of the integrated steel industry, which continue to lead the world in environmental performance among steelmaking countries. According to the U.S. Department of Energy, steel production in the U.S. is the most energy efficient of any major steel producing country. Steel produced from these North American facilities is used primarily in the manufacture of automobiles, appliances, tubular applications for all industries, and in the construction industry. Steel is also a critical component of the clean energy transformation underway today. Meeting the demand for more renewable energy and the need for additional infrastructure to transport green energy from the point of generation to the end user both require steel. Historically, less than 10 percent of Minnesota taconite production has been exported outside of North America.
There has been a general historical correlation between U.S. steel production and Minnesota taconite production. The American Iron and Steel Institute, an association of North American steel producers, reported that U.S. raw steel production operated at approximately 82 percent of capacity in 2021 (68 percent in 2020 and 80 percent in 2019). The World Steel Association, an association of steel producers, national and regional steel industry associations, and steel research institutes representing approximately 85 percent of world steel production, projected U.S. steel consumption in 2022 will increase by approximately 6 percent compared to 2021.
Minnesota Power’s taconite customers may experience annual variations in production levels due to such factors as economic conditions, short-term demand changes or maintenance outages. We expect taconite production from our taconite customers of approximately 35 million tons in 2022. We estimate that a one million ton change in Minnesota Power’s taconite customers’ production would impact our annual earnings per share by approximately $0.04, net of expected power marketing sales at current prices. Changes in wholesale electric prices or customer contractual demand nominations could impact this estimate. Minnesota Power proactively sells power in the wholesale power markets that is temporarily not required by industrial customers to optimize the value of its generating facilities. Long-term reductions in taconite production or a permanent shut down of a taconite customer may lead Minnesota Power to file a general rate case to recover lost revenue.
USS Corporation. In April 2020, USS Corporation stated it would idle its Keetac facility in Keewatin, Minnesota, in response to the sudden and dramatic decline in business conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, in May 2020, USS Corporation announced that production was expected to be temporarily reduced at its Minntac Plant in Mountain Iron, Minnesota. USS Corporation resumed normal production at its Minntac Plant beginning in late July 2020 and resumed operations at its Keetac facility in December 2020. In October 2021, USS Corporation announced that it will be increasing its blast furnace operating rates at its Gary, Indiana steel mill through the installation of a 500,000 ton per year pig iron caster. When completed in early 2023, the pig iron produced from Minnesota iron ore would be used at USS Corporation’s Big River steel making facility in Osceola, Arkansas. USS Corporation has the capability to produce approximately 15 million and 5 million tons annually at its Minntac and Keetac plants, respectively.
Cliffs. In December 2020, Cliffs announced that it had completed the previously announced acquisition of substantially all of the operations of ArcelorMittal USA LLC and its subsidiaries. Cliffs had stated that upon closure of the acquisition Cliffs would be the largest flat-rolled steel producer and the largest iron ore pellet producer in North America. The acquisition included ArcelorMittal’s Minorca mine in Virginia, Minnesota, and its ownership share of Hibbing Taconite in Hibbing, Minnesota, which are both large industrial customers of Minnesota Power. Cliffs is now Minnesota Power’s largest customer. The acquisition has increased customer concentration risk for the Company and could lead to further capacity consolidation for both steel blast furnaces and the related Minnesota iron ore production.
Cliffs completed construction of a hot briquetted iron production plant in Toledo, Ohio, in 2020, which has utilized direct reduced-grade pellets from Northshore Mining. In October 2021, Cliffs indicated it plans to move direct reduced-grade pellet production to its Minorca mine and that Northshore Mining would become a “swing facility” due to the higher royalty rates at that mine. (See Northshore Mining.).
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Outlook (Continued)
Industrial Customers and Prospective Additional Load (Continued)
Northshore Mining. In April 2020, Cliffs announced that, based on market conditions, it would be temporarily idling Northshore Mining. Cliffs idled production at Northshore Mining in April 2020 and resumed normal production at the facility in August 2020. On February 11, 2022, Cliffs announced that with the use of additional scrap in its basic oxygen furnaces, iron ore needs are not as high as before. When determining where to adjust production, Cliffs decided to idle all production at its Northshore mine. Cliffs anticipated that the Northshore mine will be temporarily idled for approximately four months during 2022. Cliffs also indicated that going forward it will be limiting the tonnage of iron ore pellets sold to third parties. Northshore Mining has the capability to produce approximately 6 million tons annually. Minnesota Power has a PSA through 2031 with Silver Bay Power, which provides the majority of the electric service requirements for Northshore Mining. (See Silver Bay Power and Cliffs.)
Silver Bay Power. In 2016, Minnesota Power and Silver Bay Power entered into a PSA through 2031. Silver Bay Power supplies approximately 90 MW of load to Northshore Mining, an affiliate of Silver Bay Power, which had previously been served predominately through self-generation by Silver Bay Power. Starting in 2016, Minnesota Power supplied Silver Bay Power with at least 50 MW of energy and Silver Bay Power had the option to purchase additional energy from Minnesota Power as it transitioned away from self-generation. In the third quarter of 2019, Silver Bay Power ceased self-generation and Minnesota Power began supplying the full energy requirements for Silver Bay Power.
Hibbing Taconite. In April 2020, ArcelorMittal announced that Hibbing Taconite in Hibbing, Minnesota, would idle production due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Hibbing Taconite resumed normal production in August 2020. Hibbing Taconite’s current mineable ore reserves are expected to be exhausted in 2025. Cliffs, which in December 2020 became majority owner and resumed management of Hibbing Taconite, has stated that it has a plan to extend the mine life of Hibbing Taconite with ore reserves already under control of Cliffs. There are ample ore reserves in northeastern Minnesota that could supply operations for decades to come, and Minnesota Power’s taconite customers routinely develop and extend their mine plans to optimize assets. Hibbing Taconite has the capability to produce approximately 8 million tons annually.
Minnesota Sulfate Wild Rice Water Quality Standard. On April 29, 2021, the EPA identified rivers and lakes in Minnesota in which wild rice grows that have sulfate levels that exceed Minnesota’s sulfate limit for wild rice waters. On September 1, 2021, three additional wild rice waters with sulfate levels that exceed Minnesota’s sulfate limit were identified. The EPA directed the MPCA to add these rivers and lakes to its list of impaired waters which can be used to set limits in discharge permits for industrial activities such as mining. Minnesota Power’s taconite customers could be adversely impacted if they are required to significantly reduce sulfate discharges.
Paper, Pulp and Secondary Wood Products. The North American paper and pulp industry faces declining demand due to the impact of electronic substitution for print and changing customer needs. As a result, certain paper and pulp customers have reduced their existing operations in recent years and have pursued or are pursuing product changes in response to the declining demand. We expect operating levels in 2022 at the major paper and pulp mills we serve to be lower than in 2021 as several customers operated at higher than normal levels in 2021.
Verso Corporation and ST Paper. In June 2020, Verso Corporation indefinitely idled its paper mill in Duluth, Minnesota (Duluth Mill). Verso Corporation stated the decision was due to the accelerated decline in graphic paper demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and has disclosed it is considering options for the Duluth Mill, including marketing for a sale. On January 29, 2021, Verso Corporation provided notice of termination for its contract. Minnesota Power and Verso Corporation mutually agreed to resolve the outstanding commitments under the contract in January 2022. In May 2021, Verso Corporation announced the completion of the sale of the Duluth Mill to ST Paper LLC (ST Paper). ST Paper has stated it plans to convert the Duluth Mill to produce tissue. In January 2022, Minnesota Power entered into an electric service agreement with ST Paper, subject to MPUC approval, that would begin Large Power customer service with a minimum term of 6-years upon start-up of operations, which is anticipated in 2023. The agreement will qualify as a Large Power customer contract as we expect to serve requirements of at least 10 MW of customer load.
Pipeline and Other Industries.
Cenovus Energy. In 2018, a fire at Cenovus Energy’s refinery in Superior, Wisconsin, which was owned by Husky Energy at that time, disrupted operations at the facility. Under normal operating conditions, SWL&P provides approximately 14 MW of average monthly demand to the refinery in addition to water service. The facility remains at minimal operations, and the refinery is not expected to resume normal operations until 2023.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Outlook (Continued)
Industrial Customers and Prospective Additional Load (Continued)
Prospective Additional Load. Minnesota Power is pursuing new wholesale and retail loads in and around its service territory. Currently, several companies in northeastern Minnesota continue to progress in the development of natural resource-based projects that represent long-term growth potential and load diversity for Minnesota Power. We cannot predict the outcome of these projects.
PolyMet. PolyMet is planning to start a new copper-nickel and precious metal (non-ferrous) mining operation in northeastern Minnesota. In 2015, PolyMet announced the completion of the final EIS by state and federal agencies, which was subsequently published in the Federal Register and Minnesota Environmental Quality Board Monitor. The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers have both issued final Records of Decision, finding the final EIS adequate.
PolyMet was issued all necessary permits to construct and operate its new mining operation; however, of the more than 20 permits issued to build and operate the mine, three permits remain on hold pending legal or regulatory action, which is expected to continue during 2022. Minnesota Power could supply between 45 MW and 50 MW of load under a 10-year power supply contract with PolyMet that would begin upon start-up of operations.
EnergyForward. Minnesota Power is executing EnergyForward, its strategy assuring reliability, protecting affordability and further improving environmental performance. The plan includes completed and planned investments in wind, solar, natural gas and hydroelectric power, construction of additional transmission capacity, the installation of emissions control technology and the idling and retirement of certain coal-fired generating facilities. Minnesota Power has a vision to deliver 100 percent carbon-free energy to customers by 2050, continuing its commitment to climate, customers and communities through its EnergyForward strategy. This vision builds on Minnesota Power’s recent achievement of now providing 50 percent renewable energy to its customers.
2021 Integrated Resource Plan. On February 1, 2021, Minnesota Power filed its latest IRP with the MPUC, which outlines its clean-energy transition plans through 2035. These plans include expanding its renewable energy supply to 70 percent by 2030, achieving coal-free operations at its facilities by 2035, and investing in a resilient and flexible transmission and distribution grid. Minnesota Power has also set a target to achieve an 80 percent reduction in carbon emissions by 2035 compared to 2005 levels. As part of these plans, Minnesota Power anticipates adding approximately 400 MW of new wind and solar energy resources, retiring Boswell Unit 3 by 2030 and transforming Boswell Unit 4 to be coal-free by 2035. Minnesota Power’s plans recognize that advances in technology will play a significant role in completing its transition to carbon-free energy supply, reliably and affordably. A final decision on the IRP is expected in the second half of 2022.
In recent years, Minnesota Power has transformed its energy supply from more than a 95 percent reliance on coal to become a leader in the nation’s clean-energy transformation. Since 2013, the company has closed or converted seven of its nine coal-fired units and added nearly 900 megawatts of renewable energy sources. Additionally, Minnesota Power has been a leader in energy conservation, surpassing the state’s conservation goals each year for the past decade.
Nemadji Trail Energy Center. In 2017, Minnesota Power submitted a resource package to the MPUC which included requesting approval of a natural gas capacity dedication and other affiliated-interest agreements for NTEC, an approximately 600 MW proposed combined-cycle natural gas-fired generating facility to be built in Superior, Wisconsin, which will be jointly owned by Dairyland Power Cooperative, Basin and South Shore Energy, ALLETE’s non-rate regulated, Wisconsin subsidiary. Minnesota Power is expected to purchase approximately 20 percent of the facility's output starting in 2025 pursuant to the capacity dedication agreement.
Renewable Energy. Minnesota Power continues to execute its renewable energy strategy and recently reached its goal of supplying 50 percent of its energy by renewable energy sources. Minnesota Power also has a goal of delivering 100 percent carbon-free energy by 2050. (See EnergyForward.)
Minnesota Power has approved cost recovery riders for certain renewable investments and expenditures as well as investments and expenditures related to compliance with the Minnesota Solar Energy Standard. The cost recovery riders allow Minnesota Power to charge retail customers on a current basis for the costs of certain renewable and solar investments and expenditures plus a return on the capital invested. (See Note 4. Regulatory Matters.)
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Outlook (Continued)
EnergyForward (Continued)
Wind Energy. Minnesota Power’s wind energy facilities consist of Bison (497 MW) located in North Dakota, and Taconite Ridge (25 MW) located in northeastern Minnesota. Minnesota Power also has two long-term wind energy PPAs with an affiliate of NextEra Energy, Inc. to purchase the output from Oliver Wind I (50 MW) and Oliver Wind II (48 MW) located in North Dakota.
Minnesota Power uses the 465-mile, 250-kV DC transmission line that runs from Center, North Dakota, to Duluth, Minnesota, to transport wind energy from North Dakota while gradually phasing out coal-based electricity delivered to its system over this transmission line from Square Butte’s lignite coal-fired generating unit. Minnesota Power is currently pursuing a modernization and capacity upgrade of its DC transmission system to continue providing reliable operations and additional system capabilities.
Nobles 2 PPA. Minnesota Power has a long-term PPA with Nobles 2 that provides for Minnesota Power to purchase the energy and associated capacity from a 250 MW wind energy facility in southwestern Minnesota through 2040. The agreement provides for the purchase of output from the facility at fixed energy prices. There are no fixed capacity charges, and Minnesota Power will only pay for energy as it is delivered. (See Corporate and Other - Investment in Nobles 2.)
Manitoba Hydro. Minnesota Power has three long-term PPAs with Manitoba Hydro. Under the first PPA, Minnesota Power is purchasing surplus energy through April 2022. This energy-only agreement primarily consists of surplus hydro energy on Manitoba Hydro’s system that is delivered to Minnesota Power on a non-firm basis. Under this agreement, Minnesota Power will purchase at least one million MWh of energy over the contract term. The second PPA provides for Minnesota Power to purchase 250 MW of capacity and energy from Manitoba Hydro through May 2035. The third PPA provides for Minnesota Power to purchase up to 133 MW of energy from Manitoba Hydro through June 2040. (See Note 8. Commitments, Guarantees and Contingencies.)
Solar Energy. Minnesota Power’s solar energy supply consists of Camp Ripley, a 10 MW solar energy facility at the Camp Ripley Minnesota Army National Guard base and training facility near Little Falls, Minnesota, and a community solar garden in northeastern Minnesota, which is comprised of a 1 MW solar array owned and operated by a third party with the output purchased by Minnesota Power and a 40 kW solar array that is owned and operated by Minnesota Power. SWL&P also plans to construct a 470 kW solar array in 2022 as part of a community solar garden in Superior, Wisconsin, which was approved by the PSCW in October 2020.
In June 2020, Minnesota Power filed a proposal with the MPUC to accelerate its plans for purchasing solar energy from approximately 20 MW of solar energy projects in Minnesota which was approved in a June 2021 order. These solar energy projects will be constructed and owned through an ALLETE subsidiary with an estimated investment of $40 million. Construction of these solar energy projects is expected to commence in 2022.
Transmission. We continue to make investments in transmission opportunities that strengthen or enhance the transmission grid or take advantage of our geographical location between sources of renewable energy and end users. These include the GNTL, investments to enhance our own transmission facilities, investments in other transmission assets (individually or in combination with others) and our investment in ATC. See Item 1. Business - Regulated Operations and Note 8. Commitments, Guarantees and Contingencies.
Duluth Loop Reliability Project. On October 21, 2021, Minnesota Power submitted an application for a certificate of need for the Duluth Loop Reliability Project. This transmission project was proposed to enhance reliability in and around Duluth, Minnesota. The project includes the construction of a new 115-kV transmission line; construction of an approximately one-mile extension of an existing 230-kV transmission line; and upgrades to several substations. The Duluth Loop Reliability Project is expected to be completed and in service by 2025, subject to MPUC approval, with an estimated cost of $50 million to $70 million.
ALLETE Clean Energy.
ALLETE Clean Energy will pursue growth through acquisitions or project development. ALLETE Clean Energy is targeting acquisitions of existing operating portfolios which have a mix of long-term PSAs in place and/or available for repowering and recontracting. Further, ALLETE Clean Energy will evaluate actions that will lead to the addition of complimentary clean energy products and services. At this time, ALLETE Clean Energy expects acquisitions or development of new facilities will be primarily wind, solar, energy storage or storage ready facilities across North America. ALLETE Clean Energy is also targeting the development of new facilities up to 300 MW each, which will have long-term PSAs in place for the output or may be sold upon completion.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Outlook (Continued)
ALLETE Clean Energy (Continued)
Portions of our ALLETE Clean Energy business are experiencing return pressures that are impacting our earnings per share growth from increased competition, and lower forward price curves, as a growing amount of investment capital is being directed into wind generation opportunities. In addition, current and potential new project developments can be negatively affected by a lower ALLETE stock price, which may result in such projects not being accretive, or otherwise unable to satisfy our financial objectives criteria to proceed. In response to these market pressures, we are actively evaluating additional growth opportunities to deliver more comprehensive clean energy solutions for customers at ALLETE Clean Energy, which may include solar, storage solutions, and related energy infrastructure investments and services. We believe that the renewable energy industry is entering a new phase of growth and that we are well-positioned to serve customers and drive future growth at ALLETE. ALLETE Clean Energy will continue to optimize its existing wind energy facility portfolio, seek development of its remaining safe harbor inventory of tax credit qualified turbines, and explore other renewable energy opportunities to expand its service offerings to further enhance its growth and profitability.
Federal production tax credit qualification is important to the economics of project development, and ALLETE Clean Energy has invested in equipment to meet production tax credit safe harbor provisions which provides an opportunity to seek development of its remaining safe harbor production tax credit qualified equipment through 2025 based on the most recent PTC safe harbor extension by the IRS. ALLETE Clean Energy has completed its investment of approximately $80 million for production tax credit requalification of approximately 470 WTGs at its Storm Lake I, Storm Lake II, Lake Benton and Condon wind energy facilities. We anticipate annual production tax credits relating to these projects of approximately $17 million to $22 million annually through 2027 and decreasing thereafter through 2030. Disruptions in our supply chains or a lack of available financing resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, if they occur, could jeopardize our ability to complete certain capital projects in time to qualify them for production tax credits. To date we have not experienced disruptions in our supply chains related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In March 2020, ALLETE Clean Energy acquired the rights to the approximately 300 MW Caddo wind development project in Oklahoma from Apex Clean Energy. The Caddo wind project is fully contracted to sell wind power under long-term power sales agreements; construction was completed and tax equity funding of $62.0 million of cash, net of issuance costs, was received in the fourth quarter of 2021 with an additional $183.0 million of cash, net of issuance costs, received in January 2022. Also in January 2022, ALLETE Clean Energy acquired a portion of the non-controlling interest for its Caddo wind energy facility for approximately $30 million.
On February 4, 2021, ALLETE Clean Energy entered into a purchase and sale agreement with a subsidiary of Xcel Energy Inc. to sell a 100 MW wind energy facility for approximately $185 million. ALLETE Clean Energy will repower its Northern Wind project, consisting of its 98 MW Chanarambie and Viking wind energy facilities located in southwest Minnesota, as part of the transaction. Construction is expected to begin in 2022 with the Northern Wind project expected to continue operating until the second quarter of 2022. At a hearing in June 2021, the MPUC approved the sale, which is expected to close in late 2022, subject to completion of construction and receipt of permits. ALLETE Clean Energy has experienced inflationary increases and significant cost pressures related to this project and as a result now anticipates a loss on sale of the project, which resulted in an approximately $2 million after-tax charge in the fourth quarter of 2021.
In May 2021, ALLETE Clean Energy announced that it acquired the rights to the approximately 92 MW Red Barn wind development project and the approximately 68 MW Whitetail renewable development project in southwestern Wisconsin. ALLETE Clean Energy also signed an asset sale agreement for the completed Red Barn wind project with Wisconsin Public Service Corporation and Madison Gas and Electric Company. At a hearing in January 2022, the PSCW approved the sale of the Red Barn wind project, which is expected to close in 2023, subject to completion of construction and receipt of permits.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Outlook (Continued)
ALLETE Clean Energy (Continued)
ALLETE Clean Energy manages risk by having a diverse portfolio of assets, which includes PSA expiration, technology and geographic diversity. The current operating portfolio is subject to typical variations in seasonal wind with higher wind resources typically available in the winter months. The majority of its planned maintenance leverages this seasonality and is performed during lower wind periods. ALLETE Clean Energy’s current operating portfolio is as follows:
(a)The PSA expiration assumes the exercise of four one-year renewal options that ALLETE Clean Energy has the sole right to exercise.
Non-cash amortization to revenue recognized by ALLETE Clean Energy relates to the amortization of differences between contract prices and estimated market prices on assumed PSAs. As part of wind energy facility acquisitions, ALLETE Clean Energy assumed various PSAs that were above or below estimated market prices at the time of acquisition; the resulting differences between contract prices and estimated market prices are amortized to revenue over the remaining PSA term. Non-cash amortization is expected to be approximately $7 million in 2022, $5 million in 2023, $6 million annually in 2024 through 2027, and decreasing thereafter through 2032.
Corporate and Other.
BNI Energy. In 2021, BNI Energy sold 3.9 million tons of coal (4.2 million tons in 2020) and anticipates 2022 sales will be similar to 2021. BNI Energy operates under cost-plus fixed fee agreements extending through December 31, 2037.
Investment in Nobles 2. Our subsidiary, ALLETE South Wind, owns a 49 percent equity interest in Nobles 2, the entity that owns and operates a 250 MW wind energy facility in southwestern Minnesota pursuant to a 20-year PPA with Minnesota Power. We account for our investment in Nobles 2 under the equity method of accounting. (See Note 5. Equity Investments.)
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Outlook (Continued)
Corporate and Other (Continued)
South Shore Energy. South Shore Energy, ALLETE’s non-rate regulated, Wisconsin subsidiary, is developing NTEC, an approximately 600 MW proposed combined-cycle natural gas-fired generating facility to be built in Superior, Wisconsin, which will be jointly owned by Dairyland Power Cooperative, Basin and South Shore Energy. Minnesota Power is expected to purchase approximately 20 percent of the facility's output starting in 2025 pursuant to a capacity dedication agreement. Construction of NTEC is subject to obtaining additional permits from local, state and federal authorities. The total project cost is estimated to be approximately $700 million, of which South Shore Energy’s portion is expected to be approximately $150 million. South Shore Energy’s portion of NTEC project costs incurred through December 31, 2021, is approximately $5 million.
On October 1, 2021, South Shore Energy sold a portion of its undivided ownership interest in NTEC for approximately $20 million representing reimbursement of current costs plus a fee for prior development costs and risks incurred. Following the transaction, South Shore Energy now owns a 20 percent undivided ownership interest in NTEC, Basin owns a 30 percent undivided ownership interest in NTEC and Dairyland Power Cooperative continues to own a 50 percent undivided ownership interest in NTEC. The closing of the transaction resulted in the recognition of an approximately $8.5 million after-tax gain recorded in Corporate and Other in the fourth quarter of 2021, related to prior development costs and risks incurred.
ALLETE Properties. Our strategy incorporates the possibility of a bulk sale of the entire ALLETE Properties portfolio. Proceeds from a bulk sale would be strategically deployed to support growth initiatives at our Regulated Operations and ALLETE Clean Energy. ALLETE Properties also continues to pursue sales of individual parcels over time and will continue to maintain key entitlements and infrastructure.
Income Taxes
ALLETE’s aggregate federal and multi-state statutory tax rate is approximately 28 percent for 2021. ALLETE also has tax credits and other tax adjustments that reduce the combined statutory rate to the effective tax rate. These tax credits and adjustments historically have included items such as production tax credits, excess deferred taxes, non-controlling interests in subsidiaries, as well as other items. The annual effective rate can also be impacted by such items as changes in income before income taxes, state and federal tax law changes that become effective during the year, business combinations, tax planning initiatives and resolution of prior years’ tax matters. We expect our effective tax rate to be a benefit of approximately 5 percent for 2022 primarily due to federal production tax credits as a result of wind energy generation and non-controlling interests in subsidiaries. We also expect that our effective tax rate will be lower than the combined statutory rate over the next 10 years due to production tax credits attributable to our wind energy generation.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity Position. ALLETE is well-positioned to meet its liquidity needs; however, the Company is monitoring capital markets and other financing sources in light of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. (See Item 1A. Risk Factors.) A disruption in capital markets could lead to increased borrowing costs or adversely impact our ability to access capital markets or other financing sources. If we are not able to access capital on acceptable terms in sufficient amounts and when needed, or at all, the ability to maintain our businesses or to implement our business plans would be adversely affected.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $45.1 million, $240.8 million in available consolidated lines of credit, 2.1 million original issue shares of common stock available for issuance through a distribution agreement with Lampert Capital Markets and a debt-to-capital ratio of 40 percent.
Capital Structure. ALLETE’s capital structure for each of the last three years is as follows:
(a) Excludes unamortized debt issuance costs.
Cash Flows. Selected information from ALLETE’s Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows is as follows:
Operating Activities. Cash from operating activities was lower in 2021 compared to 2020. Cash from operating activities in 2021 included lower net income and higher payments for inventories compared to 2020, and was negatively impacted by the timing of recovery and refund of the fuel adjustment clause.
Cash from operating activities was higher in 2020 compared to 2019. Cash from operating activities in 2019 included the refund of Minnesota Power’s provisions for interim rates and tax reform, and the impact of U.S. Water Services prior to its sale. Cash from operating activities in 2020 included lower collections of accounts receivable due to timing.
Investing Activities. Cash used for investing activities was lower in 2021 compared to 2020. Cash used for investing activities in 2021 reflected lower additions to property, plant and equipment and lower payments for equity method investments compared to 2020.
Cash used for investing activities in 2020 was higher compared to 2019. Cash used for investing activities in 2020 included higher additions to property, plant and equipment and additional payments for equity method investments compared to 2019. Cash used for investing activities in 2019 included proceeds received from the sale of U.S. Water Services.
Financing Activities. Cash from financing activities was lower in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to lower proceeds from non-controlling interest in subsidiaries and higher repayments of short-term and long-term debt in 2021. These decreases were partially offset by higher proceeds from the issuance of common stock and higher proceeds from the issuance of short-term and long-term debt in 2021.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Liquidity and Capital Resources (Continued)
Cash Flows (Continued)
Cash from financing activities was higher in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to higher proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt and proceeds from a tax equity financing (non-controlling interest in subsidiaries) in 2020. These increases were partially offset by higher repayments of long-term debt in 2020.
Working Capital. Additional working capital, if and when needed, generally is provided by consolidated bank lines of credit and the issuance of securities, including long-term debt, common stock and commercial paper. As of December 31, 2021, we had consolidated bank lines of credit aggregating $432.0 million ($407.0 million as of December 31, 2020), most of which expire in January 2025. We had $31.5 million outstanding in standby letters of credit and $159.7 million outstanding draws under our lines of credit as of December 31, 2021 ($22.3 million in standby letters of credit and no outstanding draws as of December 31, 2020). We also have other credit facility agreements in place that provide the ability to issue up to $100.0 million in standby letters of credit. As of December 31, 2021, we had $91.2 million outstanding in standby letters of credit under these agreements.
In January 2022, ALLETE Clean Energy received approximately $183.0 million from final closing of tax equity funding for the Caddo wind energy facility. The proceeds from the funding were used to pay down a portion of outstanding draws on our lines of credit.
In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had 3.1 million original issue shares of our common stock available for issuance through Invest Direct and 2.1 million original issue shares of common stock available for issuance through a distribution agreement with Lampert Capital Markets. (See Securities.) The amount and timing of future sales of our securities will depend upon market conditions and our specific needs.
Securities. We entered into a distribution agreement with Lampert Capital Markets, in 2008, as amended most recently in 2020, with respect to the issuance and sale of up to an aggregate of 13.6 million shares of our common stock, without par value, of which 2.1 million shares remain available for issuance as of December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, 0.8 million shares of common stock were issued under this agreement resulting in net proceeds of $51.0 million (none in 2020 and 2019).
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 0.3 million shares of common stock through Invest Direct, the Employee Stock Purchase Plan and the Retirement Savings and Stock Ownership Plan, resulting in net proceeds of $18.9 million (0.4 million shares for net proceeds of $18.1 million in 2020; 0.2 million shares for net proceeds of $1.9 million in 2019). See Note 9. Common Stock and Earnings Per Share for additional detail regarding ALLETE’s equity securities.
Financial Covenants. See Note 7. Short-Term and Long-Term Debt for information regarding our financial covenants.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans. Management considers various factors when making funding decisions, such as regulatory requirements, actuarially determined minimum contribution requirements and contributions required to avoid benefit restrictions for the defined benefit pension plans. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we contributed $10.3 million in cash to the defined benefit pension plans. We do not expect to make any contributions to our defined benefit pension plans in 2022, and we do not expect to make any contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans in 2022. (See Note 9. Common Stock and Earnings Per Share and Note 11. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans.)
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. Off-balance sheet arrangements are discussed in Note 8. Commitments, Guarantees and Contingencies.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Liquidity and Capital Resources (Continued)
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments. ALLETE has contractual obligations and other commitments that will need to be funded in the future, in addition to its capital expenditure programs. Material contractual obligations and other commitments are as follows:
Long-Term Debt. ALLETE has material long-term debt obligations, including long-term debt due within one year. These obligations include the principal amount of bonds, notes and loans which are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, plus interest. (See Note 7. Short-Term and Long-Term Debt.)
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans. Pension and other postretirement benefit plan obligations include the current estimate of future benefit payments. Pension contributions are dependent on several factors including realized asset performance, future discount rate and other actuarial assumptions, Internal Revenue Service and other regulatory requirements, and contributions required to avoid benefit restrictions for the pension plans. Funding for the other postretirement benefit plans is impacted by realized asset performance, future discount rate and other actuarial assumptions, and utility regulatory requirements. Our obligations are estimates and will change based on actual market performance, changes in interest rates and any changes in governmental regulations. (See Note 11. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans.)
Operating Lease Obligations. ALLETE has certain operating lease obligations for the minimum payments required under various lease agreements which are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. (See Note 1. Operations and Significant Accounting Policies.)
Easement Obligations. ALLETE has easement obligations for the minimum payments required under our land easement agreements at our wind energy facilities. (See Note 8. Commitments, Guarantees and Contingencies.)
PPA Obligations. PPA obligations represent our Square Butte, Manitoba Hydro and other PPAs. (See Note 8. Commitments, Guarantees and Contingencies.)
Other Purchase Obligations. ALLETE has other purchase obligations covering our minimum purchase commitments under coal supply and rail contracts, and long-term service agreements for wind energy facilities. (See Note 8. Commitments, Guarantees and Contingencies.)
Credit Ratings. Access to reasonably priced capital markets is dependent in part on credit and ratings. Our securities have been rated by S&P and by Moody’s. Rating agencies use both quantitative and qualitative measures in determining a company’s credit rating. These measures include business risk, liquidity risk, competitive position, capital mix, financial condition, predictability of cash flows, management strength and future direction. Some of the quantitative measures can be analyzed through a few key financial ratios, while the qualitative ones are more subjective. Our current credit ratings are listed in the following table:
(a) Not rated by S&P.
The disclosure of these credit ratings is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold our securities. Ratings are subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Common Stock Dividends. ALLETE is committed to providing a competitive dividend to its shareholders while at the same time funding its growth. ALLETE’s long-term objective is to maintain a dividend payout ratio similar to our peers and provide for future dividend increases. Our targeted payout range is between 60 percent and 70 percent. In 2021, we paid out 78 percent (74 percent in 2020; 65 percent in 2019) of our per share earnings in dividends. On February 3, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.65 per share, which is payable on March 1, 2022, to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 15, 2022.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Capital Requirements
ALLETE’s projected capital expenditures for the years 2022 through 2026 are presented in the following table. Actual capital expenditures may vary from the projections due to changes in forecasted plant maintenance, regulatory decisions or approvals, future environmental requirements, base load growth, capital market conditions or executions of new business strategies. Projected capital expenditures exclude amounts for projects that will be sold to third parties upon completion.
(a)Capital expenditures in 2022 do not include costs related to ALLETE Clean Energy’s projects to repower and sell the 100 MW Northern Wind project or to develop and sell the 92 MW Red Barn project as these projects will be sold upon completion. (See Outlook - ALLETE Clean Energy.)
(b)Our portion of estimated capital expenditures for construction of NTEC, an approximately 600 MW proposed combined-cycle natural gas-fired generating facility to be built in Superior, Wisconsin, which will be jointly owned by Dairyland Power Cooperative, Basin and South Shore Energy.
We are well positioned to meet our financing needs due to adequate operating cash flows, available additional working capital and access to capital markets. We will finance capital expenditures from a combination of internally generated funds, debt and equity issuance proceeds. We intend to maintain a capital structure with capital ratios near current levels. (See Capital Structure.)
Environmental and Other Matters
Our businesses are subject to regulation of environmental matters by various federal, state and local authorities. A number of regulatory changes to the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act and various waste management requirements have been promulgated by both the EPA and state authorities over the past several years. Minnesota Power’s facilities are subject to additional requirements under many of these regulations. Minnesota Power is reshaping its generation portfolio, over time, to reduce its reliance on coal, has installed cost-effective emission control technology, and advocates for sound science and policy during rulemaking implementation. (See Note 8. Commitments, Guarantees and Contingencies.)
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K
Market Risk
Securities Investments.
Available-for-Sale Securities. As of December 31, 2021, our available-for-sale securities portfolio consisted primarily of securities held in other postretirement plans to fund employee benefits.
INTEREST RATE RISK
We are exposed to risks resulting from changes in interest rates as a result of our issuance of variable rate debt. We manage our interest rate risk by varying the issuance and maturity dates of our fixed rate debt, limiting the amount of variable rate debt, and continually monitoring the effects of market changes in interest rates. We may also enter into derivative financial instruments, such as interest rate swaps, to mitigate interest rate exposure. The following table presents the long-term debt obligations and the corresponding weighted average interest rate as of December 31, 2021:
Interest rates on variable rate long-term debt are reset on a periodic basis reflecting prevailing market conditions. Based on the variable rate debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021, an increase of 100 basis points in interest rates would impact the amount of pre-tax interest expense by $3.0 million. This amount was determined by considering the impact of a hypothetical 100 basis point increase to the average variable interest rate on the variable rate debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
COMMODITY PRICE RISK
Our regulated utility operations incur costs for power and fuel (primarily coal and related transportation) in Minnesota, and power and natural gas purchased for resale in our regulated service territory in Wisconsin. Minnesota Power’s exposure to price risk for these commodities is significantly mitigated by the current ratemaking process and regulatory framework, which allows recovery of fuel costs in excess of those included in base rates or distribution of savings in fuel costs to ratepayers. SWL&P’s exposure to price risk for natural gas is significantly mitigated by the current ratemaking process and regulatory framework, which allows the commodity cost to be passed through to customers. We seek to prudently manage our customers’ exposure to price risk by entering into contracts of various durations and terms for the purchase of power and coal and related transportation costs (Minnesota Power) and natural gas (SWL&P).
POWER MARKETING
Minnesota Power’s power marketing activities consist of: (1) purchasing energy in the wholesale market to serve its regulated service territory when energy requirements exceed generation output; and (2) selling excess available energy and purchased power. From time to time, Minnesota Power may have excess energy that is temporarily not required by retail and municipal customers in our regulated service territory. Minnesota Power actively sells any excess energy to the wholesale market to optimize the value of its generating facilities.
We are exposed to credit risk primarily through our power marketing activities. We use credit policies to manage credit risk, which includes utilizing an established credit approval process and monitoring counterparty limits.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements.
New accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 1. Operations and Significant Accounting Policies.
ALLETE, Inc. 2021 Form 10-K