Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including those described in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements.” Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth under the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company pioneering immuno-neurology, a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of neurodegeneration. Immuno-neurology targets immune dysfunction as a root cause of multiple pathologies that are drivers of degenerative brain disorders. We are developing therapies designed to simultaneously counteract these pathologies by restoring healthy immune function to the brain. Supporting our scientific approach, our research and drug discovery platform enables us to advance a broad portfolio of product candidates, validated by human genetics, which we believe will improve the probability of technical success over shorter development timelines. As a result, we have identified over 100 immune system targets, have advanced four product candidates, AL001, AL002, AL003, and AL101, into clinical development, and continue to develop our research pipeline, including AL044, AL008, and AL009.
We are closely monitoring the evolving impact of COVID-19 and subsequent variants of the virus on our operations and we continue to be committed to our discovery, research, and clinical development plans and timelines. We are aware that the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent variants have impacted the ability of certain clinical sites to maintain scheduled events for clinical trial participants due in part to the sites' temporary suspension of activities or regional shelter-in-place directives. We intend to continue to collect data from ongoing clinical trial participants and to make progress in completing enrollment across these ongoing clinical trials taking into account applicable regulatory, institutional, and government guidance compliance regimes. Any unscheduled changes in trial conduct due directly or indirectly to COVID-19 could negatively impact the integrity, reliability, or robustness of the data from our clinical trials.
Our operations have been financed primarily through our collaborations with AbbVie and GSK and the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock and of common stock upon the completion of our IPO and follow-on offering. We completed our IPO in February 2019, and received $168.2 million net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. We completed a follow-on offering in January 2020 and received $224.5 million net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
To date, we have not had any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Further, we do not expect to generate revenue from product sales until such time, if ever, that we are able to successfully complete the development and obtain marketing approval for one of our product candidates. We will continue to require additional capital to develop our product candidates and fund operations for the foreseeable future. We have incurred net losses in each year since inception and expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. Our ability to generate product revenue will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. Our net losses were $36.3 million, $190.2 million, and $105.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $446.4 million. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•advance product candidates through preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•pursue regulatory approval of product candidates;
•hire additional personnel;
•acquire, discover, validate, and develop additional product candidates;
•require the manufacture of supplies for our preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
•obtain, maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to do so in the near future. Our revenue to date has been primarily related to the AbbVie Agreement and GSK Agreement for the license and co-development of product candidates with those parties. We recognize revenue from the upfront payments from AbbVie over time as services are provided. We recognize revenue from the upfront payments from GSK at a point in time for a development license and over time for research and development services. Revenues for research and development services are recognized as the program costs are incurred by measuring actual costs incurred to date compared to the overall total expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation.
Under the terms of our AbbVie Agreement, in addition to receiving the upfront payments from AbbVie, we may also be entitled to development and regulatory milestone payments, opt-in payments for continued development after proof-of-concept for AL002 and AL003, and other future payments from profit sharing or royalties after commercialization of product candidates from such programs.
Under the terms of our GSK Agreement, we received $700 million in upfront payments, of which $500 million was received in August 2021 and $200 million was received in January 2022. In addition, we will be eligible to receive up to an additional $1.5 billion in clinical development, regulatory, and commercial launch-related milestone payments for AL001 and AL101. Alector and GSK will jointly develop AL001 and AL101.
In the United States, Alector and GSK will equally share profits and losses from commercialization of AL001 and AL101. We may opt out of the sharing of development costs and of profit and losses from commercialization in the United States on a product-by-product basis. In such case, we will no longer conduct development or commercialization of that product and we will receive royalties on net sales of the product in the United States instead of a share of profits. Outside of the United States, GSK will be responsible for commercialization of AL001 and AL101 for all indications, and we will be eligible for double-digit tiered royalties.
We expect that our revenue for the next several years will be derived primarily from the AbbVie and GSK Agreements. The balance of deferred revenue was $425.2 million as of December 31, 2021, related to the AbbVie and GSK Agreements. The deferred revenue is expected to be recognized over the research and development period of the programs through proof-of-concept for AL002 and AL003 and the completion of the initial Phase 2 clinical trials for specified indications for AL001 and AL101.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We record research and development expenses as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the discovery and development of our product candidates, which include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with third-party contract organizations, preclinical testing organizations, and consultants;
•costs related to production of clinical materials, including fees paid to contract manufacturers;
•laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•costs related to the preparation of regulatory submissions;
•third-party license fees; and
•facilities and other expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation and amortization expense, and other supplies.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors, collaborators, and third-party service providers. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are then expensed as the related goods are delivered and as services are performed.
Specific program expenses include expenses associated with the development of our most advanced product candidates, AL001 which commenced dosing of the first patient in a pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial, INFRONT-3, and remains in an ongoing Phase 2 clinical trial, AL002, which commenced dosing of the first patient in a Phase 2 clinical trial, and AL003 and AL101, which are in Phase 1 clinical trials. We also have expenses related to the discovery and development of future product candidates and separately tracked expenses related to programs that we expect to move out of preclinical studies and into Phase 1 clinical trials. We do not track personnel or other operating expenses incurred for our research and development programs on a program-specific basis. These expenses primarily relate to salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation, facility expenses, including depreciation, and lab consumables.
Where we share costs with our collaboration partners, such as in our GSK Agreement, research and development expenses may include cost sharing reimbursements from, or payments to, our partner.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing, and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of, and obtain regulatory approval for, any of our product candidates. We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities related to developing our product candidates, as our product candidates advance into later stages of development, as we begin to conduct larger clinical trials, as we seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, and incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel to support our research and development efforts. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, legal, finance and accounting, information technology, human resources, and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees paid for accounting, auditing, consulting, and tax services, insurance costs, and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our programs. We also anticipate that we will continue to incur expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and those of the NASDAQ Stock Market on which our securities are traded, legal, auditing, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities and foreign currency transaction gains and losses incurred during the period.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Collaboration revenue was $207.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $186.0 million was mostly due to the $173.4 million recognized from the AL001 FTD-GRN license provided as part of the GSK Agreement. The remaining revenue was from GSK and AbbVie for research and development services provided over time. Revenues are recognized as the program costs are incurred by measuring actual costs incurred to date compared to the overall total expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation. Revenue from the AbbVie Agreement was lower this year due to increased estimated total program costs.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $189.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $156.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $32.5 million was driven by a $18.0 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, due to an increase in headcount and issuance of option grants to employees. In addition, we had a $10.3 million increase in early stage programs as we continue to invest in developing our pipeline, a $6.7 million increase for AL002 as it further progresses in clinical trials, and a $6.9 million increase in facilities and other unallocated research and development expenses from additional rent expense, headcount, and other overhead costs as we continue to grow. This was offset by an $8.7 million decrease in AL001 mainly due to the cost sharing agreement with GSK.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $55.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $59.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $4.4 million was driven by a $10.4 million decrease in legal expense related to an arbitration proceeding in 2020. This was offset by an increase of $6.4 million in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, due to an increase in headcount and issuance of equity grants to employees.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $3.9 million was due to lower investment yields on our marketable securities.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Collaboration revenue was $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $21.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We recognize revenue from the upfront payments under the AbbVie Agreement over time as the services are provided. Revenues are recognized as the program costs are incurred by measuring actual costs incurred to date compared to the overall total expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation. Changes in estimates for revenue recognized over time are recognized on a cumulative basis. Revenue decreased by $0.1 million, primarily due to an increase in total expected costs for the AL002 and AL003 programs under the AbbVie Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $156.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $100.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $56.3 million was driven by a $23.3 million increase in AL001 related manufacturing runs and continued progression through clinical trials. We had a $15.6 million increase in personnel related expenses, including stock-based compensation, due to an increase in headcount and issuance of option grants to employees. In addition, expenses increased by $9.9 million for AL044, a recent program to progress to preclinical trials, and increased by $6.6 million for other early stage programs as we continue to invest in developing our pipeline.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $59.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $35.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $24.3 million was driven by a $12.2 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, due to increase in headcount and issuance of option grants to employees. In addition, there was an $8.2 million increase in legal expense due mainly to our arbitration proceeding that we commenced in June 2019 with decision issued in November 2020. We also had a $3.4 million increase in consulting expenses related to information technology, accounting, human resources, and other administrative functions.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net was $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $4.1 million was due to lower investment yields on our marketable securities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception through December 31, 2021, our operations have been financed primarily by our collaborations with AbbVie and GSK and the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock and of common stock upon the completion of our IPO and follow-on offering.
In May 2020, we established a registered “at-the-market” facility for the sale of up to $150.0 million worth of shares of common stock from time to time by entering into an equity distribution agreement with Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC and Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, as sales agents. We have not yet issued any shares under the facility.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $735.3 million of cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $446.4 million.
Future Funding Requirements
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our operations, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures related to our programs, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. We expect our expenses to continue to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, in particular as we continue to advance our product candidates and our discovery programs. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, combined with the $200 million proceeds received from the GSK collaboration in the first quarter of 2022, will enable us to fund our operations and capital expenditure requirements into mid-2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We may also choose to seek additional financing opportunistically. We expect to need to obtain substantial additional funding in the future for our research and development activities and continuing operations. If we were unable to raise capital when needed or on favorable terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities; including, without limitation, our collaboration efforts with AbbVie and GSK;
•the number and scope of preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•our ability to establish agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and, if our product candidates are approved, commercial manufacturing;
•our ability to maintain our current research and development programs and establish new research and development programs;
•addition and retention of key research and development personnel;
•our efforts to enhance operational, financial, and information management systems, and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support development of our product candidates;
•negotiating favorable terms in any collaboration, licensing, or other arrangements into which we may enter and performing our obligations in such collaborations;
•the timing and amount of milestone and other payments we may receive under our collaboration arrangements;
•our eventual commercialization plans for our product candidates;
•the costs involved in prosecuting, defending, and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims; and
•the costs and timing of regulatory approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $298.6 million. This was due to the net loss of $36.3 million offset by an increase in deferred revenue of $292.9 million from the $500 million upfront payment received in the third quarter of 2021 from GSK. In addition, we had non-cash charges of $40.8 million for stock-based compensation and $6.3 million for depreciation and amortization expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $166.7 million. This was mainly due to the net loss of $190.2 million and the decrease in deferred revenue of $21.1 million as revenue was recognized related to the AbbVie Agreement. This was partially offset by a non-cash charges of $30.5 million for stock-based compensation and $5.9 million for depreciation and amortization expense. We also had an increase of $12.2 million in accrued liabilities and accrued clinical supply costs, which offset the cash used in operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $99.3 million. This was mainly due to the net loss of $105.4 million and the decrease in deferred revenue of $21.2 million as revenue was recognized related to the AbbVie Agreement. This was offset by a non-cash charges of $16.3 million for stock-based compensation and $3.8 million for depreciation and amortization expense. We also had an increase of $9.2 million in accrued liabilities and accrued clinical supply costs.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities of $49.7 million was primarily related to the maturities of marketable securities of $286.3 million offset by purchases of marketable securities of $343.4 million and sales of marketable securities of $10.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of $105.1 million was primarily related to the purchase of marketable securities of $506.8 million offset by the proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $406.8 million. In addition, we used cash for the purchase of $5.0 million of property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities of $48.9 million was primarily related to the purchase of marketable securities of $529.6 million offset by the proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $496.0 million. In addition, we used cash for the purchase of $15.3 million of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities of $30.3 million was primarily from the exercise of options to purchase common stock.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $232.1 million was primarily from net proceeds of the issuance of 9,602,500 shares of our common stock upon the completion of a follow-on public offering. In addition, we received $6.3 million cash from the exercise of options to purchase common stock.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities of $172.4 million was primarily from net proceeds of the issuance of 9,739,541 shares of our common stock upon the completion of our IPO.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We
believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected to be received for those goods or services. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under arrangements, we perform the following steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies the performance obligation. If it is determined that multiple performance obligations exist, the transaction price is allocated at the inception of the agreement to all identified performance obligations based on the relative standalone selling price (SSP). The relative SSP for each deliverable is estimated using external sourced evidence if it is available. If external sourced evidence is not available, we use our best estimate of the SSP for the deliverable.
We recognize collaboration revenue at a point in time if control of the promised good or service has been transferred to the customer. We recognize collaboration revenue over time by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation using an input measure. In order to recognize revenue over the research and development period, we measure actual costs incurred to date compared to the overall total expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation. Revenues are recognized as the program costs are incurred. We re-evaluate the estimate of expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation each reporting period and make adjustments for any significant changes. Clinical trials are expensive and can take many years to complete, and the outcome is inherently uncertain. Changes in our forecasted costs are likely to occur over time based upon changes in clinical trial procedures set forth in protocols, changes in estimates of manufacturing costs, or feedback from regulators on the design or operation of our clinical trials. We have had changes to the overall expected costs to satisfy the performance obligations from period to period. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a 14% increase in the forecast of the total expected costs. As a result of the cumulative catch up for the change in estimate, revenue was reduced by approximately $12.8 million compared to if the expected costs had remained the same.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We record accrued expenses for estimated preclinical study and clinical trial expenses. Estimates are based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions, contract research organizations in connection with clinical studies, investigative sites in connection with clinical studies, vendors in connection with preclinical development activities, and contract manufacturing organizations in connection with the production of materials for clinical trials. Further, we accrue expenses related to clinical trials based on the level of patient enrollment and activity according to the related agreement. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activity to the extent reasonably possible and make judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. If we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. To date, we have not experienced significant changes in our estimates of preclinical studies and clinical trial accruals.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is measured at the date of grant, based on the estimated fair value of the award and recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period (usually the vesting period). We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term was derived by using the simplified method which uses the midpoint between the average vesting term and the contractual expiration period of the stock-based award.
Expected Volatility-We have limited information on the volatility of our stock as shares of our common stock were not actively traded on any public markets prior to February 7, 2019. The expected volatility was derived from the historical stock volatilities of comparable peer public companies within our industry. These companies are considered to be comparable to our business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock-based awards. In 2020, we began giving weight to our own historical volatility in the determination of expected volatility.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the measurement date with maturities approximately equal to the expected term.
Expected Dividend-The expected dividend rate is zero because we have not historically paid and do not expect for the foreseeable future to pay a dividend on our common stock.
Stock-based compensation associated with RSUs is based on the fair value of our common stock on the grant date, which equals the closing price of our common stock on the grant date. We recognize expense over the vesting period of the awards. Expense for options and RSUs are recognized on a straight-line basis.
We also granted RSUs with market conditions to certain executives. The fair value of the RSUs with market conditions are estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model. Assumptions and estimates utilized in the model include the stock price on grant date, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, expected stock volatility, and the estimated period to achieve the market condition. The expense is recognized based on continued employment of the participants, regardless of achievement of the market condition. Expense related to the RSUs with market conditions is recognized using the accelerated attribution method.
We account for forfeitures as they occur for all awards.