Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Special note regarding forward-looking statements” and “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our fiscal year ends on December 31 each year.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing novel therapeutics to address unmet medical needs in viral and liver diseases. We utilize our proprietary oligonucleotide and small molecule platforms to develop pharmacologically optimized drug candidates for use in combination regimens designed to achieve improved treatment outcomes. Our lead effort is to develop a functional cure for Chronic Hepatitis B (CHB), which often results in life-threatening conditions such as cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease (ESLD) and the most common form of liver cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The most widely used treatment for CHB, nucleos(t)ide analogs, suppresses viral replication but only achieves low rates of functional cure and often requires long-term administration. To address this issue, we have developed a portfolio of differentiated drug candidates for CHB, including a small molecule Capsid Assembly Modulator (CAM) and oligonucleotides (Antisense Oligonucleotides (ASO) and Small Interfering Ribonucleic Acids (siRNA)), each of which is designed against clinically validated targets in the Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) life cycle. We are also exploring approaches towards boosting immune response with the use of small molecule antagonists of the PD1/PD-L1 interaction. We believe that combination regimens utilizing our portfolio of CHB drug candidates may lead to higher rates of functional cure.
Initial Phase 1a studies in healthy volunteers (HVs) for our CAM and ASO drug candidates have been completed and Phase 1b dose range studies evaluating the safety, pharmacokinetics and antiviral activity of these drugs in CHB patients are ongoing. For the CAM drug candidate, ALG-000184, preliminary data as of January 28, 2022, in both HVs and CHB subjects indicate the drug has a predictable, dose proportional pharmacokinetic (PK) profile and was well tolerated after up to 28 days of oral daily dosing. Specifically, one unrelated serious adverse event (SAE) (hospitalization for management of pre-existing back pain) and no treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs) leading to discontinuation have been reported and no concerning TEAEs, laboratory abnormalities, or other safety assessments have been identified by the study’s safety committee. Preliminary antiviral activity data through completion of dosing (i.e., 28 days) are available in cohorts of Hepatitis B E-antigen (HBeAg) negative subjects (100 mg (Cohort 1) and 50 mg (Cohort 2)) and HBeAg positive subjects (100 mg (Cohort 4)). ALG-000184 was observed to have similar levels of activity at 50-100 mg doses in Cohorts 1-2, where both doses achieved HBV DNA and HBV RNA reductions of approximately 3-4 log10 IU/mL and approximately 1.5-2 log10 copies/mL, respectively. In both of these cohorts, HBV DNA and HBV RNA levels fell below the lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ) in ≥75% and 100% of subjects, respectively. In Cohort 4 (HBeAg positive subjects receiving 100 mg ALG-000184), HBV DNA and HBV RNA declined by >4 log10 IU/mL and >3 log10 copies/mL, respectively, with no plateauing of the antiviral effect throughout dosing. Enrollment in Cohorts 3 (10 mg for 28 days in HBeAg negative CHB) and 5 (300 mg for 28 days in HBeAg positive CHB) is ongoing with topline data planned to be presented at a scientific conference in mid-2022. In order to understand the effects of longer-term dosing with ALG-000184 on viral markers (e.g., HBV DNA, HBV RNA, HBsAg, and HBeAg) as well as safety, the Phase 1 protocol has been amended to add Part 4, which is planned to dose HBeAg positive subjects for 12 weeks at the 100 mg and 300 mg dose levels in combination with a nucleos(t)ide analog. Dosing in Part 4 is expected to be completed during the fourth quarter of 2022.
For the ASO drug candidate, ALG-020572, dosing in HVs is complete. After reviewing preliminary data through Cohort 4 (480 mg given subcutaneously (SC)), the highest dose evaluated, the study’s safety committee identified no concerning findings. Based on the drug’s acceptable safety and PK profile to date, dosing in Part 2, which is evaluating multiple SC doses (7 doses given over 29 days) in CHB patients, was initiated at the 210 mg dose level. Enrollment in the first cohort of CHB subjects is complete. Preliminary data, including antiviral activity, through multiple cohorts in Part 2 are anticipated to be shared at a scientific conference in the fourth quarter of 2022.
Our preclinical activities to advance our siRNA targeted against HBV are ongoing, with the clinical trial application (CTA) filing for ALG-125755 on-track for the first half of 2022 and dosing in HVs set to begin in the third quarter of 2022.
If our CHB drug candidates are advanced from Phase 1 into Phase 2 development, we plan in 2023 to initiate a Phase 2 platform study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of various combinations of our CAM, ASO, and siRNA drug candidates with or without additional drugs with alternative mechanisms of action.
Finally, note that our CHB portfolio previously included the drug candidate, ALG-010133, one of our proprietary S-antigen Transport-inhibiting Oligonucleotide Polymers (STOPSTM) drug candidates that was in a Phase 1b dose range finding trial (NCT04485663) evaluating subjects with CHB. In January 2022, we announced that we halted further development of ALG-010133 based on data from the Phase 1b trial, which indicated there was insufficient antiviral activity to warrant further development.
Our second area of focus is in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), a complex, chronic liver disease where combination regimens may likewise prove beneficial. Our most advanced drug candidate for NASH is
ALG-055009, a small molecule THR-ß agonist. This drug candidate is being evaluated in a Phase 1a/1b study in HVs (oral single ascending doses) and subjects with hyperlipidemia (14 oral daily doses); dosing in both populations is currently underway. Topline data, including safety, PK, and anti-lipid effects in hyperlipidemic subjects are anticipated in the third quarter of 2022. Based on the previously demonstrated effects of other thyromimetics on liver fat, noninvasive markers of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)/NASH, and liver histology in NASH patients, we believe ALG-055009 has the potential to become an integral component of future combination regimens for NASH.
Our third area of focus is to develop drug candidates with pan-coronavirus activity, including against Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus responsible for COVID-19. Our efforts to identify a coronavirus therapeutic are focused on a small molecule approach, where we are exploring coronavirus protease inhibitors in collaboration with Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven), the Center for Innovation and Stimulation of Drug Discovery (CISTIM) and the Centre for Drug Design and Discovery (CD3).
In October 2020, we completed our initial public offering (IPO) and issued 10,000,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $15.00 per share for net proceeds of $135.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $10.5 million and estimated expenses of $4.1 million. In connection with the IPO, all shares of Series A, Series B-1 and Series B-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock converted into 19,761,870 shares of voting common stock and 3,092,338 shares of non-voting common stock. On November 5, 2020, the underwriters of the IPO partially exercised their overallotment option by purchasing an additional 1,150,000 shares from the Company, resulting in an additional $16.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $1.2 million. Prior to our IPO, we had received gross proceeds of approximately $186.9 million from sales of our preferred stock and our issuance of convertible debt.
In July 2021, we completed a follow-on offering and issued 4,400,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $19.00 per share for net proceeds of $77.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
We have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations in each year since our formation in February 2018. Our net losses were $128.3 million and $108.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have had no revenue from product sales. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $303.1 million. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses over at least the next several years. Our net operating losses may fluctuate from quarter to quarter and year to year depending primarily on the timing of our clinical trials and nonclinical studies and our other research and development expenses. We have no internal manufacturing capabilities or sales force and outsource a substantial portion of our clinical trial work to third parties.
Components of our results of operations
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses since inception have consisted solely of research and development costs and general and administrative costs.
Research and development expenses
We rely substantially on third parties to conduct our discovery activities, nonclinical studies, clinical trials and manufacturing. We primarily estimate research and development expenses based on estimates of services performed and rely on third party contractors and vendors to provide us with timely and accurate estimates of expenses of services performed to assist us in these estimates. A portion of our research and development expenses are based on contractual milestones. Research and development costs consist primarily of costs incurred for the identification and development of our drug candidates through our technology platforms, which include:
•salaries, benefits and other employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees, and related travel expenses;
•costs associated with in-process research and development, including license fees and milestones paid to third-party collaborators for technologies with no alternative use;
•costs related to production of clinical materials, including fees paid to contract manufacturers;
•expenses incurred under agreements with collaborators that perform nonclinical activities;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•facility costs, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, and other supplies.
We expense research and development costs as the services are performed or the goods are received. Non-refundable payments for goods or services that will be used for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. Such amounts are recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed until it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered, or the services will be rendered.
We expect our research and development costs to increase in future periods as we continue to invest in research and development activities and advance our nonclinical and clinical programs through clinical development. The process of conducting nonclinical studies and, eventually, clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming, and the successful development of our drug candidates is highly uncertain. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or clinical trials or if and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our drug candidates.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, corporate and business development and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs not otherwise classified as research and development costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our general and administrative personnel headcount to support personnel in research and development and to support our operations generally as we increase our research and development activities and activities related to the potential commercialization of our drug candidates. We also expect to incur increased expenses associated with operating as a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing rules and requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC), director and officer insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs.
Interest and other (expense) income, net
Interest and other (expense) income, net comprises interest (expense) income, net and other income (expense), net. Interest income (expense), net primarily consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and investments and interest expense related to our convertible preferred stock liability and warrants. Other (expense) income, net consists primarily of the change in fair value of our derivative liabilities.
We classified our warrants and the commitment to sell redeemable convertible preferred stock as liabilities on
our consolidated balance sheets and recorded changes in fair value at each balance sheet date with the corresponding change recorded as other income (expense), net. Prior to our IPO, all outstanding warrants were exercised for the issuance of shares of common stock and, upon that exercise, such warrants were no longer outstanding. Similarly, the redeemable convertible preferred stock liability was converted to common stock.
We do not anticipate other (expense) income, net to fluctuate in the future due to the conversion of the redeemable convertible preferred stock liability prior to our IPO.
Provision for income taxes
Since our inception in 2018, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in any year or for our earned research and development tax credits, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards of $255.9 million available to reduce taxable income and these NOLs can be carried forward indefinitely. We have state NOL carryforwards of $263.0 million as of December 31, 2021, available to reduce future state taxable income, which expire at various dates beginning in 2038. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $1.5 million of Australia NOL carryforwards, which carryforward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $6.1 million and $3.0 million, respectively. The federal development tax credit carryforwards begin to expire in 2038, while the state development tax credit carryforwards can be carried forward indefinitely. Under Sections 382 and 383 of the Code, and corresponding provisions of state law, if a corporation undergoes an “ownership change” (generally defined as a greater than 50 percentage point change (by value) in its equity ownership over a rolling three-year period), the corporation’s ability to use its pre-change NOL carryforwards and other pre-change tax attributes to offset its post-change income may be limited. We performed an IRC Section 382 analysis in 2021 and determined there was an ownership change that resulted in Section 382 limitations. The ownership change limited our ability to utilize net operating losses against future taxable income but will not result in the expiration of any NOLs. We may in the future experience ownership changes as a result of changes in our stock ownership (some of which are not in our control). In addition, under current tax law, federal NOL carryforwards generated in periods after December 31, 2017, may be carried forward indefinitely but, in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2020, may only be used to offset 80% of our taxable income. For these reasons, our ability to utilize our NOL carryforwards and other tax attributes to reduce future tax liabilities may be limited.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $104.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $79.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $24.3 million. The increase was due to an increase of $8.3 million of additional employee-related costs, of which $6.2 million related to stock-based compensation. Additionally, we had an increase of $10.5 million in third-party expenses for our nonclinical programs and the continued increase in expenditures related to research, development and manufacturing activities associated with our CAM, ASO and STOPs, clinical trial activities, as well as activities related to our NASH program (we have discontinued our STOPs program in the first quarter of 2022, refer to Note 16, Subsequent Events for further details). In addition, we had higher facilities and related expenses allocated to research and development in 2021.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $10.6 million. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $6.4 million of additional employee-related costs, of which $4.3 million related to stock-based compensation. In addition, we had a $4.0 million increase in third-party expenses primarily due to increased administrative and legal costs and an increase in of $2.6 million for D&O insurance, all to support our status as a public company, partially offset by a decrease in facilities and related expenses allocated to general and administrative cost centers in 2021.
Interest income, net
Interest income, net decreased to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $1.0 million, primarily due to the change in our portfolio of cash equivalents, short-term and long-term investments as well as a general decrease in market interest rates during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other (loss) income, net
Other (loss) income, net was a loss of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a loss of $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a difference of $11.7 million. The difference was due primarily to the prior year loss recognized on the net increase in fair value of both our redeemable convertible preferred stock liability and warrant liabilities prior to our IPO.
Liquidity and capital resources
Liquidity
We have incurred net losses since inception. We have not generated any revenue from product sales or any other sources and have incurred significant operating losses. We have not yet commercialized any products and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any drug candidates for at least several years, if ever.
Our operations have been financed primarily by net proceeds from the sale and issuance of our convertible preferred stock, net proceeds from our IPO, and the issuance of convertible debt. In October 2020, we issued an aggregate of 3,569,630 shares of our Series B-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock in the second tranche of our Series B convertible preferred stock financing for aggregate proceeds of $40.0 million. On October 20, 2020, we closed our IPO and issued 10,000,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $15.00 per share for net proceeds of $135.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $10.5 million and expenses of $4.1 million. On November 5, 2020, the underwriters of the IPO partially exercised their overallotment option by purchasing an additional 1,150,000 shares from the Company, resulting in an additional $16.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $1.2 million. In July 2021, we completed a follow-on offering and issued 4,400,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $19.00 per share for net proceeds of $77.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $205.8 million.
Capital resources
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development costs related to our drug candidates and our discovery programs, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative
expenditures. We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing clinical development activities related to our most advanced drug candidate ALG-000184, which we have initiated clinical trials, as well as our research and development of our other drug candidates within our CHB, NASH and coronavirus programs.
In addition, we are incurring additional costs associated with operating as a public company following our IPO in October 2020. We expect that our expenses will increase substantially to the extent we:
•conduct our current and future clinical trials, and additional nonclinical studies;
•initiate and continue research and nonclinical and clinical development of other drug candidates;
•seek to identify additional drug candidates;
•pursue marketing approvals for any of our drug candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, if any;
•establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval;
•require the manufacture of larger quantities of our drug candidates for clinical development and potentially commercialization;
•obtain, maintain, expand, protect and enforce our intellectual property portfolio;
•acquire or in-license other drug candidates and technologies;
•hire and retain additional clinical, quality control and scientific personnel;
•achieve milestones triggering payments by us under our current and potential future licensing and/or collaboration agreements;
•build out or expand existing facilities to support our ongoing development activity; and
•add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our drug development, any future commercialization efforts and our transition to becoming a public company.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will enable us to fund our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through at least the twelve months from the date of issuing our financial statements. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Furthermore, we may elect to raise additional capital on an opportunistic basis to fund operations.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with our research and development programs and because the extent to which we may enter into collaborations with third parties for development of our drug candidates is unknown, we are unable to estimate the timing and amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our drug candidates. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our drug candidates and programs, and of conducting nonclinical studies and clinical trials;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining marketing approvals for drug candidates we develop if clinical trials are successful;
•the cost of commercialization activities for our current drug candidates, and any future drug candidates we develop, whether alone or in collaboration, including marketing, sales and distribution costs if our current drug candidates or any future drug candidate we develop is approved for sale;
•the cost of manufacturing our current and future drug candidates for clinical trials in preparation for marketing approval and commercialization;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic licenses or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, expanding, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or profit share or royalties on, our future products, if any;
•the emergence of competing therapies for hepatological indications and viral diseases and other adverse market developments; and
•any acquisitions or in-licensing of other programs or technologies.
Developing pharmaceutical products, including conducting nonclinical studies and clinical trials, is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval for any drug candidates or generate revenue from the sale of any drug candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval. In addition, our drug candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of drugs that we do not expect to be commercially available for many years, if ever. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funds to achieve our business objectives.
Adequate additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. We do not currently have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, ownership interest may be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences and anti-dilution protections that could adversely affect the rights of a common stockholder. Additional debt or preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that may limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, which could adversely constrain our ability to conduct our business, and may require the issuance of warrants, which could potentially dilute ownership interest.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technology, future revenue streams, research programs, or drug candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce and/or terminate our product development programs or any future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating activities
During Fiscal 2021, operating activities used $115.7 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $128.3 million and cash used as a result of changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.7 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $17.3 million. Net cash used as a result of changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.7 million consisted of an increase in other assets of $8.1 million, a decrease of $4.4 million in deferred revenue from collaborations, a decrease of $1.4 million in operating lease liabilities, a decrease of $0.3 million in accounts payable and a decrease of $0.2 million in other liabilities, partially offset by an increase in accrued liabilities of $9.7 million. The increase in other assets resulted from advances for clinical trial costs and deposits for manufacturing slot reservation fees. The decrease in deferred revenue from collaborations was a result of recognition of revenue from collaborations due to progress towards the completion of the project. Operating lease liabilities decreased due to contractual lease payments, and the increase in accrued liabilities was due primarily due
to a ramp in manufacturing activities for various drug compounds that are expected to be consumed in future clinical trials.
During Fiscal 2020, operating activities used $74.3 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $108.5 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $18.2 million and cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $16.1 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $16.1 million consisted of an increase of $9.4 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, an increase of $12.0 million in deferred revenue, partially offset by an increase of $4.1 million in other current assets and a decrease of $1.3 million in operating lease liability. The increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities was largely due to an increase in external research and development costs. The increase in other assets was largely due to an increase in prepayments for services. The decrease in operating lease liability was a result of payments made on outstanding lease obligations.
Investing activities
During Fiscal 2021, investing activities provided $3.0 million of cash, consisting primarily of $23.0 million of investment maturities, offset by $19.1 million of investment purchases and $0.9 million of purchases of property and equipment.
During Fiscal 2020, investing activities provided $32.8 million of cash, consisting primarily of $80.1 million of investment maturities, offset by $45.3 million of investment purchases and $2.1 million of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities
During Fiscal 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $78.7 million, consisting primarily of $78.6 million in proceeds from our follow-on offering, net of issuance costs, and $1.0 million from the issuance of common stock from the exercise of employee stock options and the issuance of shares through our employee stock purchase plan. The cash provided was partially offset by costs related to our follow-on offering of $0.9 million and payments for our capital leases of $0.1 million.
During Fiscal 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $192.3 million, consisting primarily of $155.5 million in net proceeds from the initial public offering and underwriters exercise of the overallotment option and $41.1 million in proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock, partially offset by $4.1 million in payments of deferred offering costs.
Contractual obligations and commitments
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our operating leases for office space in South San Francisco, California, and Belgium, and finance lease commitments representing obligations related to vehicle leases for employees and a lease for lab equipment. All of our finance leases are for assets in Belgium. We do not have any material purchase commitments for contracts with fixed or minimum service requirements. We also enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various vendors that generally provide for contract termination following a certain notice period. The Company enters into contracts in the normal course of business that includes arrangements with clinical research organizations, vendors for preclinical research and vendors for manufacturing. These agreements generally allow for cancellation with notice. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had non-cancellable purchase commitments of approximately $1.9 million related to the discontinued development of STOPSTM drug candidate. Refer to note 16, Subsequent Events, for further details.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Indemnification agreements
We enter into standard indemnification arrangements in the ordinary course of business. Pursuant to these arrangements, we indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified parties for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified party, in connection with any trade secret, copyright, patent or other intellectual property infringement claim by any third party with respect to its technology. The term of these indemnification agreements is generally perpetual any time after the execution of the agreement. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is not determinable. We have never
incurred costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification agreements. As a result, we believe the fair value of these agreements is minimal.
Critical accounting estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and the disclosure of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on relevant assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Accrued research and development costs
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of clinical trials and nonclinical studies. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced and include these costs in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and within research and development expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. These expenses are a significant component of our research and development costs. We record accrued expenses for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with these third-party service providers. Any payments made in advance of services provided are recorded as prepaid expenses and other assets, which are expensed as the contracted services are performed.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed could vary from actuals and result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from clinical research organizations and other third-party service providers. For the periods presented, we have experienced no material differences between our accrued expenses and actual expenses.
Research and development expenses
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Acquired intangible assets are expensed as research and development if, at the time of payment, the technology is under development; is not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or other regulatory agencies for marketing; has not reached technical feasibility; or otherwise has no foreseeable alternative future use.
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in performing research and development activities, including salaries, stock-based compensation and benefits, facilities costs, depreciation, and third-party license fees. Non-refundable prepayments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are expensed as incurred. In-process research and development (IPR&D) expense represents the costs to acquire technologies to be used in research and development that have not reached technological feasibility or have no alternative future uses and thus are expensed as incurred. IPR&D expense also includes upfront license fees and milestones paid to collaborators for technologies with no alternative use.
Stock-based compensation
We measure stock options and other stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and other service providers based on their fair value on the date of grant and recognize compensation expense of those awards over
the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We recognize the impact of forfeitures on stock-based compensation expense as forfeitures occur. We apply the straight-line method of expense recognition to all awards with only service-based vesting conditions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not grant any stock-based awards with performance-based vesting conditions. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we granted stock-based awards with performance-based vesting conditions. We recognize compensation expense related to these awards when it is determined that satisfying the performance conditions is probable using the accelerated attribution method over the requisite service period.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option grant on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the use of highly subjective assumptions including:
•Expected term-We have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of plain-vanilla options, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option (generally 10 years). We estimated the expected term of performance-based vesting options based on the expected life of the options to remain outstanding, which is estimated to be materially consistent with time-vesting options.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments with maturities similar to the expected term of our stock options.
•Expected dividend-We have not issued any dividends and do not anticipate to issue dividends on our common stock. As a result, we have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
•Expected volatility-Due to our limited operating history and a lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. The historical volatility data was computed using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards.
Emerging growth company status
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the JOBS Act), was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” (an EGC) can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an EGC can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period for any new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an EGC; however, we may adopt certain new or revised accounting standards early.
We will remain an EGC until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (2) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700.0 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided to EGCs by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an EGC, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) or (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
Recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.