ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited annual consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For further information regarding forward-looking statements, please refer to the “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Projections” at the beginning of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Alimera Sciences, Inc., and its subsidiaries (we, our or us), is a global pharmaceutical company whose mission is to be invaluable to patients, physicians and partners concerned with retinal health and maintaining better vision longer.
ILUVIEN
Our only product is ILUVIEN®, which has received marketing authorization and reimbursement in numerous countries for the treatment of DME. In the U.S. and certain other countries outside Europe, ILUVIEN is indicated for the treatment of DME in patients who have been previously treated with a course of corticosteroids and did not have a clinically significant rise in intraocular pressure. In 17 countries in Europe, ILUVIEN is indicated for the treatment of vision impairment associated with chronic DME considered insufficiently responsive to available therapies. ILUVIEN is also now indicated in 16 countries in Europe for prevention of relapse in recurrent non-infectious uveitis affecting the posterior segment of the eye (NIU-PS). See Item 1, “Business - Overview” above.
We market ILUVIEN directly in the U.S., Germany, the U.K., Portugal, Ireland, and in the Nordic Region (Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden) with the support of an exclusive wholesaler. In addition, we have entered into various agreements under which distributors are providing or will provide regulatory, reimbursement and sales and marketing support for ILUVIEN in Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, Australia, New Zealand China and several countries in the Western Pacific and several countries in the Middle East. As of December 31, 2021, we have recognized sales of ILUVIEN to our international distributors in the Middle East, Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Spain and the Netherlands.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $16.5 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
For information about:
how the unprecedented events of the COVID-19 pandemic, and its unpredictable duration, in the regions where we have customers, employees and distributors have had an adverse effect on our sales of ILUVIEN and thus on our net revenues;
how the COVID-19 pandemic may in the future have an adverse effect on our liquidity and financial condition;
the factors that have caused these adverse effects; and
the measures we have implemented to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on our financial position and operations,
please see Part I, Item 1, “Business - The COVID-19 Pandemic and Our Steps to Address its Effects on Our Business.” Please also see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors - Risks Related to the Public Health Pandemic.”
Sources of Revenues
We generate revenue from ILUVIEN, our only product. In addition to generating revenue from product sales, we intend to seek to generate revenue from other sources such as upfront fees, milestone payments in connection with collaborative or strategic relationships, and royalties resulting from the licensing of ILUVIEN or any future product candidates and other intellectual property. Additionally, revenue from our international distributors fluctuates depending on the timing of the shipment of ILUVIEN to the distributors and the distributors’ sales of ILUVIEN to their customers.
Our revenues for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were generated from (a) product sales primarily in the U.S., Germany and the U.K. and, for 2021, the recognition of $1.0 million of deferred revenue associated with the termination of our Canadian distribution agreement with Knight Therapeutics, and (b) for 2021, the upfront license payment under the Ocumension License Agreement which resulted in license revenue of approximately $11.0 million (under an analysis performed under FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606)). The upfront license payment under the Ocumension License Agreement was our only licensing revenue for 2020 or 2021.
In the U.S., two large pharmaceutical distributors accounted for 55% and 49% of our consolidated product revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These U.S.-based distributors purchase ILUVIEN from us, maintain inventories of ILUVIEN and sell on to physician offices, pharmacies and hospitals. Internationally, in countries where we sell direct, our customers are hospitals, clinics and pharmacies. We sometimes refer to physician offices, pharmacies, hospitals and clinics as end users. In international countries where we sell to distributors, these distributors purchase ILUVIEN from us and maintain inventories of ILUVIEN that they sell to their customers.
License Agreement with EyePoint Pharmaceuticals US, Inc.
Effective July 1, 2017, we amended and restated our license agreement with EyePoint Pharmaceuticals US, Inc. (EyePoint), formerly known as pSivida US, Inc., which was made effective July 1, 2017 (the New Collaboration Agreement). Under the New Collaboration Agreement, we have rights to the technology underlying ILUVIEN for the treatment of uveitis, including NIU-PS, in Europe, the Middle East and Africa. The New Collaboration Agreement converted our previous profit share obligation to a royalty payable on global net revenues of ILUVIEN.
Following the signing of the New Collaboration Agreement, we retained a right to offset $15.0 million of future royalty payments (the Future Offset). As of December 31, 2021, the balance of the Future Offset was approximately $7.4 million. See Note 10 of our notes to consolidated financial statements below.
We will be able to recover the balance of the Future Offset as a reduction of future royalties that would otherwise be owed to EyePoint as follows:
From December 12, 2018 through December 12, 2020, the royalty was reduced from 6% to 4%; and
Beginning December 13, 2020, the royalty was reduced from 6% to 5.2% for net revenues and other related consideration up to $75.0 million annually and from 8% to 6.8% for net revenues and other related consideration in excess of $75.0 million on an annual basis.
During 2021 and 2020, we recognized approximately $2.9 million and $2.1 million of royalty expense, respectively, which amounts reflect the reductions in the royalty percentage noted above and the corresponding reductions in the Future Offset.
Transactions with Ocumension Therapeutics
On April 14, 2021, we entered into a transaction with Ocumension Therapeutics, incorporated in the Cayman Islands with limited liability (Ocumension), or one of its affiliates. In the Ocumension transaction, we received a total of $20.0 million in cash under two agreements:
•an Exclusive License Agreement (the Ocumension License Agreement) with a wholly owned subsidiary of Ocumension, pursuant to which we granted an exclusive license for the development and commercialization of our 190 microgram fluocinolone acetonide intravitreal implant in applicator under Ocumension’s own branded label in China, East Asia, and the Western Pacific, in exchange for a nonrefundable upfront payment of $10.0 million and aggregated potential sales milestone payments of up to $89.0 million upon achievement by the Ocumension subsidiary of specified amounts of net sales of the licensed product in in the future. We recognized $11.0 million in license revenue from the Ocumension transaction (including the value of a warrant subscription agreement, which we received as consideration, to purchase 1,000,000 shares of Ocumension Therapeutics during a period of four years), in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, with the remaining approximate $300,000 in consideration received classified as deferred revenue that will be recognized over the remaining term of the license agreement once Ocumension begins to sell products. Revenue from the Ocumension License Agreement is included within net revenue in the accompanying condensed consolidated statements of operations; and
•a Share Purchase Agreement with Ocumension, pursuant to which we offered and sold to Ocumension 1,144,945 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $8.734044 per share, or $10.0 million in total.
For more information about the Ocumension transaction, see our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on April 14, 2021.
Change in Operating Segments
During the first quarter of 2021, the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), who is the chief operating decision maker (CODM), changed the manner in which the CODM monitors performance, aligns strategies and allocates resources, which resulted in a change in the operating segments. Our operations are now managed as three operating segments: U.S., International and Operating Cost. We determined that each of these operating segments represented a reportable segment. Previously, we were managed as two operating segments: U.S. and International. You can find financial information about our business segments below in “- Results of Operations - Segment Review” and (b) Note 19 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations - Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Net revenue increased by approximately $8.2 million, or 16%, to approximately $59.0 million for 2021, compared to approximately $50.8 million for 2020. The 2021 increase was primarily attributable to (a) the $11.0 million of recognized license revenue from our transactions with Ocumension and (b) the recognition of $1.0 million of deferred revenue associated with the termination of our Canadian distribution agreement with Knight Therapeutics.
Cost of Goods Sold, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization, and Gross Profit
Gross profit is affected by costs of goods sold, which includes costs of manufactured goods sold and royalty payments to EyePoint under the New Collaboration Agreement. Additionally, cost of goods sold by our international distributors fluctuates depending on the revenue share attributable to the respective contract.
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization increased by approximately $100,000, or 1%, to approximately $7.0 million for 2021, compared to approximately $6.9 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to our increased royalty expense payable on net revenue associated with a change in the net effective royalty rate from 4% in 2020 to 5.2% in 2021.
Gross profit increased by approximately $8.1 million, or 18%, to approximately $52.0 million for 2021, compared to approximately $43.9 million for 2020. Gross margin was 88% and 86% for 2021 and 2020, respectively. While the license revenue we recognized had no product cost of goods sold associated with it, we did have additional royalty expense that reduced our total gross margin for 2021.
Research, Development and Medical Affairs Expenses
Currently, our research, development and medical affairs expenses are primarily focused on activities that support ILUVIEN and include salaries and related expenses for research and development and medical affairs personnel, expenses related to clinical trials including the NEW DAY Study, and expenses tied to physician engagement by our medical sciences liaisons. Our research, development and medical affairs expenses also include costs related to symposia development for physician education, and costs related to compliance with FDA, EEA or other regulatory requirements.
Research, development and medical affairs expenses increased by approximately $4.1 million, or 42%, to approximately $13.8 million for 2021, compared to approximately $9.7 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of (a) approximately $2.8 million of administration costs associated with clinical trials, primarily consisting of costs associated with the NEW DAY Study; (b) $740,000 in personnel costs; (c) $720,000 in consultant costs; and (d) $320,000 in scientific communications costs. These increases were offset somewhat by a decrease of approximately $430,000 in drug safety and quality department project costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation for employees in executive and administrative functions, including finance, accounting, information technology and human resources. Other significant costs include facilities costs and professional fees for accounting and legal services, including legal services associated with obtaining and maintaining patents. We expect to continue to incur significant costs to comply with the corporate governance, internal control and similar requirements applicable to public companies.
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.1 million, or 9%, to approximately $12.8 million for 2021, compared to approximately $11.7 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of approximately $970,000 in personnel costs, including increased headcount, and $430,000 in legal and professional fees.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of compensation for employees for commercial promotion of ILUVIEN, including the assessment of the commercial opportunity, development of market awareness, pursuit of reimbursement approval and commercialization generally, including launch plans in new markets. Other costs include third party service fees, professional fees associated with developing marketing strategies for ILUVIEN and maintaining public relations.
Sales and marketing expenses increased by approximately $2.7 million, or 13%, to approximately $23.1 million for 2021, compared to approximately $20.4 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of (a) approximately $1.6 million of personnel costs, including expenses associated with increased headcount, and additional travel expenses as our sales force began to return to pre-pandemic travel levels in 2021; and (b) $1.1 million in marketing costs, including costs for patient brand-awareness campaigns.
Operating Expenses
As a result of the changes in expenses described above, total operating expenses increased by approximately $7.8 million, or 18%, to approximately $52.2 million for 2021, compared to approximately $44.4 million for 2020. The increase was attributable to increases of approximately $4.1 million in research, development and medical affairs expenses, $2.7 million in sales and marketing expenses and $1.1 million in general and administrative expenses and as described above.
Interest Expense and Other
Interest expense consists primarily of interest and amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts associated with our outstanding debt under the 2019 Loan Agreement. Interest income consisted primarily of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Interest expense and other was approximately $5.4 million for both 2021 and 2020. Interest expense consisted primarily of interest and amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts associated with our outstanding debt under the 2019 Loan Agreement. For more detailed information, see Note 12 of our notes to consolidated financial statements below.
Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Applicable to Common Stockholders per Share of Common Stock
We follow FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), Earnings Per Share (ASC 260), which requires the reporting of both basic and diluted earnings per share. Because our preferred stockholders participate in dividends equally with common stockholders (if we were to declare and pay dividends), we use the two-class method to calculate EPS. However, our preferred stockholders are not contractually obligated to share in losses.
Basic EPS is computed by dividing net income (loss) available to stockholders by the weighted average number of shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS is calculated in accordance with ASC 260 by adjusting weighted average shares outstanding for the dilutive effect of common stock options, restricted stock units and warrants. In periods where a net loss is recorded, no effect is given to potentially dilutive securities, since the effect would be anti-dilutive.
Weighted average shares outstanding increased by approximately 1.5 million shares to approximately 6.6 million for 2021 compared to approximately 5.1 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in our common shares outstanding, including the issuance of 1,144,945 common shares in accordance with the Share Purchase Agreement with Ocumension in April 2021.
Results of Operations - Segment Review
The following selected unaudited financial and operating data are derived from our consolidated financial statements. The results and discussions that follow reflect how executive management monitors the performance of our reporting segments.
Our U.S. and International segments represent the sales and marketing, general and administrative and research and development activities dedicated to the respective geographies. The Operating Cost segment primarily represents the general and administrative and research and development activities not specifically associated with the U.S. or International segments and includes expenses such as executive management; information technology administration and support; legal; compliance; clinical studies; and business development. In monitoring performance, aligning strategies and allocating resources, our CODM manages and evaluates our U.S., International and Operating Cost segments based on segment income or loss from operations adjusted for certain non-cash items, such as stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization. Therefore, we classify within Other (a) the non-cash expenses included in research, development and medical affairs expenses; general and administrative expenses; and sales and marketing expenses; and (b) depreciation and amortization.
Each of our U.S., International and Operating Cost segments is separately managed and is evaluated primarily upon segment income or loss from operations. Other is presented to reconcile to our consolidated totals. For that reconciliation, please see Note 19 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements. We do not report balance sheet information by segment because our CODM does not review that information. We allocate certain operating expenses among our reporting segments based on activity-based costing methods. These activity-based costing methods require us to make estimates that affect the amount of each expense category that is attributed to each segment. Changes in these estimates will directly affect the amount of expense allocated to each segment and therefore the operating profit of each reporting segment.
U.S. Segment
U.S. Segment - Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenue. Net revenue increased by approximately $1.9 million, or 8%, to approximately $26.7 million for 2020, compared to approximately $24.8 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to our end user demand, which increased 7% in 2021 to 3,287 units compared to 3,075 units for 2020.
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization. Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization increased by approximately $400,000, or 14%, to approximately $3.3 million for 2021 compared to approximately $2.9 million for 2020. The increase was attributable to our increased royalty percentage payable to EyePoint, which increased from 4% in 2020 to 5.2% in 2021 and our increased product demand.
Research, development and medical affairs expenses. Research, development and medical affairs expenses increased by approximately $500,000, or 16%, to approximately $3.6 million for 2021, compared to approximately $3.1 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in scientific communication costs and travel-related costs.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $50,000, or 5%, to approximately $970,000 for 2021, compared to approximately $920,000 for 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases in costs related to professional fees and insurance costs.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased by approximately $1.5 million, or 11%, to approximately $15.3 million for 2021, compared to approximately $13.8 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of (a) approximately $1.1 million of personnel costs, including salary expenses associated with increased headcount, and travel expenses as our sales force was able to regain access to customers as we began to come out of the COVID-19 pandemic; and (b) $610,000 in marketing costs, including an investment in our direct to patient marketing campaign and costs for projects targeted at regaining engagement with our customers.
International Segment
International Segment - Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenue. Net revenue, consisting of both product and licensing revenue, increased by approximately $6.3 million, or 24%, to approximately $32.3 million for 2021, compared to approximately $26.0 million for 2020, which consisted of only product revenue. International net revenue in 2021 was composed of $21.3 million of net product revenue and $11.0 million in license revenue from the Ocumension transaction. The 2021 decrease in product revenue was primarily due to our international distributor partners purchasing inventory in late 2020, which they did not sell to end users until mid-2021 because of the ongoing pandemic.
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization. Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization decreased by approximately $400,000, or 10%, to approximately $3.7 million for 2021, compared to approximately $4.1 million for 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower sales to our international distributors. This decrease was offset by our increased royalty expense payable to EyePoint, which increased from 4% in 2020 to 5.2% in 2021, which was applicable to all revenue.
Research, development and medical affairs expenses. Research, development and medical affairs expenses increased by approximately $1.2 million, or 40%, to approximately $4.2 million for 2021, compared to approximately $3.0 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of approximately $440,000 in consultant costs including pharmacovigilance consultants, $350,000 in medical consulting associated with our launch in the Nordic region and $380,000 in personnel costs.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $200,000, or 13%, to approximately $1.3 million for 2021, compared to approximately $1.5 million for 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreased expenses associated with logistics costs and VAT expense in Europe.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased by approximately $1.2 million, or 21%, to approximately $7.0 million for 2021, compared to approximately $5.8 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of approximately $660,000 in personnel costs associated with increased headcount, $480,000 in marketing costs tied to digital marketing projects, and $230,000 in market access costs targeted at market research and improving reimbursement.
Operating Cost Segment
Operating Cost Segment - Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Research, development and medical affairs expenses. Research, development and medical affairs expenses increased by approximately $2.6 million, or 79%, to approximately $5.9 million for 2021, compared to approximately $3.3 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of approximately $2.7 million of administration costs associated with clinical trials, primarily consisting of costs associated with the NEW DAY Study.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.4 million, or 17%, to approximately $9.8 million for 2021, compared to approximately $8.4 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of approximately $1.1 million in personnel costs which included increased headcount, and $480,000 in professional fees.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased by approximately $40,000, or 8%, to approximately $530,000 for 2021, compared to approximately $490,000 for 2020. These costs are tied to executive management of our global sales and marketing.
Other
Other - Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
In monitoring performance, aligning strategies and allocating resources, our CODM manages and evaluates our U.S., International and Operating Cost segments based on segment income or loss from operations adjusted for certain non-cash items, such as stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization. Therefore, we classify within Other (a) the non-cash expenses included in research, development and medical affairs expenses, general and administrative expenses, and sales and marketing expenses; and (b) depreciation and amortization.
Operating expenses. Operating expenses in Other decreased by approximately $400,000, or 10%, to $3.6 million for 2021, compared to approximately $4.0 million for 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in global stock-based compensation expenses.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization was approximately $2.6 million for 2021 and approximately $2.7 million for 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Since inception, we have incurred recurring losses, negative cash flow from operations and have accumulated a deficit in stockholders’ equity of $397.3 million as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $16.5 million in cash and cash equivalents. In April 2021 we received a total of $20.0 million in cash from the Ocumension transaction described above. We are using these funds to continue to commercialize ILUVIEN, to fund our NEW DAY clinical trial and for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, other clinical trial expenditures, acquisitions of new technologies, products or businesses in ophthalmology, and investments.
As noted above in Part I, Item 1, “Business - The COVID-19 Pandemic and Our Steps to Address the Effects on our Business,” the unprecedented events of the COVID-19 pandemic, and its unpredictable duration, in the regions where we have customers, employees and distributors have had an adverse effect on our sales of ILUVIEN and thus on our net revenues and capital resources. The extent and duration of that impact is uncertain.
Since January 2020, we have funded our operations through:
(a)cash received from our sales;
(b)net proceeds of the loans that we obtained in December 2019 and February 2020 from a group of lenders led by SLR Investment Corp. (formerly named Solar Capital Ltd.) under a $45.0 million loan and security agreement (the 2019 Loan Agreement);
(c)an approximately $1.8 million loan (the PPP Loan) we obtained in April 2020 under the Paycheck Protection Program established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, which was forgiven in its entirety, including interest on April 16, 2021; and
(d)the $20.0 million in funds we obtained in April 2021 as a result of the Ocumension transaction.
The 2019 Loan Agreement does not include a revolving loan feature and has been fully advanced by the lenders. We currently have no additional borrowing capacity, and the 2019 Loan Agreement generally prohibits any additional debt unless we obtain the prior consent of the lenders.
Indebtedness
Loans from SLR Investment Corp. (SLR, formerly known as Solar Capital Ltd. until February 2021). On January 5, 2018, we entered into a $40.0 million loan and security agreement with SLR, as Collateral Agent, and the parties signatory thereto from time to time as Lenders, including SLR in its capacity as a lender (the 2018 Loan Agreement). On December 31, 2019, we refinanced the 2018 Loan Agreement by entering into a $45.0 million loan and security agreement (the 2019 Loan Agreement) with SLR, as Agent, and the parties signing the loan agreement from time to time as Lenders, including SLR in its capacity as a Lender (collectively, the Lenders). Under the 2019 Loan Agreement, we borrowed $42.5 million on December 31, 2019 and borrowed the remaining $2.5 million on February 21, 2020. The two borrowings under the 2019 Loan Agreement totaled $45.0 million and are referred to as the SLR Loan. The SLR Loan matures on July 1, 2024. We used the initial proceeds of the SLR Loan to pay off the outstanding loan under the 2018 Loan Agreement, along with related prepayment, legal and other fees and expenses totaling approximately $2.3 million, which included $2.2 million in fees to SLR. We used the remaining proceeds of the SLR Loan to provide additional working capital for general corporate purposes during 2020 and the first half of 2021.
On May 1, 2020, we entered into a First Amendment to the 2019 Loan Agreement (the First Amendment). The First Amendment included revised covenants that applied to our financial performance during 2020, all of which we met. The First Amendment, among other things, required that a minimum revenue covenant be measured at March 31, 2021 and at the last day of each quarter thereafter, with the minimum revenue amount equal to a percentage of our projected revenues in accordance with a plan we submitted to Agent in February 2021, with such plan to be approved by our board of directors (the Board) and Agent in its sole discretion.
On March 30, 2021, we entered into a Second Amendment to the 2019 Loan Agreement (the Second Amendment), which, among other things:
(a)reflected Agent’s consent to our delivery of Board-approved annual financial projections for 2021 by April 1, 2021 (which we delivered in a timely manner);
(b)specified the minimum revenue amount, calculated on a trailing six-month basis and tested at the end of each calendar quarter in 2021, that we must achieve for each such period (the Revenue Covenant);
(c)required that the Revenue Covenant be tested at March 31, 2022 and at the last day of each quarter thereafter, with the minimum revenue amount equal to a percentage of our projected revenues in accordance with an annual plan submitted by us to Agent by January 15th of such year, such plan to be approved by our Board and Agent in its sole discretion; and
(d)provided that in future years we must deliver to Agent and the Lenders as soon as available after approval thereof by our Board, but no later than the earlier of (x) 15 days after such approval and (y) February 28 of such year, our annual financial projections for the entire current fiscal year as approved by our Board; provided that any revisions to such projections approved by our Board shall be delivered to Agent and the Lenders no later than seven days after such approval.
On February 22, 2022, we entered into a Third Amendment to the 2019 Loan Agreement (the Third Amendment), which, among other things:
(a)specified the minimum revenue amount, calculated on a trailing six-month basis and tested at the end of each calendar quarter in 2022, that Alimera must achieve for each such period (the Revenue Covenant);
(b)consented to Alimera maintaining a lower minimum revenue amount under the Revenue Covenant for the trailing six month period ended December 31, 2021 than previously required under the Loan Agreement (and waived any event of default that may have occurred or may be deemed to have occurred as a result of Alimera’s lower revenue amount for that period); and
(c)required that the Revenue Covenant be tested at March 31, 2023 and at the last day of each quarter thereafter, with the minimum revenue amount equal to a percentage of Alimera’s projected revenues in accordance with an annual plan submitted by Alimera to Collateral Agent by January 15 of such year, such plan to be thereafter approved by Alimera’s board of directors and Collateral Agent in its sole discretion no later than February 28 of such year.
Interest on the 2019 Loan Agreement is payable at the greater of (i) one-month LIBOR or (ii) 1.78%, in either case plus 7.65% per annum. As of December 31, 2021, the 2019 Loan Agreement’s interest rate was 9.43%. The 2019 Loan Agreement provides for interest only payments until January 1, 2023. If we meet certain revenue thresholds and no event of default shall have occurred and is continuing, we can extend the interest only period an additional six months, ending on June 30, 2023, followed by one year of monthly payments of principal and interest.
The Federal Reserve recently raised interest rates to combat the effects of inflation and has announced that it expects to continue to do so in the future. An increase in LIBOR (or a successor interest rate) would increase our interest costs. For example, a 1.0% increase in the interest rate under the 2019 Loan Agreement above the interest rate that applied to us as of December 31, 2021 (9.43%) would increase our interest expense by approximately $456,000 per year and reduce our liquidity and capital resources by that amount. A more significant increase could materially and adversely affect our results of operations and our ability to pay amounts due under the 2019 Loan Agreement.
Our operations and thus our net product revenues have continued to be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. During each of the six-month periods ended September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021, we did not generate sufficient revenue to meet the trailing six-month Revenue Covenant included in the 2019 Loan Agreement. As noted above, for each such six-month period, the lenders provided a consent that permitted us not to maintain the Revenue Covenant as of September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021, respectively, and waived any event of default that may have occurred or may have been deemed to have occurred. We expect to comply with the Revenue Covenant at the next reportable date, which is March 31, 2022, and throughout 2022. However, due to the remaining uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic it is possible that we will fail to comply with the Revenue Covenant. If we fail to comply with the Revenue Covenant and the lenders do not provide a consent and waiver, acceleration of the maturity of the loan is one of the remedies available to the lenders. If the lenders accelerate the maturity of the loan, we would be forced to find alternative financing or enter into an alternative agreement with the lenders. We cannot be sure that alternative financing will be available when needed or that, if available, the alternative financing could be obtained on terms that are not significantly detrimental to us or our stockholders. See the risk factor related to the 2019 Loan Agreement in Part I, Item 1A above.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan. On April 22, 2020, we received an approximately $1.8 million loan (the PPP Loan) under the Paycheck Protection Program established by the U.S. Small Business Administration as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act. The PPP Loan was unsecured and was evidenced by a note in favor of HSBC Bank USA, National Association (HSBC) as the lender. On July 21, 2020, we submitted an application to HSBC for forgiveness of the PPP Loan. The PPP Loan was forgiven in its entirety, including interest, on April 16, 2021.
$20.0 million Ocumension Transaction
On April 14, 2021, we entered into a Share Purchase Agreement with Ocumension Therapeutics, pursuant to which we offered and sold to Ocumension 1,144,945 shares of our common stock, at a purchase price of $8.734044 per share. The number of shares sold was equal to 19.9% of the number of shares of common stock outstanding immediately before the closing. The aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of the shares were $10.0 million. In addition, we received a nonrefundable upfront license payment of $10.0 million pursuant to the Ocumension License Agreement. Under that agreement, we granted an exclusive license for the development and commercialization of our 190 microgram fluocinolone acetonide intravitreal implant in applicator under Ocumension’s own branded label in China, East Asia and the Western Pacific. For more information about the Ocumension transaction, see “Transactions with Ocumension Therapeutics” above and our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on April 14, 2021.
Current Cash Position
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $16.5 million in cash and cash equivalents, a decrease of $5.0 million from the $21.5 million in cash and cash equivalents that we reported as of September 30, 2021 but an increase from the $11.2 million in cash and cash equivalents we reported as of December 31, 2020. In April 2021, we received gross proceeds of $20.0 million in cash from the Ocumension transaction described above. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our business strategy, including the continued commercialization of ILUVIEN and the retention and in certain areas, the expansion, of our current employees and staff. The actual amount of funds that we may need will depend on many factors, some of which are beyond our control. See Part I, Item 1, “Business - The COVID-19 Pandemic and Our Steps to Address its Effects on Our Business” for an explanation of how we are seeking to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on our financial position and operations.
We cannot be sure that additional financing will be available when needed or that, if available, the additional financing could be obtained on terms that are not significantly detrimental to us or our stockholders. If we were to raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, substantial dilution to existing stockholders could result, and the terms of any new equity securities may have a preference over our common stock. If we were to attempt to raise additional funds through strategic collaboration agreements, we may not be successful in obtaining those agreements, or in receiving milestone or royalty payments under them. If we were to attempt to raise additional funds through debt financing, we would be required to obtain the permission or participation of SLR, which we might not be able to obtain. Our recurring losses and any potential needs to raise capital create substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the next 12 months following the issuance of the financial statements for the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Sources and Uses of Cash in 2021 and 2020
For 2021, net cash used in our operations was approximately $3.2 million. The cash used in our operations was primarily due to our net loss of $4.4 million, a $2.2 million increase in accounts receivable, a gain on extinguishment of debt of $1.8 million, $970,000 of non-cash consideration received as revenue, a decrease of $750,000 in long-term liabilities and $420,000 of unrealized foreign currency gains. These cash decreases were offset by $2.6 million of non-cash depreciation and amortization, a $2.0 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, $1.0 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense, $960,000 of non-cash interest expense associated with the amortization of our debt discount and a $530,000 change in fair value of warrant asset.
For 2020, net cash used in our operations of $2.2 million was primarily due to our net loss of $5.3 million, a $1.6 million decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, a $1.3 million increase in inventory, a $680,000 increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $520,000 decrease in long-term liabilities. These decreases in cash were offset by $2.7 million of non-cash depreciation and amortization, a $2.6 million decrease in accounts receivable, $1.3 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense and $1.0 million of non-cash interest expense associated with the amortization of our debt discount.
For 2021, net cash used in our investing activities was approximately $620,000, which was primarily due to capital expenditures associated with relocating our U.S. headquarters and purchases of new IT equipment.
For 2020, net cash used in our investing activities was approximately $620,000, which was primarily due to capital expenditures associated with the transfer of manufacturing to the facility at Cadence.
For 2021, net cash provided by our financing activities was approximately $9.8 million, which was primarily due to $10.1 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock, including the $10.0 million common stock sale to Ocumension, offset by $220,000 of payments of finance lease obligations.
For 2020, net cash provided by our financing activities was approximately $3.9 million, which was primarily due to borrowing the remaining $2.5 million under the 2019 Loan Agreement and receiving the $1.8 million PPP Loan, offset by $430,000 of payments of finance lease obligations.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
2019 Loan Agreement. The outstanding loan under the 2019 Loan Agreement (the SLR Loan) provides for interest only payments until January 1, 2023. If we meet certain revenue thresholds and no event of default shall have occurred and is continuing, we can extend the interest only period an additional six months, ending on June 30, 2023, followed by one year of monthly payments of principal and interest until the SLR Loan matures on July 1, 2024. Assuming we will be entitled to this six month extension of the interest only period, we estimate that we will be obligated to pay to the Lenders $45.0 million in loan principal and approximately $9.0 million in interest through July 1, 2024 at the current rate of 9.43% per annum (which may be higher as noted above).
The NEW DAY Study. In January 2020, we began entering into agreements with contract research organizations (CROs) and physician clinics in connection with a multicenter, single masked, randomized and controlled trial designed to generate prospective data evaluating ILUVIEN as a baseline therapy in the treatment of DME and demonstrate its advantages over the current standard of care of repeat anti-VEGF injections (the NEW DAY Study). The NEW DAY Study is planned to enroll approximately 300 treatment-naïve, or almost naïve, DME patients in approximately 42 sites around the U.S. For 2021 and 2020, we incurred approximately $3.8 million and $1.3 million, respectively, of expense associated with the NEW DAY Study. In connection with the NEW DAY Study, we expect to incur approximately an additional $6.3 million, $5.5 million and $1.0 million of expense in 2022, 2023, and 2024, respectively.
Manufacturing Services Agreement with Alliance. In February 2016, we and Alliance Medical Products Inc., a Siegfried Company (Alliance), a third-party manufacturer, amended and restated the parties’ existing agreement for the manufacture of the ILUVIEN implant, the assembly of the ILUVIEN applicator and the packaging of the completed ILUVIEN commercial product. Under the amended and restated Alliance agreement, its term was extended by five years, at which point the agreement became automatically renewable for successive one-year periods unless either party delivers notice of non-renewal to the other party at least 12 months before the end of the term or any renewal term. We are responsible for supplying the ILUVIEN applicator and the active pharmaceutical ingredient, and we must order at least 80% of the ILUVIEN units required in the U.S., Canada and the EEA from Alliance.
Manufacturing Services Agreement with Cadence. On October 30, 2020, we entered into a Manufacturing Services Agreement (the Cadence Agreement) with Cadence, Inc., for the manufacture of certain component parts of the ILUVIEN applicator (the components) at its facility near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Under the Cadence Agreement, we will pay certain per-unit prices based on regularly scheduled shipments of a minimum number of components. The initial term of the Cadence Agreement expires on October 30, 2025. After the expiration of the initial term, the Cadence Agreement will automatically renew for separate but successive one-year terms unless either party provides written notice to the other party that it does not intend to renew the Cadence Agreement at least 24 months before the end of the term. The Cadence Agreement may be terminated by either party under certain circumstances. To date, we have been in the process of transferring the manufacturing of parts to Cadence and have spent cash resources to purchase new equipment, to update clean room facilities and to assist in the regulatory approval process. In connection with the Cadence Agreement, we expect to be invoiced approximately $650,000 in each of 2022 and 2023.
Critical Accounting Policies and Critical Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates. For a description of the accounting policies are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use to prepare our consolidated financial statements, see Note 2 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Net Product Revenue
We sell our products to major pharmaceutical distributors, pharmacies, hospitals and wholesalers (collectively, our Customers). In addition to distribution agreements with Customers, we enter into arrangements with healthcare providers and payors that provide for government-mandated and/or privately negotiated rebates, chargebacks, and discounts with respect to the
purchase of our products. All of our current contracts have a single performance obligation, as the promise to transfer the individual goods is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and is, therefore, not distinct.
We recognize revenues from product sales when the Customer obtains control, typically upon delivery. We accrue for fulfillment costs when the related revenue is recognized. Taxes collected from Customers relating to product sales and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenues.
License Revenue
We enter into agreements in which we license certain rights to our products to partner companies that act as distributors. The terms of the license agreement may include payment to us of non-refundable up-front license fees, milestone payments if specified objectives are achieved, and/or royalties on product sales. We recognize revenue from upfront payments at a point in time, typically upon fulfilling the delivery of the associated intellectual property to the customer.
Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised products or services underlying each performance obligation. We determine standalone selling prices based on the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately. If the standalone selling price is not observable through past transactions, we estimate the standalone selling price taking into account available information such as market conditions related to the performance obligations.
We will recognize sales-based milestone payments as revenue upon the achievement of the cumulative sales amount specified in the contract in accordance with ASC 606. For those milestone payments which are contingent on the occurrence of particular future events, we determine that these need to be considered for inclusion in the calculation of total consideration from the contract as a component of variable consideration using the expected value method. As such, we assess each milestone to determine the probability of and substance behind achieving each milestone. Given the inherent uncertainty associated with these future events, we will not recognize revenue from such milestones until there is a high probability of occurrence, which typically occurs near or upon achievement of the event.
Estimates of Variable Consideration
Revenues from product sales are recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration for reserves related to statutory rebates to state Medicaid and other government agencies; commercial rebates and fees to Managed Care Organizations (MCOs), Group Purchasing Organizations (GPOs), distributors and specialty pharmacies; product returns; sales discounts (including trade discounts); distributor costs; wholesaler chargebacks; and allowances for patient assistance programs relating to sales of our products.
These reserves are based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales. Our estimates take into consideration historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and Customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of variable consideration included in the net sales price is limited to the amount that is probable not to result in a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized in a future period. If actual results vary, we may adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on earnings in the period of adjustment.
With respect to our international contracts with third party distributors, certain contracts have elements of variable consideration, and management reviews those contracts on a regular basis and makes estimates of revenue based on historical ordering patterns and known market events and data. The amount of variable consideration included in net sales in each period can vary depending on the terms of these contracts and the probability of reversal in future periods.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. We evaluate the positive and negative evidence bearing upon the realizability of our deferred tax assets on an annual basis. Significant management judgment is involved in determining the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. Due to uncertainties with respect to the realization of our U.S. deferred tax assets resulting from our history of operating losses, we have established a valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax asset balances to reduce the net carrying value to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. As a result, we have fully reserved against the U.S. deferred tax asset balances. The valuation allowances are based on our estimates of taxable income in the jurisdictions in which we operate and the period over which deferred tax assets will be recoverable. If actual results differ from these estimates or we adjust these estimates in future periods, a change in the valuation allowance may be needed, which could materially impact our financial position and results of operations.
Our deferred tax assets primarily consist of net operating loss (NOL) carry-forwards. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal NOL carry-forwards of approximately $143.2 million and state NOL carry-forwards of approximately $106.7 million,
respectively, subject to further limitation based upon the final results of our analyses under Internal Revenue Code Sections 382 and 383. Except for the NOLs generated after 2017, the U.S. federal NOLs not fully utilized will expire at various dates between 2029 and 2037; most state NOL carry-forwards will expire at various dates between 2021 and 2041. Under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, U.S. federal NOLs and some state NOLs generated after 2017 will carry forward indefinitely.
Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code limit the annual use of NOL carry-forwards and tax credit carry-forwards, respectively, following an ownership change. NOL carry-forwards may be subject to annual limitations under Internal Revenue Code Section 382 (Section 382) (or comparable provisions of state law) if certain changes in ownership were to occur. We periodically evaluate our NOL carry-forwards and whether certain changes in ownership have occurred that would limit our ability to utilize a portion of our NOL carry-forwards. If we determine that significant ownership changes have occurred since we generated our NOL carry-forwards, we may be subject to annual limitations on the use of these NOL carry-forwards under Section 382 (or comparable provisions of state law). We have determined that a Section 382 change in ownership occurred in late 2015. As a result of this change in ownership, we estimated that approximately $18.6 million of our federal NOLs and approximately $382,000 of federal tax credits generated prior to the change in ownership will not be utilized in the future. We are currently in the process of refining and finalizing these calculations, and upon finalization, will determine if a write-off is necessary. The reduction to our NOL deferred tax asset due to the annual Section 382 limitation and the NOL carryforward period would result in an offsetting reduction in valuation allowance recorded against the NOL deferred tax asset.
If we were to determine that we are able to realize any of our net deferred tax assets in the future, we would adjust the valuation allowance to increase net income in the period in which we make that determination. We believe that the most significant uncertainty affecting the determination of our valuation allowance will be our estimation of the extent and timing of future net income, if any.
We considered our income tax positions for uncertainty in accordance with ASC 740. The balance of unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 are approximately $88,000 and $65,000, respectively. Both balances relate to research and development tax credits. In accordance with ASC 740-10, such attributes are reduced to the amount that is expected to be recognized in the future. We do not accrue interest or penalties, as there is no risk of additional tax liability due to significant NOLs available. We do not expect any decreases to the unrecognized tax benefits within the next twelve months due to any lapses in statute of limitations. Tax years from 2018 to 2020 remain subject to examination in California, Georgia, Kentucky, New Jersey, Tennessee, Texas and on the federal level, provided that assessment of NOL carry-forwards available for use can be examined for all years since 2009. The statute of limitations on these years will close when the NOLs expire or when the statute closes on the years in which we use the NOLs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that would have been established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is referenced in Instruction 8 to Item 303(b) of SEC Regulation S-K) or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in those types of relationships. We enter into guarantees in the ordinary course of business related to the guarantee of our own performance and the performance of our subsidiaries.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of our notes to consolidated financial statements below for a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and expected effects on results of operations and financial condition, if known.