Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Refer to “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this report to the “Company,” “Alkami,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Alkami Technology, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries taken as a whole.
Overview
Alkami is a cloud-based digital banking solutions provider. We inspire and empower community, regional and super-regional financial institutions (“FIs”) to compete with large, technologically advanced and well-resourced banks in the United States. Our solution, the Alkami Platform, allows FIs to onboard and engage new users, accelerate revenues and meaningfully improve operational efficiency, all with the support of a proprietary, true cloud-based, multi-tenant architecture. We cultivate deep relationships with our clients through long-term, subscription-based contractual arrangements, aligning our growth with our clients’ success and generating an attractive unit economic model.
Alkami was founded to help level the playing field for FIs. Since then, our vision has been to create a platform that combines premium technology and fintech solutions in one integrated ecosystem, delivered as a software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) solution and providing our clients’ customers with a single point of access to all things digital. We have invested significant resources to build a technology stack that prioritized innovation velocity and speed-to-market given the importance of product depth and functionality in winning and retaining clients. In fiscal 2020, we acquired ACH Alert, LLC (“ACH Alert”) to pursue adjacent product opportunities, such as fraud prevention and to expand our addressable market. In addition, in September 2021, we acquired MK Decisioning Systems, LLC (“MK”) a technology platform for digital account opening, credit card and loan origination solutions.
Our domain expertise in retail and business banking has enabled us to develop a suite of products tailored to address key challenges faced by FIs. Due to our architecture, adding products through our single code base is fast, simple and cost-effective. The key differentiators of the Alkami Platform include:
•User experience: Personalized and seamless digital experience across user interaction points, including mobile, chat and SMS, establishing durable connections between FIs and their customers.
•Integrations: Scalability and extensibility driven by 230 real-time integrations to back office systems and third-party fintech solutions as of December 31, 2021, including core systems, payment cards, mortgages, bill pay, electronic documents, money movement, personal financial management and account opening.
•Deep data capabilities: Data synchronized and stored from back office systems and third-party fintech solutions and synthesized into meaningful insights, targeted content and other areas of monetization.
The Alkami Platform offers an end-to-end set of software products. Our typical relationship with an FI begins with a set of core functional components, which can extend over time to include a rounded suite of products across account opening, card experience, client service, extensibility, financial wellness, security and fraud protection, marketing and analytics and money movement.
We primarily go to market through an internal sales force. Given the long-term nature of our contracts, a typical sales cycle can range from approximately three to 12 months, with the subsequent implementation timeframe generally ranging from six to 12 months depending on the depth of integration.
We derive our revenues almost entirely from multi-year contracts for the Alkami platform that are based on an average contract life of approximately 70 months as of December 31, 2021. We predominantly employ a per-registered-user pricing model, with incremental fees above certain contractual minimum commitments for each licensed solution. Our pricing is tiered, with per-registered-user discounts applied as clients achieve higher levels of customer penetration, incentivizing our clients to internally market and promote digital engagement.
To support our growth and capitalize on our market opportunity, we have increased our operating expenses across all aspects of our business. In research and development, we continue to focus on innovation and bringing novel capabilities to our platform, extending our product depth. Similarly, we continue to expand our sales and marketing organization focusing on new client wins, cross-selling opportunities and client renewals.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, our total revenues were $152.2 million, $112.1 million, and $73.5 million, respectively, representing growth rates of 35.7% from 2020 to 2021 and 52.5% from 2019 to 2020. SaaS subscription revenues, as further described below, represented 94.4%, 93.7%, and 91.5% of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We incurred net losses of $46.8 million, $51.4 million, and $41.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, largely on the basis of significant continued investment in sales, marketing, product development and post-sales client activities.
Recent Developments
Initial Public Offering. On April 13, 2021, the Company's registration statement relating to our IPO of our common stock was declared effective by the SEC. In connection with our IPO, the Company issued and sold 6,900,000 shares of common stock (including 900,000 shares issued pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters' option to purchase additional shares) at a public offering price of $30.00 per share for net proceeds of $192.8 million, after deducting underwriters' discounts and commissions (excluding other IPO costs as of April 13, 2021).
Acquisition of MK. On September 10, 2021, the Company acquired substantially all of the assets of MK for approximately $20 million in cash consideration due at closing subject to a $2 million holdback provision held in escrow with $1 million to be released at the 12-month anniversary of close and the remainder to be released at the 18-month anniversary of close. The Company also agreed to assume certain liabilities associated with MK’s business. MK expands our total addressable market by over $2.0 billion while gaining new cross-selling opportunities among a larger installed base.
Factors Affecting our Operating Results
Growing our FI Client Base. A key part of our strategy is to grow our FI client base. As of December 31, 2021, we served 177 FIs through the Alkami Platform and an additional 123 clients through the ACH Alert suite of solutions, representing 32.2% annual client growth since December 31, 2020. Each of our digital banking client wins is a competitive takeaway, and as such, our historical ability to grow our client base has been a function of product depth, technological excellence and a sales and marketing function able to match our solutions with the strategic objectives of our clients. Our future success will significantly depend on our ability to continue to grow our FI client base through competitive wins.
Deepening Client Customer Penetration. We primarily generate revenues through a per-registered-user pricing model. Once we onboard a client, our ability to help drive incremental client customer digital adoption translates to additional revenues with very limited additional spend. Our FI clients are incentivized to market and encourage digital account sign-up based on identifiable improvement in customer engagement as well as discounts received based on certain levels of customer penetration. We expect to continue to support digital adoption by client customers through continued investments in new products and platform enhancements. Our future success will depend on our ability to continue to deepen client customer penetration.
Expanding our Product Suite. Product depth is a key determinant in winning new clients. In a replacement market, we win based on our ability to bring a product suite to market that is superior to the incumbent, as well as to our broader competition. Of equal importance is the ability to cohesively deliver a deep product suite with as little friction as possible to the client customer. The depth of our product suite is a function of technology and platform partnerships. Our platform model with 230 integrations as of December 31, 2021 enables us to deliver thousands of configurations aligned with the digital platform strategies adopted by our clients. We expect our future success in winning new clients to be partially driven by our ability to continue to develop and deliver new, innovative products to FI clients in a timely manner. Furthermore, expanding our product suite expands our RPU potential. For additional information regarding RPU, see “Key Business Metrics.”
Client Renewals. Our model and the stability of our revenue base is, in part, driven by our ability to renew our clients. In addition to extending existing relationships, renewals provide an opportunity to grow minimum contract value, as over the course of a contract term our clients often grow or their needs evolve. Client renewals are also an important lever in driving our long-term gross margin targets, as we generally achieve approximately 70% gross margin upon renewal. We had twelve client renewals in the year ended December 31, 2021. We expect client renewals to continue to play a key role in our future success.
Continued Leadership in Innovation. Our ability to maintain a differentiated platform and offering is dependent upon our pace of innovation. In particular, our single code base, built on a multi-tenant infrastructure and combined with continuous software delivery enables us to bring new, innovative products to market quickly and positions us with what we believe is market-leading breadth in terms of product offerings and feature sets. We remain committed to investing in our platform, notably through our research and development spend, which was 32.1% of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our future success will depend on our continued leadership in innovation.
COVID-19 Impact. The continued global impact of COVID-19 has resulted in various measures to combat the spread of the virus. With the development of variants and increased vaccinations rates, the status of ongoing measures varies widely. We transitioned our employee base to work-from-home in March 2020, creating challenges in executing sales and implementations that have resurfaced due to the renewal of certain actions and restrictions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and which may be exacerbated if such actions or restrictions are prolonged. We continue to face significant uncertainty concerning the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the severity of any future infection surges.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
Our client relationships are primarily based on multi-year contracts for the Alkami Platform that have an average contract life of 70 months as of December 31, 2021. We derive the majority of our revenues from SaaS subscription services charged for the use of our digital banking solution. For each client, we invoice monthly a contractual minimum fee for each licensed solution. In addition, we invoice monthly an additional subscription fee for the number of registered users using each solution and the number of bill-pay and certain other transactions those registered users conduct through our digital banking platform in excess of their contractual minimum commitments. Our pricing is tiered, with per-registered-user discounts applied as clients achieve higher levels of customer penetration, incentivizing our clients to internally market our products and promote digital engagement. Variable consideration earned for subscription fees in excess of contractual minimums is recognized as revenues in the month of actual usage. SaaS subscription services also include annual and monthly charges for maintenance and support services which are recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract term.
We receive implementation and other upfront fees for the implementation, configuration and integration of our digital banking platform. We typically invoice these services as a fixed price per contract. These fees are not distinct from the underlying licensed SaaS subscription services. As a result, we recognize the resulting revenues on a straight-line basis over the client’s initial agreement term for our licensed SaaS solutions, commencing upon launch.
Occasionally, our clients request custom development and other professional services, which we provide. These are generally one-time requests and involve unique, non-standard features, functions or integrations that are intended to enhance or modify their licensed SaaS solutions. We recognize revenues at the point in time the services are transferred to the client.
The following disaggregates our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 by major source:
See Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues is comprised primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including employee benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation, travel and related costs for employees supporting our SaaS subscription, implementation and other services. This includes the costs of our implementation, client support and client success teams, development personnel responsible for maintaining and releasing updates to our platform, as well as third-party cloud-based hosting services. Cost of revenues also includes the direct costs of bill-pay services and other third-party intellectual property included in our solutions, the amortization of acquired technology and depreciation.
We capitalize certain personnel costs directly related to the implementation of our solutions to the extent those costs are recoverable from future revenues. We amortize the costs for an implementation once revenue recognition commences. The amortization period is typically five to seven years which represents the expected period of client benefit. Other costs not directly recoverable from future revenues are expensed in the period incurred.
We intend to continue to increase our investments in our implementation, client support and client success teams and technology infrastructure to serve our clients and support our growth. We expect cost of revenues to continue to grow in absolute dollars as we grow our business, but to vary as a percentage of revenues from period to period as a function of the utilization of implementation and support personnel and the extent to which we recognize fees from bill-pay services and other third-party functionality integrated into our solutions. Our gross margin for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 was 55.1%, 52.8%, and 41.4%, respectively.
The major components of cost of revenues represented the following percentages of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021: third-party hosting services (8.6%), the direct costs of bill-pay and other third-party intellectual property included in our solutions (16.5%), our implementation team (9.6%), our client success team (5.6%) and our development team responsible for maintaining and releasing updates to our platform (4.1%). The major components of cost of revenues represented the following percentages of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020: third-party hosting services (8.7%), the direct costs of bill-pay and other third-party intellectual property included in our solutions (15.9%), our implementation team (11.2%), our client success team (6.4%) and our development team responsible for maintaining and releasing updates to our platform (5.0%). The major components of cost of revenues represented the following percentages of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019: third-party hosting services (12.6%), the direct costs of bill-pay and other third-party intellectual property included in our solutions (17.5%), our implementation team (13.8%), our client success team (9.1%) and our development team responsible for maintaining and releasing updates to our platform (5.6%).
Operating Expenses
Research and Development. Research and development costs consist primarily of personnel-related costs for our engineering, information technology and products, including salaries, bonuses, commissions, other incentive-related compensation, employee benefits and stock-based compensation. In addition, we also include third-party contractor expenses, software development and testing tools, allocated corporate expenses, and other expenses related to developing new solutions and upgrading and enhancing existing solutions. We expect research and development costs to increase as we expand our platform with new features and functionality as well as enhance the existing Alkami Platform.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs of our sales, marketing and a portion of account management employees, including salaries, bonuses, commissions, other incentive-related compensation, employee benefits and stock-based compensation. Sales and marketing expenses also include travel and related costs, outside consulting fees and marketing programs, including lead generation, costs of our annual client conference, advertising, trade shows, other event expenses and amortization of acquired client relationships. We expect sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase as we expand our direct sales teams to pursue our market opportunity.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs for our general and administrative teams including salaries, bonuses, commissions, other incentive-related compensation, employee benefits and stock-based compensation associated with our executive, finance, legal, human resources, information technology, security and compliance as well as other administrative personnel. General and administrative expenses also include accounting, auditing and legal professional services fees, travel and other unallocated corporate-related expenses such as the cost of our facilities, employee relations, corporate telecommunication and software. We expect that general and administrative expenses will continue to increase as we scale our business and as we incur costs associated with being a publicly traded company, including legal, audit, business insurance and consulting fees.
Non-operating Income (Expense)
Non-operating income (expense) consists primarily of interest income from our cash balances, interest expense from borrowings under our revolving line of credit, amortization of deferred debt costs and changes in fair value of warrants In connection with our IPO, warrants converted from a liability instrument to an equity instrument resulting in a reduction of the warrant liability to $0.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate differs from the statutory tax rate primarily due to the impact of the valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets, partially offset by the tax benefits related to stock-based compensation.
Results of Operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this filing. The following table presents our selected consolidated statements of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expenses as follows:
The following table presents our reconciliation of GAAP net loss to adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated.
(1) Acquisition-related expenses are associated with the accrual of deferred compensation due to the former owner of the acquired business, ACH Alert, in addition to acquisition related-expenses associated with purchase of MK, primarily related to legal, consulting, and professional fees.
(2) Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered an alternative to GAAP net loss as a measure of operating performance or as a measure of liquidity. For additional information regarding adjusted EBITDA, see “Key Business Metrics.”
Key Business Metrics
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered an alternative to GAAP net loss as a measure of operating performance or as a measure of liquidity. We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss before provision for income taxes; (gain) loss on financial instruments; interest (income) expense, net; amortization of intangible assets; depreciation; stock-based compensation expense; expenses related to tender offer; and acquisition-related costs. We believe adjusted EBITDA provides investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations. Adjusted EBITDA was $(22.0) million, $(23.4) million, and $(39.1) million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Annual Recurring Revenue (ARR). We calculate ARR by aggregating annualized recurring revenue related to SaaS subscription services recognized in the last month of the reporting period as well as the next 12 months of expected implementation services revenues for all clients on the platform in the last month of the reporting period. We believe ARR provides important information about our future revenue potential, our ability to acquire new clients, and our ability to maintain and expand our relationship with existing clients. ARR was $169.0 million, $128.0 million, and $87.8 million as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $41.0 million, or 32.0%, from 2020 to 2021 and an increase of $40.2 million, or 45.8%, from 2019 to 2020.
Registered Users. We define a registered user as an individual or business related to an account holder of an FI client on our digital banking platform who has registered to use one or more of our solutions and has current access to use those solutions as of the last day of the reporting period presented. We price our digital banking platform based on the number of registered users, so as the number of registered users of our digital banking platform increases, our ARR grows. We believe growth in the number of registered users provides important information about our ability to expand market adoption of our digital banking platform and its associated software products, and to grow revenues over time. We had 12.4 million, 9.7 million, and 7.2 million registered users as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of 2.7 million registered users, or 27.8%, from 2020 to 2021 and an increase of 2.5 million registered users, or 34.9%, from 2019 to 2020.
Revenue per Registered User (RPU). We calculate RPU by dividing ARR as of the last day of the reporting period by the number of registered users as of the last day of the reporting period. We believe RPU provides important information about our ability to grow the number of software products adopted by new clients over time, as well as our ability to expand the number of software products that our existing clients add to their contracts with us over time. RPU was $13.68, $13.22, and $12.23 as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $0.46, or 3.5%, from 2020 to 2021 and an increase of $0.99, or 8.1%, from 2019 to 2020.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Revenues
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Revenues increased $40.0 million, or 35.7%, for 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in revenues was primarily due to registered user growth of 2.7 million, comprised of 1.4 million in registered user growth from existing clients (net of attrition) and 1.3 million in registered users from new clients implemented through our digital banking platform (contractual minimums). In addition, increased revenues were due to RPU growth of 3.5%. RPU growth was primarily driven by cross-sell activity to existing clients and higher average RPU of new clients implemented in 2021 on our digital banking platform compared to aggregate RPU. The average RPU of users from new clients implemented on our digital platform
in the last year of $14.80 as of December 31, 2021, is 8.2% higher than the aggregate RPU as of December 31, 2021.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Revenues increased $38.6 million, or 52.5%, for 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in revenues was primarily due to registered user growth of 2.5 million, primarily driven by 1.2 million in registered user growth from existing clients (net of attrition) and 1.2 million in registered users from new client wins. In addition, increased revenues were due to RPU growth of 8.1%. RPU growth was primarily driven by cross-sell activity to existing clients and new client average RPU of $17.14 as of December 31, 2020 which reflects new client adoption that was 29.6% higher than the aggregate RPU. An additional contributing factor to increased revenues in 2020 is the acquisition of ACH Alert completed on October 4, 2020, contributing $1.0 million to 2020 revenues.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of Revenues
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Cost of revenues increased $15.4 million, or 29.0%, for 2021 compared to 2020, generating a gross margin of 55.1% for 2021 compared to a gross margin of 52.8% for 2020. The increase in cost of revenues was primarily driven by a $4.0 million increase in personnel-related costs (which includes stock-based compensation) resulting from headcount increases supporting our growth in the following teams: site reliability engineering, client implementation and client support, $6.8 million in higher costs of our third-party partners where we resell their solutions as part of our digital platform, $3.5 million in incremental hosting costs, both incurred from an increase in revenues derived from existing and new client growth and $0.6 million of increased amortization on intangible assets from our acquisitions. We expect the cost of revenues will continue to increase as SaaS subscription services and the associated implementation services increase over time. However, we expect gross margin to continue to improve due to operational scaling.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Cost of revenues increased $9.9 million, or 22.9% for 2020 compared to 2019, generating a gross margin of 52.8% for 2020 compared to a gross margin of 41.4% for 2019. The increase in cost of revenues was primarily driven by a $5.1 million increase in personnel-related costs resulting from headcount increases supporting our growth in the following teams: site reliability engineering, client implementation and client support, $4.8 million higher third-party costs and $0.5 million in incremental hosting costs, both incurred from an increase in revenues derived from existing and new client growth. These costs were partially offset by $0.6 million in lower travel and other costs primarily due to the work-from-home business environment during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Research and development expenses increased $8.6 million, or 21.4%, for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to an $8.2 million increase in personnel-related costs (which includes stock-based compensation) resulting from headcount growth in our engineering, information technology and product teams dedicated to platform enhancements and innovation. In addition we incurred $0.6 million in higher costs associated with maintaining our corporate infrastructure.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Research and development expenses increased $7.5 million, or 22.9%, for 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $6.4 million increase in personnel-related costs resulting from headcount growth in our engineering, information technology and product teams dedicated to platform enhancements and innovation. In addition, we incurred an $1.1 million increase in client infrastructure and other costs due to continued growth from our install base and new client growth.
Sales and Marketing
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Sales and marketing expenses increased $7.8 million, or 46.3%, for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $5.2 million increase in personnel-related costs (which includes stock-based compensation) resulting from headcount growth in our sales and marketing teams. In addition, we incurred $0.8 million in higher conference and trade show costs due to conducting our annual client conference in September 2021 instead of our typical April timing, $0.9 million in higher consulting costs and $0.7 million in higher travel and other costs.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Sales and marketing expenses increased $1.4 million, or 9.4%, for 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $3.1 million increase in personnel-related costs resulting from headcount growth in our sales and marketing teams and higher new sales productivity as well as higher customer success engagement costs. These costs were partially offset by $0.8 million lower travel costs for the sales team as well as $1.1 million lower costs related to our annual client conference, industry conferences and tradeshows, all primarily due to the work-from-home business environment during the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
General and administrative expenses increased $16.1 million, or 43.2%, for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $13.7 million increase in personnel-related and other costs (which includes stock-based compensation) from the modification of the stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) of the former Chief Executive Officer of the Company and increased headcount, including the impact from the acquisition of ACH Alert and MK, and a $2.1 million increase in non-personnel related costs from the acquisitions of ACH Alert and MK. In addition, we incurred a $1.8 million increase in accounting, audit and consulting expenses primarily in support of our IPO and public company operations, a $3.2 million increase in insurance costs for director and officer coverage and a $1.4 million increase in software costs. The increase in general and administrative expenses was offset by a $5.9 million decrease in other expenses primarily due to $6.1 million in compensation expense related to the Company’s tender offer which occurred in 2020 and did not repeat in 2021.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
General and administrative expenses increased $12.4 million, or 49.6% for 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to $6.1 million in compensation expense related to the Company’s tender offer, $4.3 million increase in personnel-related and other costs from increased headcount including the acquisition of ACH Alert, and a $0.8 million increase in costs related to the acquisition of ACH Alert. In addition, we incurred a $0.9 million increase in facilities costs, a $0.7 million increase in software costs and a $0.9 million increase in other costs. These higher costs were the result of additional employees to support our growth initiatives. These costs were partially offset by $1.3 million less travel, employee-related costs and lower consulting costs, all primarily due to the work-from-home business environment during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Non-operating Income (Expense)
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Non-operating expense decreased $12.5 million for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to $15.8 million in non-operating loss related to the increase in fair value of our warrant liabilities and redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche right for the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by $3.0 million in non-operating loss related to the increase in fair value of our warrant liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021. In connection with our IPO, warrants converted from a liability instrument to an equity instrument resulting in a reduction of the warrant liability to $0.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Non-operating expense increased $16.9 million, for 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to $15.8 million in non-operating loss related to the increase in fair value of our warrant liabilities and redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche right.
Provision for Income Taxes
We had a $0.2 million for provision for income taxes for 2021 and no provision for income taxes for 2020 and 2019. As a result of our valuation allowance, income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of state taxes and deferred taxes related to the tax amortization of recently acquired goodwill. Our effective tax rate differs from the statutory tax rate primarily due to the impact of the valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets, partially offset by the tax benefits related to stock-based compensation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $308.6 million in cash and cash equivalents, and an accumulated deficit of $313.9 million. Our net losses have been driven by our investments in developing our digital banking platform, expanding our sales, marketing and implementation organizations and scaling our administrative functions to support our rapid growth.
We have financed our operations primarily through the net proceeds we have received from the sales of our redeemable convertible preferred stock and common stock, cash generated from the sale of SaaS subscription services and borrowings under our Credit Agreement (as defined below).
On April 15, 2021, we completed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 6,900,000 shares of our common stock, including 900,000 shares of common stock that were sold pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of common stock at $30.00 per share. Our IPO resulted in net proceeds of $192.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering costs. With the proceeds from our IPO, the Company paid in full accumulated dividends on our previously outstanding shares of Series B redeemable convertible preferred stock, which totaled approximately $5.0 million.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including revenue growth and costs incurred to support client usage and growth in our client base, increased research and development expenses to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure, increased general and administrative expenses associated with being a publicly traded company, investments in office facilities and other capital expenditure requirements and any potential future acquisitions or other strategic transactions.
We believe that our existing cash resources, including our Credit Agreement, will be sufficient to finance our continued operations, growth strategy, planned capital expenditures and the additional expenses we expect to incur as a public company for the short term (at least the next 12 months) and longer term. We may from time to time seek to raise additional capital to support our growth. Any equity financing we may undertake could be dilutive to our existing stockholders, and any additional debt financing we may undertake could require debt service and financial and operational requirements that could adversely affect our business.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $29.0 million, which consisted of a net loss of $46.8 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $21.1 million and net cash outflows from the change in net operating assets and liabilities of $3.3 million. The non-cash charges were primarily comprised of a non-operating loss related to the increase in fair value of warrant liabilities of $3.0 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $3.4 million, and stock-based compensation expense of $14.5 million. The net cash outflows from the change in our net operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to a $6.8 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and a net $0.8 million in other balance sheet changes, partially offset by a $6.3 million increase in accounts receivable, and a $4.7 million increase in deferred implementation costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $38.1 million, which consisted of a net loss of $51.4 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $20.6 million and net cash outflows from the change in net operating assets and liabilities of $7.4 million. The non-cash charges were primarily comprised of non-operating loss related to the increase in fair value of warrant and tranche right liabilities of $15.8 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $2.8 million, and stock compensation expense of $2.0 million. The net cash outflows from the change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $3.8 million increase in deferred implementation costs and a $3.4 million increase in accounts receivable and a net $0.2 million in other balance sheet changes.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $39.1 million, which consisted of a net loss of $41.9 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $3.0 million and net cash outflows from the change in net operating assets and liabilities of $0.2 million. Non-cash charges were primarily comprised of depreciation expense of $2.2 million and stock-based compensation expense of $1.3 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $22.0 million, primarily consisting of $18.0 million for the purchase of MK, $0.3 million related to the finalization of working capital adjustments on our acquisition of ACH Alert, $2.6 million related to capitalized software development costs, and capital expenditures related to updates for computer and other equipment of $1.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $27.2 million, primarily consisting of the acquisition of ACH Alert of $25.1 million and capital expenditures related to the expansion and updates to our corporate facilities of $1.6 million and computer and other equipment of $0.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities was $3.7 million, primarily consisting of capital expenditures related to the expansion and updates to our corporate facilities of $3.0 million and computer and other equipment of $0.7 million.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $192.3 million, which was primarily due to the receipt of proceeds from our IPO of $192.8 million, proceeds of $9.1 million from the exercise of stock options to purchase 5.8 million shares of our common stock, and proceeds from issuances under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) of $3.0 million, partially offset by the cash payment of our Series B dividend of $5.0 million upon the consummation of our IPO, the $4.5 million payment of deferred IPO issuance costs, and the repurchase of shares of our common stock in the amount of $3.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $225.0 million, which was primarily due to the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock in an amount of $213.9 million. We also borrowed $25.0 million through our term loan under our Credit Agreement for the ACH Alert acquisition. Cash flows provided from financing activities were partially offset by the repurchase of $11.3 million and $3.2 million of our common stock related to a tender offer and general repurchases, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $30.2 million, primarily consisting of net proceeds of $30.0 million from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock.
Credit Agreement
On October 16, 2020, we entered into our credit agreement with Silicon Valley Bank and KeyBank National Association (“Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement replaced our prior credit facility provided by Comerica Bank. The Credit Agreement matures on October 16, 2023 and is secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of our tangible and intangible personal property and the tangible and intangible personal property of our subsidiaries that are guarantors. In addition, the Credit Agreement includes the following:
•Revolving Facility: The Credit Agreement provides $25.0 million in aggregate commitments for secured revolving loans, with sub-limits of $10.0 million for the issuance of letters of credit and $7.5 million for swingline loans (“Revolving Facility”).
•Term Loan: A term loan of $25.0 million (“Term Loan”) was borrowed on October 16, 2020. The proceeds from the Term Loan were used to partially fund the acquisition of ACH Alert.
•Accordion Feature: The Credit Agreement also allows us, subject to certain conditions, to request additional revolving loan commitments in an aggregate principal amount of up to $30.0 million.
Revolving Facility loans under the Credit Agreement may be voluntarily prepaid and re-borrowed. Principal payments on the Term Loan are due in quarterly installments equal to an initial amount of approximately $0.3 million, which began on December 31, 2021 and continue through September 30, 2022 and increase to approximately $0.6 million beginning on December 31, 2022 through the Credit Agreement maturity date. Once repaid or prepaid, the Term Loan may not be re-borrowed.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at a variable rate based upon, at our option, either the LIBOR rate or the base rate (in each case, as customarily defined) plus an applicable margin. The minimum LIBOR rate to be applied is 1.00%. The applicable margin for LIBOR rate loans ranges, based on an applicable recurring revenue leverage ratio, from 3.00% to 3.50% per annum, and the applicable margin for base rate loans ranges from 2.00 to 2.50% per annum. Our minimum interest rate applied to term debt was 4.00% as of December 31, 2021. We are required to pay a commitment fee of 0.30% per annum on the undrawn portion available under the Revolving Facility, and variable fees on outstanding letters of credit.
All outstanding principal and accrued but unpaid interest is due, and the commitments for the Revolving Facility terminate, on the maturity date. The loans are subject to mandatory prepayment requirements in the event of certain asset sales or if certain insurance or condemnation events occur, subject to customary reinvestment provisions. We may prepay the Term Loan in whole or in part at any time without premium or penalty.
The Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, as well as (i) an annual recurring revenue growth covenant requiring the loan parties to have recurring revenues in any four consecutive fiscal quarter periods in an amount that is 10% greater than the recurring revenues for the corresponding four consecutive quarter periods in the previous year and (ii) a liquidity (defined as the aggregate amount of cash in bank accounts subject to a control agreement plus availability under the Revolving Facility) covenant, requiring the loan parties to have liquidity, tested on the last day of each calendar month, of $10.0 million or more. The Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default, which if they occur, could result in the termination of commitments under the Credit Agreement, the declaration that all outstanding loans are immediately due and payable in whole or in part, and the requirement to maintain cash collateral deposits in respect of outstanding letters of credit.
Total interest expense, including commitment fees and unused line fees, for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, was $1.2 million, $0.5 million, and $0.1 million respectively. In conjunction with closing the Credit Agreement in 2020, we incurred issuance costs of $0.1 million which were deferred and will be amortized over the three-year term. Unamortized debt issuance costs totaled $0.1 million as of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, and less than $0.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Amortization expense totaled $0.2 million for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The Company believes it has sufficient liquidity to fund its operations and meet its short-term and long-term obligations. The Company's material future obligations include the contractual and purchase commitments described below.
The Company has a contractual commitment to repay its long-term debt of $24.3 million based on the defined terms of our debt agreements. Within the next 12 months, the Company is obligated to pay $1.6 million of this total debt. Refer to Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Additionally, we have material future purchase commitments for services which are legally binding and that specify all significant terms including price and/or quantity. Total future commitments for these obligations over the next five years is $58.2 million. Of this amount, $18.0 million is due within the next 12 months. Refer to Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Finally, we have operating leases for real estate, equipment, and other assets that include future minimum payments with initial terms of one year or more. Total future operating lease payments at December 31, 2021 are $25.9 million. Within the next 12 months, operating lease payments are expected to be $3.7 million. Refer to Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, we must make decisions that impact the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosures. Such decisions include the selection of the appropriate accounting principles to be applied and the assumptions on which to base accounting estimates. In reaching such decisions, we apply judgments based on our understanding and analysis of relevant circumstances, historical experience, and actuarial valuations. Actual amounts could differ from those estimated at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared.
Our most significant accounting policies, including Revenue Recognition, Deferred Costs to Obtain Client Contracts, Deferred Implementation Costs and Business Combinations, are described in Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Some of those significant accounting policies require us to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, or estimates. An accounting estimate is considered to be critical if it meets both of the following criteria: (i) the estimate requires assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made, and (ii) different estimates reasonably could have been used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period may have a material impact on the presentation of our financial condition, changes in financial condition, or results of operations. Our most critical accounting estimates include the following:
Revenue Recognition
We derive the majority of our revenues from SaaS subscription services charged for the use of our digital banking solutions. SaaS subscription services are generally recognized as revenues over the term of the contract as a series of distinct SaaS services bundled into a single performance obligation. Clients are typically charged a one-time, upfront implementation fee and recurring annual and monthly access fees for the use of our digital banking solution. Implementation and integration of the digital banking platform is complex, and we have determined that the one-time, upfront services are not distinct. In determining whether implementation services are distinct from subscription services, we considered various factors including the significant level of integration, interdependency, and interrelation between the implementation and subscription service, as well as the inability of the clients’ personnel or other service providers to perform significant portions of the services. As a result, we defer any arrangement fees for implementation services and recognize such amounts over time on a ratable basis as one performance obligation with the underlying subscription revenue commencing when the client goes live on the platform, which corresponds with the date the client obtains access to our digital banking solution and begins to benefit from the service.
Our performance obligation for the SaaS series of services includes standing ready over the term of the contract to provide access to all the clients’ customers and process any transactions initiated by those customers. We invoice clients each month for the contracted minimum number of registered users with an additional amount for registered users in excess of those minimums. We recognize variable consideration related to registered user counts in excess of the contractual minimum amounts each month. SaaS subscription revenues also includes annual and monthly charges for maintenance and support services which are recognized on a straight-line basis over the subscription term.
During the term of the contract, clients may purchase additional professional services to modify or enhance their licensed SaaS solutions. These services are distinct performance obligations recognized when control of the enhancement is transferred to the client.
Deferred Costs to Obtain Client Contracts
We capitalize certain commissions as incremental costs of obtaining a client contract if we anticipate that the costs will be recoverable under the contract. Costs include commissions earned by sales teams and leaders due to the execution of client contracts along with associated employer taxes. Capitalized amounts do not include commissions which are contingent on continued employment over a substantive service period. Contingent commissions are accrued as liabilities and expensed over the requisite employment service period. Deferred commissions are amortized over the benefit period of the client relationship. Determining the benefit period over which to amortize deferred commissions requires significant judgment. We determine the period of benefit by considering factors such as the length of the initial SaaS contract, the likelihood of renewal and the estimated useful life of the underlying technology.
Deferred Implementation Costs
We capitalize certain costs to fulfill client contracts such as employee salaries, benefits, and associated payroll taxes that are directly related to the implementation of our solutions and some third-party costs, such as third-party licenses and maintenance. We only capitalize implementation costs that we anticipate will be recoverable under the contract. We begin amortizing deferred implementation costs ratably over the expected period of client benefit once access to our SaaS solution is transferred to the client. Deferred costs are amortized over the benefit period of the client relationship. Determining the benefit period over which to amortize deferred costs requires significant judgment. We determine the period of benefit by considering factors such as the length of the initial SaaS contract, the likelihood of renewal and the estimated useful life of the underlying technology.
Business Combinations
Our acquisitions are accounted for using the acquisition method of business combinations accounting. We recognize the consideration transferred (i.e. purchase price) in a business combination as well as the acquired business’ identifiable assets, liabilities, and non-controlling interests at their acquisition date fair value. The excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the identifiable assets, liabilities, and non-controlling interest, is recorded as goodwill in our consolidated financial statements. Several valuation methods may be used to determine the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. We use our best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. Our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. Determining the useful life of an intangible asset also requires judgment as different types of intangible assets will have different useful lives and certain assets may even be considered to have indefinite useful lives. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially recorded in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. We continue to collect information and reevaluate these estimates and assumptions quarterly and record any adjustments to our preliminary estimates to goodwill provided that we are within the measurement period. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations. We use all available information to estimate fair values. We typically engage outside appraisal firms to assist in the fair value determination of identifiable intangible assets and any other significant assets or liabilities. We adjust the preliminary purchase price allocation, as necessary, up to one year after the acquisition closing date as we obtain more information regarding asset valuations and liabilities assumed.
For acquisitions involving additional consideration to be transferred to the selling parties in the event certain future events occur or conditions are met (“contingent consideration”), we recognize the acquisition date fair value of contingent consideration as part of the consideration transferred in exchange for the business combination. Contingent consideration meeting the criteria to be classified as equity in the consolidated balance sheets is not remeasured, and its subsequent settlement is recorded within stockholders’ equity (deficit). Contingent consideration classified as a liability is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved, with any changes in fair value recognized in our consolidated statements of operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and future application of accounting standards.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.