Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These statements generally relate to future events or to our future financial performance and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. The following discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Our actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. If we do update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be drawn that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other forward-looking statements. Additional information concerning these and other risks and uncertainties is contained in our other periodic filings with the SEC.
Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about:
•risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic;
•our plans and ability to manufacture, or have manufactured, sufficient quantities of lirentelimab for preclinical studies and to conduct clinical trials and to eventually commercialize the product, and our reliance on third parties in relation to the foregoing;
•the impact that the adoption of new accounting pronouncements will have on our financial statements;
•the ability of our clinical trials to demonstrate safety and efficacy of our product candidates, and other positive results;
•the timing and focus of our future clinical trials, and the reporting of data from those trials;
•our plans relating to commercializing lirentelimab, if approved, including the geographic areas of focus and sales strategy;
•the size of the market opportunity for lirentelimab in each of the diseases we are targeting;
•the number of diseases represented in the patient population enrolled in our clinical trials, and our ability to evaluate response to treatment of lirentelimab in diseases other than the primary indication in our clinical trials;
•our estimates of the number of patients in the United States who suffer from the diseases we are targeting and the number of patients that will enroll in our clinical trials;
•the beneficial characteristics, safety, efficacy and therapeutic effects of lirentelimab;
•the timing or likelihood of regulatory filings and approvals, including our expectation to seek special designations, such as orphan drug designation, for lirentelimab or our other product candidates for various diseases;
•our ability to obtain and maintain regulatory approval of lirentelimab or our other product candidates;
•our plans relating to the further development of lirentelimab and our other product candidates;
•existing regulations and regulatory developments in the United States and other jurisdictions;
•our plans and ability to obtain or protect intellectual property rights, including extensions of existing patent terms where available;
•our continued reliance on third-parties to conduct additional clinical trials of lirentelimab and our other product candidates;
•the need to hire additional personnel and our ability to attract and retain such personnel;
•the accuracy of our estimates regarding expenses, future revenue, capital requirements and needs for additional financing;
•our financial performance;
•the sufficiency of our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities to fund our future operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements; and
•our anticipated uses of our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments in marketable securities.
These forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, including, but not limited to, those described in “Risk Factors.” In some cases, you can identify these statements by terms such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expects,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “will,” “would” or the negative of those terms, and similar expressions that convey uncertainty of future events or outcomes. These forward-looking statements reflect our beliefs and views with respect to future events and are based on estimates and assumptions as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and are subject to risks and uncertainties. We discuss many of these risks in greater detail in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Report. Moreover, we operate in a very competitive and rapidly changing environment. New risks emerge from time to time. It is not possible to predict all risks, nor can we assess the impact of all factors on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements we may make. Given these uncertainties, you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. We qualify all of the forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K by these cautionary statements. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Our discussion and analysis below are focused on our financial results and liquidity and capital resources for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including year-over-year comparisons of our financial performance and condition for these years. Discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2019 specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our financial performance and condition for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, are located in Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company developing therapeutics which target immunomodulatory receptors present on immune effector cells involved in allergy, inflammatory and proliferative diseases. Our most advanced antibodies are lirentelimab (AK002) and AK006. Lirentelimab targets Siglec-8, an inhibitory receptor expressed selectively on eosinophils and mast cells. Lirentelimab has been studied in a number of human clinical studies and has shown the ability to deplete eosinophils inhibit mast cell activation, and improve patient reported symptoms. We are developing lirentelimab for the treatment of eosinophilic gastritis/eosinophilic duodenitis, eosinophilic esophagitis, atopic dermatitis, chronic spontaneous urticaria and potentially additional indications. AK006 targets Siglec-6, an inhibitory receptor selectively expressed on mast cells. AK006 appears to have the potential to provide deeper mast cell inhibition than lirentelimab and, in addition to its inhibitory activity, reduce mast cell numbers. We plan to begin human studies with AK006 in the first half of 2023.
Lirentelimab selectively targets both mast cells and eosinophils, two types of white blood cells that are widely distributed in the body and play a central role in the inflammatory response. Inappropriately activated mast cells and eosinophils have been identified as key drivers in a number of severe diseases affecting the gastrointestinal tract, eyes, skin, lungs and other organs. Our initial focus is on eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases which include eosinophilic esophagitis (“EoE”), eosinophilic gastritis (“EG”) as well as eosinophilic duodenitis (“EoD”) which has also been referred to as eosinophilic gastroenteritis. In addition, lirentelimab is being tested in atopic dermatitis and chronic spontaneous urticaria and has the potential to treat a number of other severe diseases. To date, lirentelimab completed a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2 study (ENIGMA 1) and Phase 3 study (ENIGMA 2) in patients with EG and/or EoD, a Phase 2/3 study in patients with EoE (KRYPTOS), as well as proof of concept studies in chronic spontaneous urticaria, severe allergic conjunctivitis, and indolent systemic mastocytosis. Lirentelimab has received orphan disease status for EG, EoD, and EoE from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”).
The Phase 2 EG and/or EoD study with lirentelimab (ENIGMA 1) met all prespecified primary and secondary endpoints when compared to placebo and results were published in The New England Journal of Medicine. Additionally, patients in the ENIGMA 1 study with co-morbid EoE showed histologic and symptomatic improvement when treated with lirentelimab compared to placebo. More recently, topline data from Phase 3 ENIGMA 2 and Phase 2/3 KRYPTOS studies of lirentelimab were announced in the fourth quarter of 2021. The ENIGMA 2 study met the histologic co-primary endpoint but missed the symptomatic co-primary endpoint when compared to placebo. Similarly, the KRYPTOS study met the histologic co-primary endpoint but missed the symptomatic co-primary endpoint when compared to placebo. Upon full analysis, we believe that the trials missed their symptomatic co-primary endpoints due to the inclusion of mild patients and/or patients who had not failed standard of care. In the more severe populations, clear signs of efficacy were observed in both EG/EoD and EoE patients. Based on these findings, we plan to conduct additional studies with lirentelimab in these indications after discussions with the FDA
Despite the knowledge that mast cells and eosinophils drive many pathological conditions, there are no approved therapies that selectively target both mast cells and eosinophils. Lirentelimab binds to Siglec-8, an inhibitory receptor found on mast cells and eosinophils, which represents a novel mechanism to selectively inhibit or deplete these important immune cells and thereby potentially resolve inflammation. We believe lirentelimab is the only Siglec-8 targeting antibody currently in clinical development.
Since our inception in 2012, we have devoted substantially all of our resources and efforts towards the research and development of our product candidates. Our lead product candidate, lirentelimab, a monoclonal antibody targeting Siglec-8, entered clinical trials in 2016. In addition to activities conducted internally at our facilities, we have utilized significant financial resources to engage contractors, consultants and other third parties to conduct various preclinical and clinical development activities on our behalf.
To date, we have not had any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue nor been profitable. Further, we do not expect to generate revenue from product sales until such time, if ever, that we are able to successfully complete the development and obtain marketing approval for one of our product candidates. We will continue to require additional capital to develop our product candidates and fund operations for the foreseeable future. We have incurred significant operating losses to date and expect to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our net losses were $269.9 million and $153.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $612.8 million.
In February 2022, we began implementing a reorganization plan (the “Reorganization Plan”) to reduce operating costs, contractual commitments and better align our workforce with the clinical development plans of our business. As a result, we entered into the Termination Agreement with Lonza and reduced our workforce by approximately 35%. While this will result in increased near-term costs, primarily in the first and second quarters of 2022, we believe that the Reorganization Plan will reduce our overall spending in subsequent quarters subject to periodic fluctuations caused by the timing of ongoing manufacturing development efforts. Refer to Note 12 “Subsequent Events” of our financial statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $424.2 million, which we believe will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of our financial statements.
In-Licensing Agreements
We have entered into a number of exclusive and nonexclusive, royalty bearing license agreements with third-parties for certain intellectual property. Under the terms of the license agreements described below, we are obligated to pay milestone payments upon the achievement of specified clinical, regulatory and commercial milestones. Research and development expense associated with the Company’s milestone payments are recognized when such milestone has been achieved. Actual amounts due under the license agreements vary depending on factors including, but not limited to, the number of product candidates we develop and our ability to successfully develop and commercialize our product candidates covered under the respective agreements. In addition to milestone payments, we are also subject to future royalty payments based on sales of our product candidates covered under the agreements, as well as certain minimum annual royalty and commercial reservation fees. Because the achievement of milestones
and the timing and extent of future royalties is not probable, these contingent amounts have not been included on our balance sheets or as part of Contractual Obligations and Commitments discussion below.
We did not incur any milestone expense for the year ended December 31, 2021. We incurred $3.4 million of milestone expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to development milestones associated with the first patient dosed in our Phase 3 study with lirentelimab. Milestone payments are not creditable against royalties. As of December 31, 2021, we have not incurred any royalty liabilities related to our license agreements, as product sales have not yet commenced.
Exclusive License Agreement with The Johns Hopkins University
In December 2013, we entered into a license agreement with JHU for a worldwide exclusive license to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize covered product candidates including lirentelimab, which was amended in September 2016. Under the terms of the agreement, we have made upfront and milestone payments of $0.7 million through December 31, 2021 and we may be required to make aggregate additional milestone payments of up to $1.8 million. We also issued 88,887 shares of common stock as consideration under the JHU license agreement. In addition to milestone payments, we are also subject to low single-digit royalties to JHU based on future net sales of each licensed therapeutic product candidate by us and our affiliates and sublicensees, with up to a low six-digit dollar minimum annual royalty payment.
Non-exclusive License Agreement with BioWa Inc. and Lonza Sales AG
In October 2013, we entered into a tripartite agreement with BioWa and Lonza for the non-exclusive worldwide license to develop and commercialize product candidates including lirentelimab that are manufactured using a technology jointly developed and owned by BioWa and Lonza. Under the terms of the agreement, we have made milestone payments of $3.4 million through December 31, 2021 and we may be required to make aggregate additional milestone payments of up to $38.0 million. In addition to milestone payments, we are also subject to minimum annual commercial license fees of $40,000 per year to BioWa until such time as BioWa receives royalty payments, as well as low single-digit royalties to BioWa and to Lonza. Royalties are based on future net sales by us and our affiliates and sublicensees.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of discovery, development and manufacturing of our non-commercial products, clinical trial costs (including payments to contract research organizations, or “CROs”), salaries and other personnel costs, preclinical study fees, research supply costs, facility and equipment costs and allocations of facilities and other overhead costs. Amounts incurred in connection with license agreements, including milestone payments, are also included in research and development expense.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We recognize costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as clinical site activations, patient enrollment or information provided to us by our clinical CROs and clinical investigative sites, along with analysis by our in-house clinical operations personnel. Advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized as prepaid expenses, even when there is no alternative future use for the research and development. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Prior to the regulatory approval of our product candidates, we recognize expenses incurred with our CDMOs for the manufacture of product candidates that could potentially be available to support future commercial sales, if approved, in the period in which they have occurred. To date, we have not yet capitalized any costs to inventory as we are unable to determine if these costs will provide a future economic benefit, given the unapproved nature of our product candidates.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. Accordingly, it is difficult to estimate the nature, timing and extent of costs necessary to complete the remainder of the development of our product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will be able to generate revenue from our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty surrounding:
•demonstrating sufficient safety and tolerability profiles of product candidates;
•successful enrollment and completion of clinical trials;
•requisite clearance and approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•establishing and maintaining commercial manufacturing capabilities with CDMOs;
•obtaining and maintaining protection of intellectual property; and
•commercializing product candidates, if and when approved, alone or in collaboration with third-parties.
A change pertaining to any of these variables would significantly impact the timing and extent of costs incurred with respect to the development and commercialization of our product candidates.
External costs incurred from CDMOs, clinical CROs and clinical investigative sites have comprised a significant portion of our research and development expenses since inception. We track these costs on a program-by-program basis following the advancement of a product candidate into clinical development. Consulting and personnel-related costs, laboratory supplies and non-capital equipment utilized in the conduct of in-house research, in-licensing fees and general overhead, are not tracked on a program-by-program basis, nor are they allocated, as they commonly benefit multiple projects, including those still in our pipeline.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $196.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $105.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $90.8 million. The period-over-period increase in research and development expenses is primarily driven by an additional $62.3 million of lirentelimab contract research and development costs as a result of increased spending to support the manufacturing of lirentelimab and additional clinical trials costs, $23.4 million of consulting and personnel-related costs primarily associated with increased headcount and includes $8.3 million of increased stock-based compensation expense, and $5.1 million increase in other unallocated research and development costs primarily related to increased facilities and overhead costs.
We anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase significantly during the first and second quarters of 2022 due to the Termination Agreement with Lonza as well as employment severance and retention related costs associated with the Reorganization Plan. We believe that the Reorganization Plan will reduce our overall spending, excluding stock-based compensation, in subsequent quarters subject to periodic fluctuations caused by the timing of ongoing manufacturing development efforts.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of fees paid to consultants, salaries, benefits and other personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, finance, accounting and other administrative functions, legal costs, fees paid for accounting and tax services, costs associated with pre-commercialization activities and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses. Legal costs include general corporate and patent legal fees and related costs.
General and administrative expenses were $75.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $51.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $23.6 million. The period-over-period increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $16.2 million in increased personnel-related costs due to increased headcount and includes an increase of $9.1 million in stock-based compensation expense. Other period-over-period changes included increases to G&A outside spend of $4.0 million related to legal costs, accounting and financial service costs, and costs incurred by our early commercial development efforts. Finally, we incurred incremental facilities and other administrative costs of $3.4 million not otherwise allocated to research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase during the first quarter of 2022 due to the employment severance and retention related costs associated with the Reorganization Plan. We believe that the Reorganization Plan will reduce our overall spending, excluding stock-based compensation, in subsequent quarters. Additionally, we expect to continue to incur costs associated with continuing to operate as a public company, including expenses related to maintaining compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, and those of any national securities exchange on which our securities are traded, additional insurance premiums, information technology and facility activities, and other ancillary administrative and professional services.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $3.9 million. The year-over-year decrease is primarily attributable to lower interest rates and lower investment balances held during the current year.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected a gain of $1.2 million compared to a loss of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other income (expense), net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 included a $1.9 million gain as a result of the lease modification entered into in November 2021 which was partially offset by fluctuations in foreign currency rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $424.2 million. Based on our existing business plan, we believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our anticipated level of operations through at least the next 12 months from the issuance of our financial statements.
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company with a limited operating history. As a result of our significant research and development expenditures, we have generated net losses since our inception. We have financed our operations primarily through equity offerings.
July 2018 Initial Public Offering
On July 23, 2018, we completed an IPO, selling 8,203,332 shares of common stock at $18.00 per share (the “July 2018 IPO”). Proceeds from our July 2018 IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, were $137.3 million. Concurrently with our July 2018 IPO, we completed a private placement of 250,000 shares of common stock at $18.00 per share to an existing stockholder. Proceeds from this private placement were $4.5 million.
In connection with the completion of the July 2018 IPO, all then outstanding shares of convertible preferred stock converted into 30,971,627 shares of common stock.
August 2019 Follow-On Offering
On August 9, 2019, we closed an underwritten public offering (the “August 2019 Offering”) under our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-233018) pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 5,227,272 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $77.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of $377.5 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
November 2020 Follow-On Offering
On November 2, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering (the “November 2020 Offering”) under our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-233018) pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 3,506,098 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $82.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of $271.7 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions.
“At-the-Market” Equity Offering
On May 10, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”). Pursuant to the terms of the Sales Agreement, we had the ability to sell, from time to time up to an aggregate of $400.0 million of our common stock through an “at-the-market” offering as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. We agreed to pay Cowen a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock under the Sales Agreement and reimburse up to $60,000 of legal expenses incurred by Cowen.
We were not obligated to make any sales of shares of our common stock under the Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, no shares of our common stock were sold under this Sales Agreement. The Sales Agreement was terminated effective February 24, 2022.
Summary Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the primary sources and uses of our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $207.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to our net loss of $269.9 million adjusted for net noncash charges of $57.3 million and net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $4.7 million. Noncash charges included $50.8 million in stock-based compensation expense, $3.4 million in net amortization of premiums and discounts on marketable securities, $2.3
million in depreciation and amortization expense, $2.6 million in noncash lease expense and $1.9 million in gains from a lease modification.
Net cash used in operating activities was $113.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to our net loss of $153.5 million adjusted for net noncash charges of $1.4 million and net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $38.2 million. Noncash charges included $33.4 million in stock-based compensation expense, $2.4 million in net amortization of premiums and discounts on marketable securities, $1.5 million in depreciation and amortization expense and $0.9 million in amortization of right-of-use asset.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $143.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of $564.0 million in proceeds from maturities of marketable securities, partially offset by $387.5 million for the purchases of marketable securities and $33.2 million for the purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of $546.8 million in proceeds from maturities of marketable securities, partially offset by $542.3 million for the purchases of marketable securities and $0.6 million for the purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted primarily of $8.5 million in proceeds received from employees for the exercise of stock options and $1.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the 2018 ESPP.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $278.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted primarily of $271.7 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, $5.7 million in proceeds received from employees for the exercise of stock options and $1.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the 2018 ESPP.
Funding Requirements
We will continue to require additional capital to develop our product candidates and fund operations for the foreseeable future. We may seek to raise funding through private or public equity or debt financings, or other sources such as strategic collaborations. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies.
The timing and amount of our capital expenditures will depend on many factors, including:
•the number and scope of clinical indications and clinical trials we decide to pursue;
•the scope and costs of manufacturing activities;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies, if any;
•the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the cost and timing of establishing sales and marketing capabilities for product candidates receiving marketing approval, if any;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of our product candidates; and
•the costs associated with being a public company.
If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or terminate some or all of our development efforts. We may also be required to sell or license to others rights to our product candidates in certain territories or indications that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves.
The issuance of additional equity securities may cause our stockholders to experience dilution. Future equity or debt financings may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders including debt instruments imposing covenants that restrict our operations and limit our ability to incur liens, issue additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments or engage in certain merger, consolidation, licensing or asset sale transactions.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table outlines our contractual obligations and commitments at December 31, 2021 (in thousands) and does not incorporate any cancellations or termination agreements entered into subsequent to December 31, 2021:
(1)Operating lease obligations represent future lease payments due under our two lease agreements.
(2)Purchase obligations represent noncancelable amounts due to counterparties under various master service agreements.
In addition to the amounts included in the table above, we enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical CROs, clinical investigative sites and other counterparties assisting with our preclinical studies and clinical trials. Such contracts are generally cancellable, with varying provisions regarding termination. In the event of a contract being terminated, we would only be obligated for services received as of the effective date of the termination, along with cancellation fees, as applicable.
Approximately $231.2 million of the $284.8 million total noncancellable purchase obligations as of December 31, 2021 related to manufacturing services agreements with Lonza AG or affiliates (such agreements, the “MSAs”). On February 14, 2022 (the “Effective Date”), we entered into a termination agreement (the “Termination Agreement”) with Lonza AG, Lonza Sales Ltd and Lonza Sales AG (collectively, “Lonza”) terminating such MSAs. Lonza will continue to provide certain services to us, including completion of cGMP batches already underway and other services to assist with the transition post-termination. The Termination Agreement provides that we shall pay approximately $136.1 million (126 million Swiss Francs) (the “Termination Amount”) to Lonza as a result of such termination, 95% of which is to be paid within 30 days after the Effective Date, and 5% of which is be paid within 30 days of the release of the remaining cGMP batches. If we fail to pay the first 95% of the Termination Amount to Lonza within 30 days of the Effective Date, Lonza may at its option give notice to us that the Termination Agreement is terminated. The Termination Agreement contains mutual releases by all parties thereto, for all claims known and unknown, relating and arising out of, or connected with, the MSAs and the subject matter(s) thereof, subject to certain exceptions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods.
Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Accrued Contract Research and Development Expense
As part of our preparation of the financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, as well as working with internal personnel to identify the existence and extent of services that have been performed on our behalf which have not yet been invoiced. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates, recording adjustments, if necessary.
Estimates underlying accrued contract research and development expense primarily relate to our evaluation of the timing and extent of development and manufacturing services performed by our CDMOs, as well as research activities performed by CROs and clinical investigative sites activities on our behalf. As the financial terms included within service agreements with such vendors vary from contract to contract and often include uneven payment flows, our evaluation focuses on the level of effort and resources expended. Accordingly, the calculation of accrued contract research and development expense requires us to analyze a significant amount of inputs and data from multiple internal and external sources, including information from communications with clinical operations and technical operations personnel.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are higher or lower in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred for the periods reported.
Operating Leases
We account for our leases in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 842, “Leases” (“ASC 842”). Right-of-use assets represent our right to use an underlying asset over the lease term and include any lease payments made prior to the lease commencement date and are reduced by lease incentives. Lease liabilities represent the present value of our total lease payments over the lease term, calculated using our incremental borrowing rate. In determining our incremental borrowing rate, we considered the term of the lease and our credit risk. We recognize options to extend a lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise such extension. We do not recognize options to terminate a lease when it is reasonably certain that we will not exercise such early termination options.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense resulting from stock-based awards granted to employees and nonemployees in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, (“ASC 718”). Per ASC 718, we measure the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant and recognize the associated compensation expense, net of impact from estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period on a straight-line basis. The vesting period of the stock-based award has historically served as the requisite service period for the respective grants to our employees, nonemployee directors and consultants. At each subsequent reporting date, we are required to evaluate whether the achievement of any associated vesting conditions is probable and whether or not any such events have occurred that would have resulted in the acceleration of vesting.
Determining the amount of stock-based compensation expense to be recorded requires us to develop estimates of the fair value of stock options as of the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of each stock-based award using
the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model uses highly subjective inputs such as the fair value of our common stock, as well as other assumptions including the expected volatility of our common stock, the expected term of the respective stock-based award, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of the stock-based award being valued and the expected dividend yield on our common stock over the expected term.
Expected volatility. As we do not have sufficient trading history for our common stock, we have based our computation of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a representative group of public life science companies with similar characteristics to us, including company age and stage of product development. The historical volatility data is calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term of the stock-based award being valued. We will continue to utilize this approach until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available or until other relevant circumstances change, such as our assessment that our identified entities are no longer appropriate to use as representative companies. In the latter case, more suitable, similar entities with publicly available stock prices will be incorporated in the calculation.
Expected term. In order to estimate the expected term of a stock-based award, we use the simplified method prescribed by SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment, as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. Under this approach, the expected term is presumed to be the average of the contractual term (ten years) and the vesting term (generally four years) of the stock-based award. We have not historically experienced, nor do we expect there to be substantially different exercise or post-vesting termination behavior among our employees and directors.
Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on publicly available yields of U.S. Treasury instruments with maturities consistent with the expected term of the stock-based award.
Expected dividend yield. The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Current income tax expense or benefit represents the amount of income taxes we expect to pay or have refunded in the current year. Our deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial statement reporting and tax basis accounting of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and credit carryforwards, which we measure using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such items are expected to reverse. We reduce deferred income tax assets, as necessary, by applying a valuation allowance to the extent that we determined it is more likely than not that some or all of our tax benefits will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. We assess all material positions reflected in our income tax returns, including all significant uncertain positions, for all tax years that are subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Upon determining the sustainability of our positions, we measure the largest amount of benefit possessing greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We reassess such positions at each balance sheet date to determine whether any factors underlying the sustainability assertion have changed and whether or not the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate.
As of December 31, 2021, our gross deferred tax assets were $203.5 million. Due to our lack of earnings history and uncertainties surrounding our ability to generate future taxable income, we have offset the total net deferred tax assets with a full valuation allowance. The deferred tax assets were primarily comprised of federal and state tax net operating losses, (“NOLs”), which may be limited by certain rules governing changes in ownership, as defined in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Similar rules may apply under state tax laws. Our ability to use our remaining NOLs may be further limited if we experience future ownership changes.
Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of our tax benefits, as well as limitations surrounding their realizability, might change as new information becomes available.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements for recently issued accounting pronouncements, including the respective effective dates of adoption and effects on our results of operations and financial condition.