Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Notice about Forward-Looking Statements and Other Terms
From time to time we have made, and in the future will make, forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements can be identified by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. Forward-looking statements often use words such as “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “pursue,” “seek,” “continue,” “estimate,” “project,” “outlook,” “forecast,” “potential,” “target,” “objective,” “trend,” “plan,” “goal,” “initiative,” “priorities,” or other words of comparable meaning or future-tense or conditional verbs such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “would,” or “could.” Forward-looking statements convey our expectations, intentions, or forecasts about future events, circumstances, or results.
This report, including any information incorporated by reference in this report, contains forward-looking statements. We also may make forward-looking statements in other documents that are filed or furnished with the SEC. In addition, we may make forward-looking statements orally or in writing to investors, analysts, members of the media, or others.
All forward-looking statements, by their nature, are subject to assumptions, risks, and uncertainties, which may change over time and many of which are beyond our control. You should not rely on any forward-looking statement as a prediction or guarantee about the future. Actual future objectives, strategies, plans, prospects, performance, conditions, or results may differ materially from those set forth in any forward-looking statement. While no list of assumptions, risks, or uncertainties could be complete, some of the factors that may cause actual results or other future events or circumstances to differ from those in forward-looking statements include:
•evolving local, regional, national, or international business, economic, or political conditions;
•changes in laws or the regulatory or supervisory environment, including as a result of financial-services legislation, regulation, or policies or changes in government officials or other personnel;
•changes in monetary, fiscal, or trade laws or policies, including as a result of actions by governmental agencies, central banks, or supranational authorities;
•changes in accounting standards or policies;
•changes in the automotive industry or the markets for new or used vehicles, including the rise of vehicle sharing and ride hailing, the development of autonomous and alternative-energy vehicles, and the impact of demographic shifts on attitudes and behaviors toward vehicle type, ownership, and use;
•any instability or breakdown in the financial system, including as a result of the failure of a financial institution or other participant in it;
•disruptions or shifts in investor sentiment or behavior in the securities, capital, or other financial markets, including financial or systemic shocks and volatility or changes in market liquidity, interest or currency rates, or valuations;
•the discontinuation of LIBOR and any negative impacts that could result;
•changes in business or consumer sentiment, preferences, or behavior, including spending, borrowing, or saving by businesses or households;
•changes in our corporate or business strategies, the composition of our assets, or the way in which we fund those assets;
•our ability to execute our business strategy for Ally Bank, including its digital focus;
•our ability to optimize our automotive finance and insurance businesses and to continue diversifying into and growing other consumer and commercial business lines, including mortgage lending, point-of-sale personal lending, credit cards, corporate finance, brokerage, and wealth management;
•our ability to develop capital plans acceptable to the FRB and our ability to implement them, including any payment of dividends or share repurchases;
•our ability to conduct appropriate stress tests and effectively plan for and manage capital or liquidity consistent with evolving business or operational needs, risk-management standards, and regulatory or supervisory requirements or expectations;
•our ability to cost-effectively fund our business and operations, including through deposits and the capital markets;
•changes in any credit rating assigned to Ally, including Ally Bank;
•adverse publicity or other reputational harm to us, our service providers, or our senior officers;
•our ability to develop, maintain, or market our products or services or to absorb unanticipated costs or liabilities associated with those products or services;
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
•our ability to innovate, to anticipate the needs of current or future customers, to successfully compete, to increase or hold market share in changing competitive environments, or to deal with pricing or other competitive pressures;
•the continuing profitability and viability of our dealer-centric automotive finance and insurance businesses, especially in the face of competition from captive finance companies and their automotive manufacturing sponsors and challenges to the dealer’s role as intermediary between manufacturers and purchasers;
•our ability to appropriately underwrite loans that we originate or purchase and to otherwise manage credit risk;
•changes in the credit, liquidity, or other financial condition of our customers, counterparties, service providers, or competitors;
•our ability to effectively deal with economic, business, or market slowdowns or disruptions;
•our ability to address heightened scrutiny and expectations from supervisory or other governmental authorities and to timely and credibly remediate related concerns or deficiencies;
•judicial, regulatory, or administrative inquiries, examinations, investigations, proceedings, disputes, or rulings that create uncertainty for, or are adverse to, us or the financial services industry;
•the potential outcomes of judicial, regulatory, or administrative inquiries, examinations, investigations, proceedings, or disputes to which we are or may be subject, and our ability to absorb and address any damages or other remedies that are sought or awarded, and any collateral consequences;
•the performance and availability of third-party service providers on whom we rely in delivering products and services to our customers and otherwise conducting our business and operations;
•our ability to manage and mitigate security risks, including our capacity to withstand cyberattacks;
•our ability to maintain secure and functional financial, accounting, technology, data processing, or other operating systems or infrastructure;
•the adequacy of our corporate governance, risk-management framework, compliance programs, or internal controls over financial reporting, including our ability to control lapses or deficiencies in financial reporting or to effectively mitigate or manage operational risk;
•the efficacy of our methods or models in assessing business strategies or opportunities or in valuing, measuring, estimating, monitoring, or managing positions or risk;
•our ability to keep pace with changes in technology that affect us or our customers, counterparties, service providers, or competitors or to maintain rights or interests in associated intellectual property;
•our ability to successfully make and integrate acquisitions;
•the adequacy of our succession planning for key executives or other personnel and our ability to attract or retain qualified employees;
•natural or man-made disasters, calamities, or conflicts, including terrorist events, cyber-warfare, and pandemics (such as adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on us and our customers, counterparties, employees, and service providers);
•our ability to maintain appropriate ESG practices, oversight, and disclosures;
•policies and other actions of governments to manage and mitigate climate and related environmental risks, and the effects of climate change or the transition to a lower-carbon economy on our business, operations, and reputation; or
•other assumptions, risks, or uncertainties described in the Risk Factors (Item 1A), Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Item 7), or the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements (Item 8) in this Annual Report on Form 10-K or described in any of the Company’s annual, quarterly or current reports.
Any forward-looking statement made by us or on our behalf speaks only as of the date that it was made. We do not undertake to update any forward-looking statement to reflect the impact of events, circumstances, or results that arise after the date that the statement was made, except as required by applicable securities laws. You, however, should consult further disclosures (including disclosures of a forward-looking nature) that we may make in any subsequent Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, or Current Report on Form 8-K.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions apply. The term “loans” means the following consumer and commercial products associated with our direct and indirect financing activities: loans, retail installment sales contracts, lines of credit, and other financing products excluding operating leases. The term “operating leases” means consumer- and commercial-vehicle lease agreements where Ally is the lessor and the lessee is generally not obligated to acquire ownership of the vehicle at lease-end or compensate Ally for the vehicle’s residual value. The terms “lend,” “finance,” and “originate” mean our direct extension or origination of loans, our purchase or
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
acquisition of loans, or our purchase of operating leases as applicable. The term “consumer” means all consumer products associated with our loan and operating-lease activities and all commercial retail installment sales contracts. The term “commercial” means all commercial products associated with our loan activities, other than commercial retail installment sales contracts. The term “partnerships” means business arrangements rather than partnerships as defined by law.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Overview
Ally Financial Inc. (together with its consolidated subsidiaries unless the context otherwise requires, Ally, the Company, we, us, or our) is a digital financial-services company committed to its promise to “Do It Right” for its consumer, commercial, and corporate customers. Ally is composed of an industry-leading independent automotive finance and insurance operation, an award-winning digital direct bank (Ally Bank, Member FDIC and Equal Housing Lender, which offers mortgage lending, point-of-sale personal lending, and a variety of deposit and other banking products), a consumer credit card business, a corporate finance business for equity sponsors and middle-market companies, and securities brokerage and investment advisory services. A relentless ally for all things money, Ally helps people save well and earn well, so they can spend for what matters. We are a Delaware corporation and are registered as a BHC under the BHC Act, and an FHC under the GLB Act.
Our Business
Dealer Financial Services
Dealer Financial Services is composed of our Automotive Finance and Insurance segments. Our primary customers are automotive dealers, which are independently owned businesses. A dealer may sell or lease a vehicle for cash but, more typically, enters into a retail installment sales contract or operating lease with the customer and then sells the retail installment sales contract or the operating lease and the leased vehicle, as applicable, to Ally or another automotive-finance provider. The purchase by Ally or another provider is commonly described as indirect automotive lending to the customer.
Our Dealer Financial Services business is one of the largest full-service automotive finance operations in the country and offers a wide range of financial services and insurance products to automotive dealerships and their customers. We have deep dealer relationships that have been built throughout our over 100-year history, and we are leveraging competitive strengths to expand our dealer footprint. Our dealer-centric business model encourages dealers to use our broad range of products through incentive programs like our Ally Dealer Rewards program. Our automotive finance services include purchasing retail installment sales contracts and operating leases from dealers, extending automotive loans directly to consumers, offering term loans to dealers, financing dealer floorplans and providing other lines of credit to dealers, supplying warehouse lines to automotive retailers, offering automotive-fleet financing, providing financing to companies and municipalities for the purchase or lease of vehicles, and supplying vehicle-remarketing services. We also offer retail VSCs and commercial insurance primarily covering dealers’ vehicle inventories. We are a leading provider of VSCs, GAP, and VMCs.
Automotive Finance
Our Automotive Finance operations provide U.S.-based automotive financing services to consumers, automotive dealers, other businesses, and municipalities. Our dealer-focused business model, value-added products and services, full-spectrum financing, and business expertise proven over many credit cycles make us a premier automotive finance company. At December 31, 2021, our Automotive Finance operations had $103.7 billion of assets and generated $5.5 billion of total net revenue in 2021. For consumers, we provide financing for new and used vehicles. In addition, our CSG provides automotive financing for small businesses and municipalities. At December 31, 2021, our CSG had $8.6 billion of loans outstanding. Through our commercial automotive financing operations, we fund dealer purchases of new and used vehicles through wholesale floorplan financing. We manage commercial account servicing on approximately 2,700 dealers that utilize our floorplan inventory lending or other commercial loans. We serviced $84.8 billion consumer loan and operating leases at December 31, 2021, and our commercial automotive loan portfolio was approximately $16.1 billion at December 31, 2021. The extensive infrastructure, technology, and analytics of our servicing operations as well as the experience of our servicing personnel enhance our ability to minimize our loan losses and enable us to deliver a favorable customer experience to both our dealers and retail customers. During 2021, we continued to reposition our origination profile to focus on capital optimization and risk-adjusted returns. In 2021, total consumer automotive originations were $46.3 billion, an increase of $11.1 billion compared to 2020. The shorter-term duration consumer automotive loan and variable-rate commercial loan portfolios offer attractive asset classes where we continue to optimize risk-adjusted returns through origination mix management and pricing and underwriting discipline.
Our success as an automotive finance provider is driven by the consistent and broad range of products and services we offer to dealers. The automotive marketplace is dynamic and evolving, including substantial investments in electrification by automobile manufacturers and suppliers. Ally remains focused on meeting the needs of both our dealer and consumer customers and continuing to strengthen and expand upon the approximately 21,100 dealer relationships we have. We continue to identify and cultivate relationships with automotive retailers including those with leading eCommerce platforms. We also operate Clearlane, our online direct-lending platform, which provides a digital platform for consumers seeking direct financing. We believe these actions will enable us to respond to the growing trends for a more streamlined and digital automotive financing process to serve both dealers and consumers. Furthermore, our strong and expansive dealer relationships, comprehensive suite of products and services, full-spectrum financing, and depth of experience position us to evolve with future shifts in automobile technologies, including electrification. Ally has and continues to provide automobile financing for hybrid and battery-electric vehicles today, and is well positioned to remain a leader in automotive financing as we believe the vast majority of these vehicles will be sold through dealerships with whom we have an established relationship.
The Growth channel was established to focus on developing dealer relationships beyond those relationships that primarily were developed through our previous role as a captive finance company for GM and Stellantis. The Growth channel was expanded to include direct-to-consumer financing through Clearlane and other channels and our arrangements with online automotive retailers. We have established relationships with thousands of Growth channel dealers through our customer-centric approach and specialized incentive programs designed to drive loyalty amongst dealers to our products and services. The success of the Growth channel has been a key enabler in
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
evolving our business model from a focused captive finance company to a leading market competitor. In this channel, we currently have approximately 14,800 dealer relationships, of which approximately 74% are franchised dealers (including brands such as Ford, Nissan, Kia, Hyundai, Toyota, Honda, and others), or used vehicle only retailers with a national presence.
Over the past several years, we have continued to focus on the consumer used vehicle segment primarily through franchised dealers, which has resulted in used vehicle financing volume growth, and has positioned us as an industry leader in used vehicle financing. The highly fragmented used vehicle financing market, with a total financing opportunity represented by approximately 284 million vehicles in operation, provides an attractive opportunity that we believe will further expand and support our dealer relationships and increase our risk-adjusted return on retail loan originations.
For consumers, we provide automotive loan financing and leasing for approximately 4.4 million new and used vehicle contracts. Retail financing for the purchase of vehicles by individual consumers generally takes the form of installment sales financing. We originated a total of approximately 1.4 million and 1.3 million automotive loans and operating leases during the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, totaling $46.3 billion and $35.1 billion, respectively.
Our consumer automotive financing operations generate revenue primarily through finance charges on retail installment sales contracts and rental payments on operating lease contracts. For operating leases, when the contract is originated, we estimate the residual value of the leased vehicle at lease termination. Periodically thereafter we revise the projected residual value of the leased vehicle at lease termination and adjust depreciation expense over the remaining life of the lease if appropriate. Given the fluctuations in used vehicle values, our actual sales proceeds from remarketing the vehicle may be higher or lower than the projected residual value, which results in gains or losses on lease termination. While all operating leases are exposed to potential reductions in used vehicle values, only loans where we take possession of the vehicle are affected by potential reductions in used vehicle values. Refer to the Risk Management section of this MD&A for further discussion of credit risk and lease residual risk.
We continue to maintain a diverse mix of product offerings across a broad risk spectrum, subject to underwriting policies that reflect our risk appetite. Our current operating results increasingly reflect our ongoing strategy to grow used vehicle financing and expand risk-adjusted returns. While we predominately focus on prime-lending markets, we seek to be a meaningful source of financing to a wide spectrum of customers and continue to carefully measure risk versus return. We place great emphasis on our risk management and risk-based pricing policies and practices and employ robust credit decisioning processes coupled with granular pricing that is differentiated across our proprietary credit tiers.
Our commercial automotive financing operations primarily fund dealer inventory purchases of new and used vehicles, commonly referred to as wholesale floorplan financing. This represents the largest portion of our commercial automotive financing business. Wholesale floorplan loans are secured by vehicles financed (and all other vehicle inventory), which provide strong collateral protection in the event of dealership default. Additional collateral or other credit enhancements (for example, personal guarantees from dealership owners) are typically obtained to further mitigate credit risk. The amount we advance to dealers is equal to 100% of the wholesale invoice price of new vehicles, subject to payment curtailment schedules. Interest on wholesale automotive financing is generally payable monthly and is indexed to a floating-rate benchmark. The rate for a particular dealer is based on, among other considerations, competitive factors and the dealer’s creditworthiness. During 2021, we financed an average of $11.2 billion of dealer vehicle inventory through wholesale floorplan financings. Other commercial automotive lending products, which averaged $5.3 billion during 2021, consist of automotive dealer revolving lines of credit, term loans, including those to finance dealership land and buildings, and dealer fleet financing. We also provide comprehensive automotive remarketing services, including the use of SmartAuction, our online auction platform, which efficiently supports dealer-to-dealer and other commercial wholesale vehicle transactions. SmartAuction provides diversified fee-based revenue and serves as a means of deepening relationships with our dealership customers. In 2021, Ally and other parties, including dealers, fleet rental companies, and financial institutions, utilized SmartAuction to sell approximately 261,000 vehicles to dealers and other commercial customers. SmartAuction served as the remarketing channel for 29% of our off-lease vehicles.
Insurance
Our Insurance operations offer both consumer finance protection and insurance products sold primarily through the automotive dealer channel, and commercial insurance products sold directly to dealers. We serve approximately 2.5 million consumers nationwide across F&I and P&C products. In addition, we offer F&I products in Canada, where we serve more than 400 thousand consumers and are the VSC and other protection plan provider for GM Canada and VSC provider for Subaru Canada. Our Insurance operations had $9.4 billion of assets at December 31, 2021, and generated $1.4 billion of total net revenue during 2021. As part of our focus on offering dealers a broad range of consumer F&I products, we offer VSCs, VMCs, and GAP products. We also underwrite selected commercial insurance coverages, which primarily insure dealers’ wholesale vehicle inventory. Ally Premier Protection is our flagship VSC offering, which provides coverage for new and used vehicles of virtually all makes and models. We also offer ClearGuard on the SmartAuction platform, which is a protection product designed to minimize the risk to dealers from arbitration claims for eligible vehicles sold at auction.
From a dealer perspective, Ally provides significant value and expertise, which creates high retention rates and strong relationships. In addition to our product offerings, we provide consultative services and training to assist dealers in optimizing F&I results while achieving high levels of customer satisfaction and regulatory compliance. We also advise dealers regarding necessary liability and physical damage coverages.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Our F&I products are primarily distributed indirectly through the automotive dealer network. We have established approximately 1,500 F&I dealer relationships nationwide and 550 dealer relationships in Canada, with a focus on growing dealer relationships in the future. Our VSCs for retail customers offer owners and lessees mechanical repair protection and roadside assistance for new and used vehicles beyond the manufacturer’s new vehicle warranty. These VSCs are marketed to the public through automotive dealerships and on a direct response basis. We also offer GAP products, which cover certain amounts owed by a customer beyond their covered vehicle’s value in the event the vehicle is damaged or stolen and declared a total loss. We continue to evolve our product suite and digital capabilities to position our business for future opportunities through growing third-party relationships and sales through our online direct-lending platform, Clearlane.
We have approximately 3,100 dealer relationships within our P&C business to whom we offer a variety of commercial products and levels of coverage. Vehicle inventory insurance for dealers provides physical damage protection for dealers’ floorplan vehicles. Among dealers to whom we provide wholesale financing, our insurance product penetration rate is approximately 78%. Dealers who receive wholesale financing from us are eligible for insurance incentives such as automatic eligibility for our preferred insurance programs.
A significant aspect of our Insurance operations is the investment of proceeds from premiums and other revenue sources. We use these investments to satisfy our obligations related to future claims at the time these claims are settled. Our Insurance operations have an Investment Committee, which develops guidelines and strategies for these investments. The guidelines established by this committee reflect our risk appetite, liquidity requirements, regulatory requirements, and rating agency considerations, among other factors.
Mortgage Finance
Our Mortgage Finance operations consist of the management of held-for-investment and held-for-sale consumer mortgage loan portfolios. Our held-for-investment portfolio includes our direct-to-consumer Ally Home mortgage offering, and bulk purchases of high-quality jumbo and LMI mortgage loans originated by third parties. Our Mortgage Finance operations had $17.8 billion of assets at December 31, 2021, and generated $218 million of total net revenue in 2021.
Through our direct-to-consumer channel, which was introduced late in 2016, we offer a variety of competitively priced jumbo and conforming fixed- and adjustable-rate mortgage products through a third-party fulfillment provider. Under our current arrangement, our direct-to-consumer conforming mortgages are originated as held-for-sale and sold, while jumbo and LMI mortgages are originated as held-for-investment. Loans originated in the direct-to-consumer channel are sourced by existing Ally customer marketing, prospect marketing on third-party websites, and email or direct mail campaigns. In April 2019, we announced a strategic partnership with BMC, which delivers an enhanced end-to-end digital mortgage experience for our customers through our direct-to-consumer channel. Through this partnership, BMC conducts the sales, processing, underwriting, and closing for Ally’s digital mortgage offerings in a highly innovative, scalable, and cost-efficient manner, while Ally retains control of all the marketing and advertising strategies and loan pricing. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we originated $10.4 billion of mortgage loans through our direct-to-consumer channel.
Through the bulk loan channel, we purchase loans from several qualified sellers including direct originators and large aggregators who have the financial capacity to support strong representations and warranties and the industry knowledge and experience to originate high-quality assets. Bulk purchases are made on a servicing-released basis, allowing us to directly oversee servicing activities and manage refinancing through our direct-to-consumer channel. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we purchased $3.9 billion of mortgage loans that were originated by third parties. Our mortgage loan purchases are held-for-investment.
The combination of our direct-to-consumer strategy and bulk portfolio purchase program provides the capacity to expand revenue sources and further grow and diversify our finance receivable portfolio with an attractive asset class while also deepening relationships with existing Ally customers.
Corporate Finance
Our Corporate Finance operations primarily provide senior secured leveraged cash flow and asset-based loans to mostly U.S.-based middle-market companies owned by private equity sponsors, and loans to asset managers that primarily provide leveraged loans. Our Corporate Finance operations had $8.0 billion of assets at December 31, 2021, and generated $436 million of total net revenue during 2021, and continues to offer attractive returns and diversification benefits to our broader lending portfolio. We believe our growing deposit-based funding model coupled with our expanded product offerings and deep industry relationships provide an advantage over our competition, which includes other banks as well as publicly and privately held finance companies. While there continues to be a significant level of liquidity and competition in the middle-market lending space, we have continued to prudently grow our lending portfolio with a focus on a disciplined and selective approach to credit quality, including a greater focus on asset-based loans. We seek markets and opportunities where our clients require customized, highly structured, and time-sensitive financing solutions. Our corporate-finance lending portfolio is generally composed of first-lien, first-out loans.
Our focus is on businesses owned by private equity sponsors with loans typically used for leveraged buyouts, refinancing and recapitalizations, mergers and acquisitions, growth, co-lending arrangements, turnarounds, and debtor-in-possession financings. Loan facilities typically include both a revolver and term loan component. Our target commitment hold level for these individual exposures ranges from $15 million to $150 million, depending on product type. Additionally, our Lender Finance business provides asset managers with facilities from $50 million to up to $500 million to partially fund their direct-lending activities. We also selectively arrange larger transactions that we may retain on-balance sheet or syndicate to other lenders. By syndicating loans to other lenders, we are able to provide financing commitments in excess of our target hold levels to our customers and generate loan syndication fee income while reducing our risk exposure to individual borrowers. All of our loans are floating-rate facilities with maturities typically ranging from two to seven years. In certain
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
instances, we may be offered the opportunity to make small equity investments in our borrowers, which provide a potential additional revenue opportunity for our business. The portfolio is well diversified across multiple industries including financials, services, manufacturing distribution, and other specialty sectors. These specialty sectors include our healthcare, technology/venture finance, defense and aerospace, and transportation and logistics. We also provide a healthcare-based commercial real estate product focused on lending to skilled nursing facilities, senior housing, medical office buildings, and hospitals. Other smaller complementary product offerings that help strengthen our reputation as a full-spectrum provider of financing solutions for borrowers include selectively offering second-out loans on certain transactions and issuing letters of credit through Ally Bank.
Corporate and Other
Overview
Corporate and Other primarily consists of centralized corporate treasury activities such as management of the cash and corporate investment securities and loan portfolios, short- and long-term debt, retail and brokered deposit liabilities, derivative instruments, original issue discount, and the residual impacts of our corporate FTP and treasury ALM activities. Corporate and Other also includes activity related to certain equity investments, which primarily consist of FHLB and FRB stock as well as other strategic investments, the management of our legacy mortgage portfolio, which primarily consists of loans originated prior to January 1, 2009, the activity related to Ally Invest, Ally Lending, Ally Credit Card, CRA loans and related investments, and reclassifications and eliminations between the reportable operating segments.
Ally Invest
Corporate and Other includes the results of Ally Invest, our digital brokerage and wealth management offering, which enables us to complement our competitive deposit products with low-cost investing. The digital wealth management business aligns with our strategy to create a premier digital financial services company and provides additional sources of fee income through asset management and certain other fees, with minimal balance sheet utilization. This business also provides an additional source of low-cost deposits through arrangements with Ally Invest’s clearing broker.
Through Ally Invest, we are able to offer a broader array of products through a fully integrated digital consumer platform centered around self-directed products and digital advisory services. Ally Invest’s suite of commission-free and low-cost investing options serve both active and passive investors with diverse and evolving financial objectives through a transparent online process. Our digital platform and broad product offerings are enhanced by outstanding client-focused and user-friendly customer service that is generally accessible twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, via the phone, web or email-consistent with the Ally brand.
Ally Invest provides clients with self-directed trading services for a variety of securities including stocks, options, ETFs, mutual funds, and fixed-income products through Ally Invest Securities. Ally Invest Securities also offers margin lending, which allows customers to borrow money by using securities and cash currently held in their accounts as collateral. Through Ally Invest Forex, we offer self-directed investors and traders the ability to trade over 50 currency pairs through a forex trading platform.
Ally Invest also provides digital advisory services to clients through web-based solutions, informational resources, and virtual interaction through Ally Invest Advisors, an SEC-registered investment advisor. These services have emerged as a fast-growing segment within the financial services industry over the past several years. Ally Invest Advisors provides clients the opportunity to obtain professional portfolio management services in return for a fee based upon the client’s assets under management. We also offer cash enhanced portfolios that incur no management fee. A number of core robo portfolios are offered, which hold ETFs diversified across asset class, industry sector, and geography and which are customized for clients based on risk tolerance, investment time horizon, and wealth ratio.
Ally Lending
Information related to our unsecured personal lending business, Ally Lending, is also included within Corporate and Other. Ally Lending currently serves medical, retail, and home improvement service providers by enabling promotional and fixed rate installment-loan products through a digital application process at point-of-sale. The home improvement segment, which was launched in the second quarter of 2020, now represents approximately 38% of new originations, and is expected to grow. Point-of-sale lending broadens our capabilities, and expands our product offering into consumer unsecured lending, all while helping to further meet the financial needs of our customers.
Ally Credit Card
Additionally, beginning in December 2021 with the acquisition of Fair Square, which we rebranded Ally Credit Card, financial information related to our credit card business is included within Corporate and Other. The acquisition provides us with a scalable, digital-first credit card platform, and advances our evolution as a leading digital consumer bank. Ally Credit Card (formerly Fair Square) features leading-edge technology, and a proprietary, analytics-based underwriting model. We believe the addition of credit card to our suite of products enhances our ability to grow and deepen both new and existing customer relationships. As of December 31, 2021, our credit card business was composed of approximately 750,000 customers. Refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the acquisition of Fair Square.
Corporate Treasury and ALM Activities
The net financing revenue and other interest income of our Automotive Finance, Mortgage Finance, and Corporate Finance operations include the results of an FTP process that insulates these operations from interest rate volatility by matching assets and liabilities with similar interest rate sensitivity. The FTP process assigns charge rates to the assets and credit rates to the liabilities within our Automotive Finance,
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Mortgage Finance, and Corporate Finance operations, based on anticipated maturity and a benchmark rate curve plus an assumed credit spread. The assumed credit spread represents the cost of funds for each asset class based on a blend of funding channels available to the enterprise, including unsecured and secured capital markets, private funding facilities, and deposits. In addition, a risk-based methodology is used to allocate equity to these operations.
Deposits
We are focused on growing and retaining a stable deposit base and deepening relationships with our 2.5 million primary deposit customers by leveraging our compelling brand and strong value proposition. Ally Bank is a digital direct bank with no branch network that obtains retail deposits directly from customers. We have grown our deposits with a strong brand that is based on a promise of being straightforward with our customers and offering high-quality customer service. Ally Bank has consistently increased its share of the direct banking deposit market and remains one of the largest direct banks in terms of retail deposit balances. Our strong customer acquisition and retention rates reflect the strength of our brand and, together with our overall value proposition, continue to drive growth in retail deposits. At December 31, 2021, Ally Bank had $141.6 billion of total deposits-including $134.7 billion of retail deposits, which grew $10.3 billion, or 8% during 2021. Over the past several years, the continued growth of our retail-deposit base has contributed to a more favorable mix of lower cost funding and we continue to focus on efficient deposit growth by continuing to expand the deposit value proposition beyond competitive deposit rates. Our segment results include cost of funds associated with these deposit-product offerings.
Our deposit products and services are designed to develop long-term customer relationships and capitalize on the shift in consumer preference for direct banking. Our deposits franchise is key to growing and building momentum across our suite of digital offerings at Ally Home, Ally Invest, Ally Lending, and Ally Credit Card, consistent with our strategic objective to grow multi-product customers. These products and services appeal to a broad group of customers, many of whom appreciate a streamlined digital experience coupled with our strong value proposition. Ally Bank offers a full spectrum of retail deposit products, including online savings accounts, money-market demand accounts, CDs, interest-bearing checking accounts, trust accounts, and IRAs. Our deposit services include Zelle® person-to-person payment services, eCheck remote deposit capture, and mobile banking. As demonstrated with the successful launch of our Smart Savings Tools, Ally continues to deliver innovative digital tools on top of traditional financial products to add incremental value to customers, while also driving increased engagement and loyalty. Over 500,000 customers have adopted our Smart Savings Tools.
We believe we are well-positioned to continue to benefit from the consumer-driven shift from branch banking to direct banking as demonstrated by the growth we have experienced since 2010. Our nearly 2.5 million deposit customers and 4.7 million retail bank accounts as of December 31, 2021, reflect increases from 2.3 million and 4.5 million, respectively, as compared to December 31, 2020. Our customer base spans across diverse demographic segmentations and socioeconomic bands. Our direct bank business model resonates particularly well with the millennial generation, which consistently makes up the largest percentage of our new customers. According to a 2021 American Bankers Association survey, 88% of customers prefer to do their banking most often via digital and other direct channels (internet, mobile, telephone, and mail). Furthermore, over the past five years, estimated direct banking deposits as a percentage of the broader retail deposits market increased by approximately 2 percentage points, from 7% in 2016 to 9% in 2021. We have received a positive response to innovative savings and other deposit products. In October 2021, MONEY® Magazine named Ally to its “Best Online Bank” list for the fourth consecutive year, as well as the ninth time in the past eleven years, and in June 2021, Kiplinger named Ally Bank the “Best Internet Bank” for the fifth consecutive year. Ally Bank’s competitive direct banking includes online and mobile banking features such as electronic bill pay, remote deposit, and electronic funds transfer nationwide, with innovative interfaces such as banking through Alexa-enabled devices, and no minimum balance requirements.
We intend to continue to grow and invest in our digital direct bank and further capitalize on the shift in consumer preference for direct banking with expanded digital capabilities and customer-centric products that utilize advanced analytics for personalized interactions and other technologies that improve efficiency, security, and the customer’s connection to the brand. We are focused on growing, deepening, and further leveraging the customer relationships and brand loyalty that exist with Ally Bank as a catalyst for future loan and deposit growth, as well as revenue opportunities that arise from introducing Ally Bank deposit customers to our digital wealth management offering, Ally Invest.
Funding and Liquidity
Our funding strategy targets a stable retail deposit base, supplemented by brokered deposits, public and private secured debt, and public unsecured debt. These diversified funding sources are managed across products, markets, and investors to enhance funding flexibility and stability, resulting in a more cost-effective long-term funding strategy.
Prudent expansion of asset originations at Ally Bank and continued growth of a stable deposit base continue to be the cornerstone of our long-term liquidity strategy. Our primary funding source is retail deposits, which provide us with stable, low-cost funding. We believe retail deposits are less sensitive to interest rate changes, market volatility, or changes in credit ratings when compared to other funding sources. In addition, we utilize brokered deposits, which are obtained through third-party intermediaries. At December 31, 2021, deposit liabilities totaled $141.6 billion, which reflects an increase of $4.5 billion as compared to December 31, 2020. Deposits as a percentage of total liability-based funding increased four percentage points to 89% at December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020.
As we continue to migrate assets to Ally Bank and grow our bank funding capabilities, our need for funding at the parent company has been reduced. At December 31, 2021, 95% of Ally’s total assets were within Ally Bank. This compares to approximately 94% as of December 31, 2020. Longer-term unsecured debt is the primary funding source utilized at the parent company. At December 31, 2021, we had $1.1 billion and $2.1 billion of unsecured long-term debt principal maturing in 2022 and 2023, respectively. We have substantially reduced our reliance on market-based funding by continuing to focus on retail deposit funding.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The strategies outlined above have allowed us to build and maintain a conservative liquidity position. Total available liquidity at December 31, 2021, was $31.2 billion. Absolute levels of liquidity decreased during 2021 primarily as a result of decreased liquid cash and equivalents. Refer to the section below titled Liquidity Management, Funding, and Regulatory Capital for a further discussion about liquidity risk management.
Credit Strategy
Our strategy and approach to extending credit, as well as our management of credit risk, are critical elements of our business. Credit performance is influenced by several factors including our risk appetite, our credit and underwriting processes, our monitoring and collection efforts, the financial condition of our borrowers, the performance of loan collateral, fiscal and monetary stimulus, and various macroeconomic considerations. Most of our businesses offer credit products and services, which drive overall business performance. Consistent with our risk appetite, our business lines operate under credit standards that consider the borrower’s ability and willingness to repay loans. The failure to effectively manage credit risk can have a direct and significant impact on Ally’s earnings, capital position, and reputation. Refer to the Risk Management section of this MD&A for a further discussion of credit risk and performance of our consumer and commercial credit portfolios.
Within our Automotive Finance operations, we serve a mix of consumers across the credit spectrum to achieve portfolio diversification and to optimize the risk and return of our consumer automotive portfolio. This is achieved through the utilization of robust credit decisioning processes coupled with granular pricing that is differentiated across our proprietary credit tiers. While we are a full-spectrum automotive finance lender, the significant majority of our consumer automotive loans are underwritten within the prime-lending segment. We define prime consumer automotive loans primarily as those loans with a FICO® Score at origination of 620 or greater. The carrying value of our nonprime consumer automotive loans before allowance for loan losses, as of December 31, 2021, was approximately 11.3% of our total consumer automotive loans at December 31, 2021. During 2021, our strategy for originations has been to optimize the deployment of capital by focusing on risk-adjusted returns against available origination opportunities, which has included a continued gradual and measured shift toward our Growth channel including used vehicle financings.
The mortgage-finance team focuses on applicants with stronger credit profiles and with income streams to support repayments of the loan and operates under credit standards that consider and assess the value of the underlying real estate in accordance with prudent credit practices and regulatory requirements. Refer to the Mortgage Finance section of the MD&A that follows for credit quality information about purchases and originations of consumer mortgages held-for-investment. We generally rely on appraisals conducted by licensed appraisers in conformance with the expectations and requirements of Fannie Mae and federal regulators. When appropriate, we require credit enhancements such as private mortgage insurance. We price each mortgage loan that we originate based on several factors, including the customer’s FICO® Score, the LTV ratio, and the size of the loan. For bulk purchases, we only purchase loans from sellers with the experience to originate high-quality loans and the financial wherewithal to support their representations and warranties.
Within Ally Lending, our digital payment provider that offers point-of-sale financing to consumers, we serve a mix of consumers across the credit spectrum to achieve portfolio diversification and to optimize the risk and return of our personal lending portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, the amortized cost of our finance receivables related to Ally Lending was $1.0 billion.
Additionally, on December 1, 2021, we acquired Fair Square, which we rebranded Ally Credit Card, a digital credit card provider. This expansion into credit card lending further broadens our consumer finance product portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, the amortized cost of our finance receivables related to Ally Credit Card was $953 million.
Within our commercial lending portfolios, Corporate Finance operations primarily provide senior secured leveraged cash flow and asset-based loans to mostly U.S.-based middle-market companies. Throughout 2021, we continued to prudently grow this portfolio with a disciplined and selective approach to credit quality, which has generally included the avoidance of covenant-light lending arrangements. This includes growth of our lender finance vertical launched in 2019, which provides senior secured revolving credit facilities to asset managers, collateralized by a portfolio of loans. Within our commercial automotive business, we continue to offer a variety of dealer-centric lending products that primarily relate to floorplan financing and term loans. These commercial automotive products are an important aspect of our dealer relationships and offer a secured lending arrangement with strong collateral protections in the event of dealer default. The performance of our commercial credit portfolios continues to remain strong. While nonperforming finance receivables and loans increased $96 million from December 31, 2020, to $257 million at December 31, 2021, our total net charge-offs within our commercial lending portfolio remained low at $11 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $51 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to the Risk Management section of the MD&A for further details.
Discontinued Operations
During 2013 and 2012, certain disposal groups met the criteria to be presented as discontinued operations. The remaining activity relates to previous discontinued operations for which we continue to have income taxes, net of valuation allowances, as well as wind-down, legal, and minimal operational costs. For all periods presented, the operating results for these operations have been removed from continuing operations. The MD&A has been adjusted to exclude discontinued operations unless otherwise noted.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Primary Business Lines
Dealer Financial Services, which includes our Automotive Finance and Insurance operations, Mortgage Finance, and Corporate Finance are our primary business lines. The following table summarizes the operating results excluding discontinued operations of each business line. Operating results for each of the business lines are more fully described in the MD&A sections that follow.
n/m = not meaningful
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our consolidated operating results for the periods shown. Refer to the reportable operating segment sections of the MD&A that follows for a more complete discussion of operating results by business line. For a discussion of our fiscal 2020 results compared to fiscal 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
n/m = not meaningful
(a)The ratios were based on average assets and average total equity using an average daily balance methodology.
(b)The common dividend payout ratio was calculated using basic earnings per common share.
2021 Compared to 2020
We earned net income from continuing operations of $3.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net income of $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, results were favorably impacted by higher net financing revenue driven by lower interest expense and lower net depreciation expense on operating lease assets, and lower provision for credit losses associated with improved macroeconomic conditions. These items were partially offset by higher noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, as well as increased income tax expense from continuing operations.
Net financing revenue and other interest income increased $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We experienced lower interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, driven by market and industry dynamics that drove a decrease in our deposit rates and other funding costs, and our continued shift to more cost-efficient deposit funding. Within our Automotive Finance operations, total net operating lease revenue increased $396 million for the year ended
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, driven by strong remarketing gains as a result of continued new vehicle supply constraints and an increase in demand for used vehicles, as well as lower depreciation expense based on revised residual value expectations. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, consumer automotive revenue increased as higher average consumer assets and higher portfolio yields contributed to the increase in revenue resulting from a continued focus on the used-vehicle portfolio primarily through franchised dealers and growth in application volume from our dealer network. These items were partially offset by lower commercial loan net financing revenue within our Automotive Finance operations, driven by lower outstanding floorplan assets as a result of declining new vehicle inventories due to ongoing production constraints from a global semiconductor chip shortage and strong new vehicle sales during the first half of 2021.
Loss on extinguishment of debt increased $34 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by $131 million of losses incurred for the full redemption of the Series 2 TRUPs during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a $99 million loss on the early repayment of 13 FHLB advances we elected to prepay and early terminate during 2020.
Other gain on investments was $285 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $307 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021, was the result of a decrease in realized gains on available-for-sale securities and higher unrealized losses on equity securities, as compared to 2020. These decreases were partially offset by higher realized gains on equity securities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other income, net of losses increased $121 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to an increase in remarketing fee income resulting from higher dealer sales activity. In addition, late fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the suppression of late fees in the prior year, as part of our COVID-19 relief efforts.
The provision for credit losses decreased $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in provision for credit losses was primarily driven by reserve increases during the year ended December 31, 2020, associated with deterioration in the macroeconomic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, compared to reserve declines during the year ended December 31, 2021, as the macroeconomic environment continued to recover. Additionally, the provision decrease during the year ended December 31, 2021, was impacted by lower net charge-offs in our consumer automotive portfolio as we continue to experience strong credit performance and elevated used vehicle values, partially offset by a reserve increase from portfolio growth in our consumer portfolios during the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to the Risk Management section of this MD&A for further discussion on our provision for credit losses.
Noninterest expense was $4.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was driven by higher compensation and benefits expense including an update to our retirement eligibility benefits, and increased expenses to support the growth of our consumer product suite and expand our digital capabilities and portfolio of products, as well as $57 million of contributions to the Ally Charitable Foundation during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $35 million of contributions to the Ally Charitable Foundation during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in noninterest expense was partially offset by lower insurance losses for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, and a goodwill impairment charge of $50 million related to Ally Invest recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We recognized total income tax expense from continuing operations of $790 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to income tax expense of $328 million for 2020. The increase in income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to the tax effects of an increase in pretax earnings, partially offset by a tax benefit from the release of valuation allowance on foreign tax credit carryforwards during the second quarter of 2021.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Dealer Financial Services
Results for Dealer Financial Services are presented by reportable operating segment, which includes our Automotive Finance and Insurance operations.
Automotive Finance
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the operating results of our Automotive Finance operations. The amounts presented are before the elimination of balances and transactions with our other reportable operating segments.
(a)Includes net remarketing gains of $344 million, $127 million, and $69 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents the average balance and yield of the loan and operating lease portfolios of our Automotive Financing operations.
(a)Average balances are calculated using an average daily balance methodology.
(b)Nonperforming finance receivables and loans are included in the average balances. For information on our accounting policies regarding nonperforming status, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(c)Includes the effects of derivative financial instruments designated as hedges, which is included within Corporate and Other. Excluding the impact of hedging activities, the yield was 6.87%, 6.77%, and 6.61% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
(d)Includes the effects of derivative financial instruments designated as hedges, which is included within Corporate and Other. Excluding the impact of hedging activities, the yield was 2.61%, 3.07%, and 4.60% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
(e)Consists primarily of automotive dealer term loans, including those to finance dealership land and buildings, and dealer fleet financing.
(f)Yield includes net gains on the sale of off-lease vehicles of $344 million, $127 million, and $69 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Excluding these gains and losses on sale, the yield was 6.05% for the year ended December 31, 2021, and 4.93% for both the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019. The shift in off-lease vehicle disposition mix is expected to continue in the near term and may limit our ability to optimize remarketing proceeds. Refer to the Operating Lease Residual Risk Management section of this MD&A for further discussion.
2021 Compared to 2020
Our Automotive Finance operations earned income from continuing operations before income tax expense of $3.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the increase was due primarily to lower provision for credit losses and lower interest expense, as well as lower net depreciation expense on operating lease assets.
Consumer automotive loan financing revenue increased $267 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. Higher average consumer assets and higher portfolio yields contributed to the increase in revenue resulting from a continued focus on the used-vehicle portfolio primarily through franchised dealers and growth in application volume from our dealer network. Through these actions, we continue to optimize risk adjusted returns through our origination mix.
Commercial loan financing revenue decreased $319 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The decrease was driven by lower outstanding floorplan assets as a result of declining new vehicle inventories due to ongoing production constraints from a global semiconductor chip shortage and strong new vehicle sales during the first half of 2021.
Interest expense was $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to market and industry dynamics, which drove a decrease in our deposit rates and other funding costs, as we continue to shift towards a more favorable mix of lower cost funding.
Other income was $251 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $204 million for 2020. The increase during the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to an increase in remarketing fee income resulting from higher dealer sales activity during the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, late fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the suppression of late fees in the prior year, as part of our COVID-19 relief efforts.
Total net operating lease revenue increased $396 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. We recognized remarketing gains of $344 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to remarketing gains of $127 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, while depreciation expense on operating lease assets decreased $64 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The increase in net operating lease revenue was primarily driven by strong remarketing gains as a result of continued new vehicle supply constraints and an increase in demand for used vehicles. The increase was also impacted by an increase in yield primarily resulting from lower depreciation expense resulting from downward adjustments to the rate of depreciation during the year ended December 31, 2021, as well as asset growth. Refer to the Operating Lease Residual Risk Management section of this MD&A for further discussion.
The provision for credit losses decreased $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in provision for credit losses was primarily driven by reserve increases during the year ended December 31, 2020, associated with deterioration in the macroeconomic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, compared to reserve declines during the year ended December 31, 2021, as the macroeconomic environment continued to recover. Additionally, the provision decrease during the year ended December 31, 2021, was driven by lower net charge-offs in our consumer and
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
commercial automotive portfolios as we continue to experience strong credit performance. Additionally, we continue to benefit from elevated used vehicle values in our consumer automotive portfolio. The decrease in provision was partially offset by a reserve increase from portfolio growth in our consumer automotive portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to the Risk Management section of this MD&A for further discussion on our provision for credit losses.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Automotive Financing Volume
Our Automotive Finance operations provide automotive financing services to consumers and automotive dealers. For consumers, we provide retail financing and leasing for new and used vehicles, and through our commercial automotive financing operations, we fund dealer purchases of new and used vehicles through wholesale floorplan financing and provide dealer term and revolving loans and automotive fleet financing.
Acquisition and Underwriting
Our consumer underwriting process is focused on multidimensional risk factors and data driven risk-adjusted probabilities that are continuously monitored and routinely updated. Each application is placed into an analytical category based on specific aspects of the applicant’s credit profile and loan structure. We then evaluate the application by applying a proprietary credit scoring algorithm tailored to its applicable category. Inputs into this algorithm include, but are not limited to, proprietary scores and deal structure variables such as LTV, new or used vehicle collateral, and term of financing. The output of the algorithm is used to sort applications into various credit tiers (S, A, B, C, D, and E). Credit tiers help determine our primary indication of credit quality and pricing, and are also communicated to the dealer that submitted the application. This process is built on long established credit risk fundamentals to determine both the applicant’s ability and willingness to repay. While advances in excess of 100% of the vehicle collateral value at loan origination-notwithstanding cash down and vehicle trade in value-are typical in the industry (primarily due to additional costs such as mechanical warranty contracts, taxes, license, and title fees), our pricing, risk, and underwriting processes are rooted in statistical analysis to manage this risk.
Our underwriting process uses a combination of automated strategies and manual evaluation by an experienced team of dedicated underwriters. Continued advancements in our data-driven risk assessment process have allowed us to methodically increase our use of automated credit decisioning in recent years. This increase in automated decisioning has enhanced the buying experience for our dealer and consumer customers through improved response times, and more consistent credit decisions. Underwriting is also governed by our credit policies, which set forth guidelines such as acceptable transaction parameters and verification requirements. For higher-risk approved transactions, these guidelines require verification of details such as applicant income and employment through documentation provided by the applicant or other data sources.
Underwriters have a limited ability to approve exceptions to the guidelines in our credit policies. For example, an exception may be approved to allow a term or a ratio of payment-to-income, debt-to-income, or LTV greater than that in the guidelines. Exceptions must be approved by underwriters with appropriate approval authority and generally are based on compensating factors. We monitor exceptions with the goal of limiting them to a small portion of approved applications and originated loans, and rarely permit more than a single exception to avoid layered risk.
Consumer Automotive Financing
New- and used-vehicle consumer financing through dealerships takes one of two forms: retail installment sales contracts (retail contracts) and operating lease contracts. We purchase retail contracts for new and used vehicles and operating lease contracts from dealers after those contracts are executed by the dealers and the consumers. Our consumer automotive financing operations generate revenue primarily through finance charges on retail contracts and rental payments on operating lease contracts. In connection with operating lease contracts, we recognize depreciation expense on the vehicle over the operating lease contract period and we may also recognize a gain or loss on the remarketing of the vehicle at the end of the lease.
The amount we pay a dealer for a retail contract is based on the rate of finance charge agreed by the dealer and customer, the negotiated purchase price of the vehicle, any other products such as service contracts, less any vehicle trade-in value, any down payment from the consumer, and any available automotive manufacturer incentives. Under the retail contract, the consumer is obligated to make payments in an amount equal to the purchase price of the vehicle (less any trade-in or down payment) plus finance charges at a rate negotiated between the consumer and the dealer. In addition, the consumer is responsible for charges related to past-due payments. Consistent with industry practice, when we purchase the retail contract, we pay the dealer at a rate discounted below the rate agreed by the dealer and the consumer (generally described in the industry as the “buy rate”). Our agreements with dealers limit the amount of the discount that we will accept. Although we do not own the vehicles that we finance through retail contracts, our agreements require that we hold a perfected security interest in those vehicles.
With respect to consumer leasing, we purchase operating lease contracts and the associated vehicles from dealerships after those contracts are executed by the dealers and the consumers. The amount we pay a dealer for an operating lease contract is based on the negotiated price for the vehicle, less any vehicle trade-in, any down payment from the consumer, and any available automotive manufacturer incentives. Under an operating lease, the consumer is obligated to make payments in amounts equal to the amount by which the negotiated purchase price of the vehicle (less any trade-in value, down payment, or any available manufacturer incentives) exceeds the contract residual value (including residual support) of the vehicle at lease termination, plus operating lease rental charges. The consumer is also generally responsible for charges related to past-due payments, excess mileage, excessive wear and tear, and certain disposal fees where applicable. At contract inception, we determine pricing based on the projected residual value of the leased vehicle. This evaluation is primarily based on a proprietary model, which includes variables such as vehicle age, expected mileage, seasonality, segment factors, vehicle type, economic indicators, production cycle, automotive manufacturer incentives, and shifts in used vehicle supply. This internally generated data is compared against third-party, independent data for reasonableness.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Periodically, we revise the projected value of the leased vehicle at termination based on then-current market conditions and adjust depreciation expense, if appropriate, over the remaining life of the contract. Upon termination of the lease, lessees generally have the ability to exercise a purchase option at the stated contractual amount. If the lessee declines to exercise the purchase option, the dealer then has the ability to buy out the vehicle. If neither the lessee or dealer completes the buyout, the vehicle is returned to us and we remarket the vehicle. At termination, our actual sales proceeds from remarketing the vehicle may be higher or lower than the estimated residual value resulting in a gain or loss on remarketing recorded through depreciation expense.
Our standard consumer operating lease contract, SmartLease, requires a monthly payment by the consumer. We also offer an alternative leasing plan, SmartLease Plus, which requires one up-front payment of all operating lease amounts at the time the consumer takes possession of the vehicle.
Our standard consumer lease contracts are operating leases; therefore, credit losses on the operating lease portfolio are not as significant as losses on retail contracts because lease credit losses are primarily limited to past-due payments and assessed fees. Since some of these fees are not assessed until the vehicle is returned, these losses on the operating lease portfolio are correlated with lease termination volume. Operating lease accounts over 30 days past due represented 0.8% and 1.1% of the portfolio at December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
With respect to all financed vehicles, whether subject to a retail contract or an operating lease contract, we require that property damage insurance be obtained by the consumer. In addition, for operating lease contracts, we require that bodily injury, collision, and comprehensive insurance be obtained by the consumer.
Our portfolio yield for investment in operating leases, net, including net gains on the sale of off-lease vehicles, increased over 300 basis points to 9.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 6.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our portfolio yield for consumer automotive loans, excluding the impact of hedging activities, increased approximately 10 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, relative to the year ended December 31, 2020. We set our buy rates using a granular, risk-based methodology factoring in several variables including interest costs, projected net average annualized loss rates at the time of origination, anticipated operating costs, and targeted return on equity. Our underwriting capabilities allow us to manage our risk tolerance levels to quickly react to major changes in the economy, including the current pandemic environment. Over the past several years, we have continued to focus on optimizing pricing relative to market interest rates as well as portfolio diversification and the used-vehicle segment, primarily through franchised dealers, which has contributed to higher yields on our consumer automotive loan portfolio. Commensurate with this shift in origination mix, we continue to maintain disciplined underwriting within our new and used consumer automotive loan originations. The carrying value of our nonprime consumer automotive loans before allowance for loan losses was $8.8 billion, or approximately 11.3%, of our total consumer automotive loans at December 31, 2021, as compared to $8.6 billion, or approximately 11.7% of our total consumer automotive loans at December 31, 2020.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents retail loan originations by credit tier and product type.
(a)Represents Ally’s internal credit score, incorporating numerous borrower and structure attributes including: severity and aging of delinquency; number of credit inquiries; LTV ratio; and payment-to-income ratio. We periodically update our underwriting scorecard, which can have an impact on our credit tier scoring.
The following table presents the percentage of total retail loan originations, in dollars, by the loan term in months.
Retail originations with a term of 76 months or more represented 19% of total retail originations for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 17% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and 15% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Substantially all of the loans originated with a term of 76 months or more during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, were considered to be prime and in credit tiers S, A, or B. We define prime consumer automotive loans primarily as those loans with a FICO® Score at origination of 620 or greater.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents the percentage of total outstanding retail loans by origination year.
The following tables present the total retail loan and operating lease origination dollars and percentage mix by product type and by channel.
(a)Includes CSG originations of $4.7 billion, $3.8 billion, and $4.0 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively.
Total consumer automotive loan and operating lease originations increased $11.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily driven by higher consumer demand and higher financed transaction amounts, as well as increased application flow and decisioning speeds. Additionally, originations for the year ended December 31, 2020, were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic that temporarily shut down or restricted operations at automotive dealers. These restrictions, along with the industry-wide halt of new vehicle production, drove a significant decrease in industry automotive light vehicle sales.
We have included origination metrics by loan term and FICO® Score within this MD&A. However, we employ our own risk evaluation, including proprietary risk models, in evaluating credit risk, as described in the section above titled Acquisition and Underwriting.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents the percentage of retail loan and operating lease originations, in dollars, by FICO® Score and product type.
(a)Unscored are primarily CSG contracts with business entities that have no FICO® Score.
Originations with a FICO® Score of less than 620 (considered nonprime) represented 9% of total consumer loan and operating lease originations for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 10% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and 11% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Consumer loans and operating leases with FICO® Scores of less than 540 composed 1% of total originations for the year ended December 31, 2021. Nonprime applications are subject to more stringent underwriting criteria (for example, minimum payment-to-income ratio, maximum debt-to-income ratio, and maximum amount financed), and our nonprime loan portfolio generally does not include any loans with a term of 76 months or more. For discussion of our credit-risk-management practices and performance, refer to the section titled Risk Management.
Manufacturer Marketing Incentives
Automotive manufacturers may elect to sponsor incentive programs on retail contracts and operating leases by subsidizing finance rates below market rates. These marketing incentives are also referred to as rate support or subvention. When an automotive manufacturer subsidizes the finance rate, we are compensated at contract inception for the present value of the difference between the manufacturer-supported customer rate and our standard rate. For a retail contract, we defer and recognize this amount as a yield adjustment over the life of the contract. For an operating lease contract, this payment reduces our cost basis in the underlying operating lease asset.
Automotive manufacturers may also elect to sponsor incentives, referred to as residual support, on operating leases. When an automotive manufacturer provides residual support, we receive payment at contract inception that increases the contractual operating lease residual value resulting in a lower operating lease payment from the customer. The payment received from the automotive manufacturer reduces our cost basis in the underlying operating lease asset. Other operating lease incentive programs sponsored by automotive manufacturers may be made at contract inception indirectly through dealers, which also reduces our cost basis in the underlying operating lease asset.
Under what the automotive finance industry refers to as “pull-ahead programs,” consumers may be encouraged by the manufacturer to terminate operating leases early in conjunction with the acquisition of a new vehicle. As part of these programs, we may waive all or a portion of the customer’s remaining payment obligation. Under most programs, the automotive manufacturer compensates us for a portion of the foregone revenue from the waived payments. This compensation may be partially offset to the extent that our remarketing sales proceeds are higher than otherwise would be realized if the vehicle had been remarketed upon contract maturity.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Servicing
We have historically serviced all retail contracts and operating leases we originated. However, our expansion into direct-to-consumer lending and other relationships have resulted in the employment of third-party servicers for a small portion of the portfolio. On occasion, we have sold a portion of the retail contracts we originated through whole-loan sales and securitizations, but generally retained the right to service and earn a servicing fee for our servicing functions.
Servicing activities consist largely of collecting and processing customer payments, responding to customer concerns and inquiries, processing customer requests (including those for payoff quotes, total-loss handling, and payment modifications), maintaining a perfected security interest in the financed vehicle, engaging in collections activity, and disposing of off-lease and repossessed vehicles. Servicing activities are generally consistent across our Automotive Finance operations; however, certain practices may be influenced by state laws.
Our customers have the option to receive monthly billing statements and remit payment by mail or through electronic fund transfers, or to establish online web-based account administration through Ally Auto Online Services. Customer payments are processed by regional third-party processing centers that electronically transfer payment information to customers’ accounts.
Collections activity includes initiating contact with customers who fail to comply with the terms of the retail contract or operating lease agreement by sending reminder notices or contacting customers via various channels when an account becomes 3 to 7 days past due. The type of collection treatment and level of intensity increases as the account becomes more delinquent. The nature and timing of these activities depend on the repayment risk of the account.
During the collections process, we may offer a payment extension to a customer experiencing temporary financial difficulty. A payment extension enables the customer to delay monthly payments for 30, 60, or 90 days. Extensions granted to a customer typically do not exceed 90 days in the aggregate during any 12-month period or 180 days in aggregate over the life of the contract. During the extension period, finance charges continue to accrue. If the customer’s financial difficulty is not temporary but we believe the customer is willing and able to repay their loan at a lower payment amount, we may offer to modify the remaining obligation, extending the term and lowering the scheduled monthly payment. In those cases, the outstanding balance generally remains unchanged. The use of extensions and modifications helps us mitigate financial loss. Extensions may assist in cases where we believe the customer will recover from short-term financial difficulty and resume regularly scheduled payments. Modifications may also be utilized in cases where we believe customers can fulfill the obligation with lower payments over a longer period. Before offering an extension or modification, we evaluate and take into account the capacity of the customer to meet the revised payment terms. Generally, we believe extensions that fall within our policy guidelines to represent more than an insignificant delay in payment, and therefore, they are not considered a TDR. Although the granting of an extension could delay the eventual charge-off of an account, typically we are able to repossess and sell the related collateral, thereby mitigating the loss. At December 31, 2021, 18.8% of the total amount outstanding in the servicing portfolio had been granted an extension or was rewritten, compared to 30.9% at December 31, 2020. This decrease was largely due to the impacts caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and our related relief-programs to support our customers during the year ended December 31, 2020. These programs have since been terminated.
Subject to legal considerations, we generally begin repossession activity once an account is at least 90 days past due. Repossession may occur earlier if we determine the customer is unwilling to pay, the vehicle is in danger of being damaged or hidden, or the customer voluntarily surrenders the vehicle. Approved third-party repossession vendors handle the repossession activity. Generally, after repossession, the customer is given a period of time to redeem the vehicle or reinstate the contract by paying off the account or bringing the account current, respectively. If the vehicle is not redeemed or the contract is not reinstated, the vehicle is sold at auction. Generally, the proceeds do not cover the unpaid balance, including unpaid earned finance charges and allowable expenses, and the resulting deficiency is charged-off. Asset recovery centers pursue collections on accounts that have been charged-off, including those accounts where the vehicle was repossessed, and skip accounts where the vehicle cannot be located.
Our total consumer automotive serviced portfolio, as well as our consumer automotive on-balance-sheet serviced portfolio, was $84.8 billion and $80.2 billion at December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Remarketing and Sales of Leased Vehicles
When we acquire an operating lease, we assume ownership of the vehicle from the dealer. Neither the consumer nor the dealer is responsible for the value of the vehicle at the time of lease termination. When vehicles are not purchased by customers or the receiving dealer at scheduled lease termination, the vehicle is returned to us for remarketing. We generally bear the risk of loss to the extent the value of a leased vehicle upon remarketing is below the expected residual value. Conversely, we may recognize a remarketing gain when the proceeds from a returned vehicle are greater than the expected residual value. Our ability to efficiently process and effectively market off-lease vehicles affects the disposal costs and the proceeds realized from vehicle sales. Our methods of vehicle sales at lease termination primarily include the following:
•Sale to dealer - After the lessee declines an option to purchase the off-lease vehicle, the dealer who accepts it has the opportunity to purchase it directly from us at a price we define.
•Internet auctions - Once the lessee and the dealer decline to purchase the off-lease vehicle, we offer it to dealers and other third parties through our proprietary internet site (SmartAuction). Through SmartAuction, we seek to maximize the net sales proceeds from an off-lease vehicle by reducing the time between vehicle return and ultimate disposition, reducing holding costs, and broadening the number of prospective buyers. We use SmartAuction for our own vehicles and make it available for third-party use.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
We earn a service fee for every third-party vehicle sold through SmartAuction, which includes the cost of ClearGuard coverage, our protection product designed to assist in minimizing the risk to dealers of arbitration claims for eligible vehicles. In 2021, approximately 261,000 vehicles were sold through SmartAuction, as compared to approximately 258,000 vehicles in 2020.
•Physical auctions - We dispose of an off-lease vehicle not purchased at termination by the lessee or dealer or sold on SmartAuction through traditional third-party, physical auctions. We are responsible for handling decisions at the auction including arranging for inspections, authorizing repairs and reconditioning, and determining whether bids received at auction should be accepted.
We employ an internal team, including statisticians, to manage our analysis of projected used vehicle values and residual risk. This team aids in the pricing of new operating leases, managing the disposal process including vehicle concentration risk, geographic optimization of vehicles to maximize gains, disposal platform (internet vs. physical), and evaluating our residual risk on a real-time basis. This team tracks market movements of used vehicles using data down to the VIN level including trim and options, vehicle age, mileage, and seasonality factors that we feel are more relevant than other published indices (for example, Manheim, NADA). This analysis includes vehicles sold on our SmartAuction platform, as well as vehicles sold through Manheim, ADESA, and over 200 independent physical auction sites. We believe this analysis gives us a competitive advantage over our peers.
Commercial Automotive Financing
Automotive Wholesale Dealer Financing
One of the most important aspects of our dealer relationships is providing wholesale floorplan financing for new- and used-vehicle inventories at dealerships. Wholesale floorplan financing, including syndicated loan arrangements, represents the largest portion of our commercial automotive financing business and is the primary source of funding for dealers’ purchases of new and used vehicles.
Wholesale floorplan financing is generally extended in the form of lines of credit to individual dealers. These lines of credit are secured by the vehicles financed and all other vehicle inventory, which provide strong collateral protection in the event of dealership default. Additional collateral (for example, blanket lien over all dealership assets) or other credit enhancements (for example, personal guarantees from dealership owners) are generally obtained to further mitigate credit risk. Furthermore, in some cases, we may benefit from situations where an automotive manufacturer repurchases vehicles. These repurchases may serve as an additional layer of protection in the event of repossession of dealership new-vehicle inventory or dealership franchise termination. The amount we advance to dealers for a new vehicle is equal to 100% of the manufacturer’s wholesale invoice price, subject to payment curtailment schedules. The amount we advance to dealers for a used vehicle is typically 90-100% of the dealer’s cost of acquiring it. Interest on wholesale floorplan financing is generally payable monthly. The majority of wholesale floorplan financing is structured to yield interest at a floating rate indexed to LIBOR or the Prime Rate. We have established an enterprise-wide LIBOR transition program to manage the discontinuance of LIBOR. Refer to the section titled LIBOR Transition within the MD&A for further details. The rate for a particular dealer is based on, among other things, competitive factors, the size of the account, and the dealer’s creditworthiness. Additionally, under our Ally Dealer Rewards Program, dealers benefit in certain circumstances from wholesale-floorplan-financing incentives, which we pay and account for as a reduction to interest income in the period they are earned.
Under our wholesale-floorplan-financing agreement, a dealership is generally required to pay the principal amount financed for a vehicle within a specified number of days following the dealership’s sale or lease of the vehicle. The agreement also affords us the right to demand payment of all amounts owed under the wholesale credit line at any time. We, however, generally make this demand only if we terminate the credit line, the dealer defaults, or a risk-based reason exists to do so.
Commercial Wholesale Financing Volume
The following table presents the percentage of average balance of our commercial wholesale floorplan finance receivables, in dollars, by product type and by channel.
Average commercial wholesale financing receivables outstanding decreased $8.1 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower dealer inventory levels, driven by strong consumer demand for vehicles that outpaced lower automotive production levels due to the global semiconductor chip shortage. The decline was also impacted by a reduction in the number of GM dealer relationships due to the competitive environment across the automotive lending market. Dealer inventory levels are dependent on a number of factors, including manufacturer production schedules and vehicle mix, sales incentives, and industry sales.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Manufacturer production and corresponding dealer stock levels, as well as dealer penetration levels, may continue to influence our future wholesale balances. While the severity and duration of these supply chain disruptions is not currently clear, we anticipate this will continue to limit the growth in commercial wholesale finance receivables throughout 2022 commensurate with lower dealer inventory levels.
Other Commercial Automotive Financing
We also provide other forms of commercial financing for the automotive industry including automotive dealer term and revolving loans and automotive fleet financing. Automotive dealer term and revolving loans are loans that we make to dealers to finance other aspects of the dealership business, including acquisitions. These loans are usually secured by real estate or other dealership assets and are typically personally guaranteed by the individual owners of the dealership. Additionally, these loans generally include cross-collateral and cross-default provisions. Automotive fleet financing credit lines may be obtained by dealers, their affiliates, and other independent companies that are used to purchase vehicles, which they lease or rent to others. The average balances of other commercial automotive loans decreased $467 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, to an average of $5.3 billion.
Servicing and Monitoring
We service all of the wholesale credit lines in our portfolio and the associated wholesale automotive finance receivables. A statement setting forth billing and account information is distributed on a monthly basis to each dealer. Interest and other nonprincipal charges are billed in arrears and are required to be paid immediately upon receipt of the monthly billing statement. Generally, dealers remit payments to us through ACH transactions initiated by the dealer through a secure web application.
We manage risk related to wholesale floorplan financing by assessing dealership borrowers using a proprietary model based on various factors, including their capital sufficiency, operating performance, and credit and payment history. This model assigns dealership borrowers a risk rating that affects the amount of the line of credit and the ongoing risk management of the account. We monitor the level of borrowing under each dealer’s credit line daily. We may adjust the dealer’s credit line if warranted, based on the dealership’s vehicle sales rate, and temporarily suspend the granting of additional credit, or take other actions following evaluation and analysis of the dealer’s financial condition.
We periodically inspect and verify the existence of dealer vehicle inventories. The timing of these collateral audits varies, and no advance notice is given to the dealer. Among other things, audits are intended to assess dealer compliance with the financing agreement and confirm the status of our collateral.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Insurance
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the operating results of our Insurance operations. The amounts presented are before the elimination of balances and transactions with our other reportable segments.
(a)Includes interest expense of $58 million, $80 million, and $79 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
(b)Includes net unrealized losses on equity securities of $10 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and net unrealized gains on equity securities of $31 million and $88 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 respectively.
(c)Management uses a combined ratio as a primary measure of underwriting profitability. Underwriting profitability is indicated by a combined ratio under 100% and is calculated as the sum of all incurred losses and expenses (excluding interest and income tax expense) divided by the total of premiums and service revenues earned and other income.
2021 Compared to 2020
Our Insurance operations earned income from continuing operations before income tax expense of $343 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $284 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by a $102 million decrease in insurance losses and loss adjustment expenses primarily from lower weather-related losses within our P&C business, partially offset by higher acquisition and underwriting expenses.
Insurance premiums and service revenue earned was $1.1 billion for both the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. The activity for the year ended December 31, 2021, included $63 million in higher earned revenue from our F&I products, as revenue is earned over the life of the contracts on a basis proportionate to the anticipated loss pattern. The increase was partially offset by $49 million in lower earned premiums driven by lower dealer vehicle inventory levels.
Other gain on investments, net was $216 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $220 million for the same period during 2020. The decrease was driven by net unrealized losses on equity securities of $10 million during 2021 as compared to net unrealized gains of $31 million during 2020. This decrease was partially offset by higher realized gains of $37 million from the investment securities portfolio.
Insurance losses and loss adjustment expenses totaled $261 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $363 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by lower weather-related losses within our P&C business.
Total acquisition and underwriting expense increased $71 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in insurance commissions, commensurate with higher earned premiums from our F&I products.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Lower weather losses from our P&C business drove a decrease in the combined ratio to 93.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 98.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020. In April 2021, we renewed our annual excess of loss reinsurance agreement and continue to utilize this coverage for our vehicle inventory insurance to manage our risk of weather-related loss.
Premium and Service Revenue Written
The following table summarizes premium and service revenue written by product, net of premiums ceded to reinsurers. VSC and GAP revenue are earned over the life of the service contract on a basis proportionate to the anticipated loss pattern. Refer to Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of this revenue stream.
(a)Other products include VMCs, ClearGuard, and other ancillary products.
(b)P&C insurance include vehicle inventory insurance and dealer ancillary products.
Insurance premiums and service revenue written was $1.2 billion for both the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. F&I premiums written on VSCs declined for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to lower volume partially offset by higher rates. F&I premiums written on GAP and other F&I products increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to both increased volume and higher rates. P&C premiums written declined during the year ended December 31, 2021, driven by lower dealer vehicle inventory levels resulting from lower manufacturer production levels, which have been impacted by supply chain disruptions including shortages of semiconductor chips. This decline in P&C premiums written was partially offset by lower dealer inventory reinsurance costs. While the severity and duration of these supply chain disruptions is not currently clear, we anticipate that written premium levels will continue to be impacted by trends related to automotive manufacturer vehicle production and dealer inventory levels.
Cash and Investments
A significant aspect of our Insurance operations is the investment of proceeds from premiums and other revenue sources. We use these investments to satisfy our obligations related to future claims at the time these claims are settled. Our Insurance operations have an Investment Committee, which develops guidelines and strategies for these investments. The guidelines established by this committee reflect our risk appetite, liquidity requirements, regulatory requirements, and rating agency considerations, among other factors.
The following table summarizes the composition of our Insurance operations cash and investment portfolio at fair value.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
In addition to these cash and investment securities, the Insurance segment has an interest-bearing intercompany arrangement with the Corporate and Other segment, callable on demand. The intercompany loan balance due to Insurance was $923 million and $830 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively, and interest income of $14 million and $1 million of interest income was recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Mortgage Finance
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the activities of our Mortgage Finance operations. The amounts presented are before the elimination of balances and transactions with our reportable segments.
n/m = not meaningful
2021 Compared to 2020
Our Mortgage Finance operations earned income from continuing operations before income tax expense of $32 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $53 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021, was driven by an increase in noninterest expense and lower net gains on the sale of mortgage loans, partially offset by higher net financing revenue and other interest income and a decrease in the provision for credit losses.
Net financing revenue and other interest income was $124 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $118 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net financing revenue and other interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to lower prepayment activity, driven by a higher interest rate environment, which resulted in lower premium amortization. Premium amortization was $92 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $123 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This benefit was partially offset by the impact of lower average balances and net interest rate margin in 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we purchased $3.9 billion of mortgage loans that were originated by third parties, compared to $4.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. We originated $7.0 billion of mortgage loans held-for-investment during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.0 billion, during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gain on sale of mortgage loans, net, was $87 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $93 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was attributable to margin normalization for direct-to-consumer mortgage originations and the subsequent sale of these loans to our fulfillment provider. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we originated $3.4 billion of loans held-for-sale, compared to $2.7 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The provision for credit losses decreased $8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in provision for credit losses was primarily driven by a reserve increase during the year ended December 31, 2020, associated with deterioration in the macroeconomic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, compared to a reserve decline during the year ended December 31, 2021, as the macroeconomic environment continued to recover. Refer to the Risk Management section of this MD&A for further discussion on our provision for credit losses.
Total noninterest expense was $187 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $160 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by continued growth in direct-to-consumer mortgage originations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents the total UPB of purchases and originations of consumer mortgages held for investment, by FICO® Score at the time of acquisition.
The following table presents the net UPB, net UPB as a percentage of total, WAC, premium net of discounts, LTV, and FICO® Scores for the products in our Mortgage Finance held-for-investment loan portfolio.
(a)Represents UPB, net of charge-offs.
(b)Updated home values were derived using a combination of appraisals, broker price opinions, automated valuation models, and metropolitan statistical area level house price indices.
(c)Updated to reflect changes in credit score since loan origination.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Corporate Finance
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the activities of our Corporate Finance operations. The amounts presented are before the elimination of balances and transactions with our reportable segments.
n/m = not meaningful
2021 Compared to 2020
Our Corporate Finance operations earned income from continuing operations before income tax expense of $282 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to income earned of $88 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to higher other revenue driven by significant investment gains and strong fee income generation as well as a lower provision for credit losses.
Net financing revenue and other interest income was $308 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $299 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to higher average assets from continued growth in the portfolio in 2021.
Other revenue increased $83 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by $63 million in investment income as compared to investment losses of $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Investment income included both realized gains from sales of certain nonmarketable equity securities and unrealized gains on investments carried at fair market value as well as a $16 million gain on the sale of an investment in a non performing healthcare exposure that was acquired as part of a loan restructure in a prior period. The increase was also driven by higher fee income for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020.
The provision for credit losses decreased $111 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in provision for credit losses was driven by a reserve increase during the year ended December 31, 2020, associated with deterioration in the macroeconomic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, compared to a partial release of this reserve during 2021, as the macroeconomic environment continued to recover. The decrease in provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2021, was partially offset by increased provision driven by asset growth. Refer to the Risk Management section of this MD&A for further discussion on our provision for credit losses.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Credit Portfolio
The following table presents loans held for sale, the amortized cost of finance receivables and loans outstanding, unfunded commitments to lend, and total serviced loans of our Corporate Finance operations.
(a)Includes unused revolving credit line commitments for loans held for sale and finance receivables and loans, signed commitment letters, and standby letter of credit facilities, which are issued on behalf of clients and may contingently require us to make payments to a third-party beneficiary in the event of a draw by the beneficiary thereunder. As many of these commitments are subject to borrowing base agreements and other restrictive covenants or may expire without being fully drawn, the stated amounts of these unfunded commitments are not necessarily indicative of future cash requirements.
The following table presents the percentage of total finance receivables and loans of our Corporate Finance operations by industry concentration. The finance receivables and loans are reported at amortized cost.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Corporate and Other
The following table summarizes the activities of Corporate and Other, which primarily consist of centralized corporate treasury activities such as management of the cash and corporate investment securities and loan portfolios, short- and long-term debt, retail and brokered deposit liabilities, derivative instruments, original issue discount, and the residual impacts of our corporate FTP and treasury ALM activities. Corporate and Other also includes certain equity investments, which primarily consist of FHLB and FRB stock as well as other strategic investments, the management of our legacy mortgage portfolio, which primarily consists of loans originated prior to January 1, 2009, the activity related to Ally Invest, Ally Lending, Ally Credit Card, CRA loans and related investments, and reclassifications and eliminations between the reportable operating segments.
n/m = not meaningful
(a)Primarily related to impacts associated with hedging activities within our automotive loan portfolio, consumer unsecured lending activity, and financing revenue from our legacy mortgage portfolio.
(b)Amortization is included as interest on long-term debt in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
(c)Includes the residual impacts of our FTP methodology and impacts of hedging activities of certain debt obligations.
(d)Includes reductions of $1.1 billion, $986 million, and $899 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, related to the allocation of corporate overhead expenses to other segments. The receiving segments record their allocation of corporate overhead expense within other operating expense.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents the scheduled remaining amortization of the original issue discount at December 31, 2021.
(a)The maximum annual scheduled amortization for any individual year is $141 million in 2030.
(b)The amortization is included as interest on long-term debt in the Consolidated Statement of Income.
2021 Compared to 2020
Corporate and Other incurred a loss from continuing operations before income tax expense of $186 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a loss of $296 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in loss was primarily driven by a decrease in total interest expense resulting from a lower interest rate environment, as well as a continued shift to lower-cost deposit funding. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in noninterest expense, a decrease in total financing revenue, and an increase in the provision for credit losses during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Total financing revenue and other interest income was $520 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $624 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the impacts of a lower interest rate environment on the investment securities portfolio and on hedging activities.
Interest expense decreased $611 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by market and industry dynamics that drove a decrease in our deposit rates and other funding costs, and our continued shift to more cost-efficient deposit funding, as well as the residual impacts of our FTP methodology.
Total other revenue decreased $77 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by lower upwards adjustments related to equity securities without a readily determinable fair value and a reduction in other gains on investments, net. Additionally, the decrease was impacted by $131 million of losses incurred for the full redemption of the Series 2 TRUPs during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a $99 million loss on the early repayment of 13 FHLB advances we elected to prepay and early terminate during 2020. The decrease was partially offset by favorable hedging activity related to equity derivatives during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The provision for credit losses increased $104 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the increase in provision for credit losses was primarily driven by the establishment of reserves upon the acquisition of Fair Square. Refer to the Risk Management section of this MD&A for further discussion on our provision for credit losses, and Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on our acquisition of Fair Square.
Noninterest expense increased $216 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was driven by increased compensation and benefits expense. We also incurred increased expenses to support the growth of our consumer product suite, as we continue to make investments in our technology and cybersecurity platforms to enhance the customer experience and expand our digital capabilities and portfolio of products, as well as $57 million of contributions to the Ally Charitable Foundation during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in noninterest expense was partially offset by a goodwill impairment charge of $50 million related to Ally Invest and $35 million of contributions to the Ally Charitable Foundation for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total assets were $43.3 billion as of December 31, 2021, compared to $47.2 billion as of December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily the result of a reduction in our total cash and cash equivalents portfolio. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, the amortized cost of the legacy mortgage portfolio was $368 million, compared to $495 million at December 31, 2020, which also contributed to the decrease.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Cash and Securities
The following table summarizes the composition of the cash and securities portfolio at fair value for Corporate and Other.
Ally Invest
Ally Invest is our digital brokerage and wealth management offering, which enables us to complement our competitive deposit products with low-cost and commission-free investing. The following table presents trading days and average customer trades per day, the number of funded accounts, total net customer assets, and total customer cash balances as of the end of each of the last five quarters.
(a)Represents the number of days the New York Stock Exchange and other U.S. stock exchange markets are open for trading. A half day represents a day when the U.S. markets close early.
(b)Represents activity across both the brokerage and robo portfolios.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, higher customer engagement drove higher trade activity and funded accounts. Total funded accounts increased 11% from the fourth quarter of 2020. The fourth quarter of 2021 included a 6,000 account escheatment event reducing total funded accounts during the period. Average customer trades per day decreased 29% from the fourth quarter of 2020, driven primarily by changes in market volatility as overall trade activity approached pre-pandemic levels. Additionally, net customer assets increased 24% from the fourth quarter of 2020, as a result of equity market appreciation and increased customer account openings.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Ally Lending
Ally Lending is our unsecured personal-lending offering, which currently serves medical, retail, and home improvement service providers by enabling promotional and fixed rate installment-loan products through a digital application process at point-of-sale. The following table presents consumer unsecured originations by FICO® Score.
(a)Includes acquired loans, for which we have elected the fair value option measurement.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, personal lending originations increased $738 million to $1.2 billion, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We continue to expand our relationships across all verticals, including the home improvement, retail, and medical segments.
The carrying value of our personal lending portfolio was $1.0 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $407 million at December 31, 2020, while the associated yield was 13.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 15.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Risk Management
Managing the risk/reward trade-off is a fundamental component of operating our businesses, and all employees are responsible for managing risk. We use multiple layers of defense to identify, monitor, and manage current and emerging risks.
•Business lines - Responsible for owning and managing all of the risks that emanate from their risk-taking activities, including business units and support functions.
•Independent risk management - Operates independent of the business lines and is responsible for establishing and maintaining our risk-management framework and promulgating it enterprise-wide. Independent risk management also provides an objective, critical assessment of risks and-through oversight, effective challenge, and other means-evaluates whether Ally remains aligned with its risk appetite.
•Internal audit - Provides its own independent assessments regarding the quality of our loan portfolios as well as the effectiveness of our risk management, internal controls, and governance. Internal audit includes Audit Services and the Loan Review Group.
Our risk-management framework is overseen by the RC of our Board. The RC sets the risk appetite across our company while risk-oriented management committees, the executive leadership team, and our associates identify and monitor current and emerging risks and manage those risks within our risk appetite. Our primary types of risks include the following:
•Credit risk - The risk of loss arising from an obligor not meeting its contractual obligations to us.
•Insurance/underwriting risk - The risk of loss or of adverse change in the value of insurance liabilities, due to inadequate pricing and provisioning assumptions.
•Liquidity risk - The risk that our financial condition or overall safety and soundness is adversely affected by the actual or perceived inability to liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding or to easily unwind or offset specific exposures without significantly lowering market prices because of inadequate market depth or market disruptions. Refer to discussion in the section titled Liquidity Management, Funding, and Regulatory Capital within this MD&A.
•Market risk - The risk that movements in market variables such as benchmark interest rates, investors’ required risk premium, foreign-exchange rates, equity prices, and used car prices may adversely affect our earnings, capital, or economic value. Market risk includes interest rate risk, investment risk, and lease residual risk.
•Business/strategic risk - The risk resulting from the pursuit of business plans that turn out to be unsuccessful due to a variety of factors.
•Reputation risk - The risk arising from negative public opinion on our business practices, whether true or not, that could cause a decline in the customer base, litigation, or revenue reductions.
•Operational risk - Operational risk is the risk of loss or harm arising from inadequate or failed processes or systems, human factors, or external events and is inherent in all of our risk-generating activities.
•Information technology/cybersecurity risk - The risk resulting from the failure of, or insufficiency in, information technology (for example, a system outage) or intentional or accidental unauthorized access, sharing, removal, tampering, or disposal of company and customer data or records (for example, cybersecurity).
•Compliance risk - The risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to reputation resulting from failure to comply with laws, regulations, rules, other regulatory requirements, or codes of conduct and other standards of self-regulatory organizations applicable to the banking organization (applicable rules and standards).
•Conduct risk - The risk of customer harm, employee harm, reputational damage, regulatory sanction, or financial loss resulting from the behavior of our employees and contractors toward customers, counterparties, other employees and contractors, or the markets in which we operate.
Our risk-governance structure starts within each business line, including committees established to oversee risk in their respective areas. The business lines are responsible for their risk-based performance and compliance with risk-management policies and applicable law. The independent risk-management function is accountable for independently identifying, monitoring, measuring, and reporting on our various risks and for designing an effective risk-management framework and structure. The independent risk-management function is also responsible for developing, maintaining, and implementing enterprise risk-management. In addition, the ERMC is responsible for supporting the Chief Risk Officer’s oversight of senior management’s responsibility to execute on our strategy within our risk appetite set by the RC, and the Chief Risk Officer’s implementation of our independent risk-management program. The Chief Risk Officer reports to the RC, as well as administratively to the Chief Executive Officer.
All business lines are subject to full and unrestricted audits by Audit Services. The Chief Audit Executive reports to the AC, as well as administratively to the Chief Executive Officer, and is primarily responsible for assisting the AC in fulfilling its governance and oversight
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
responsibilities. Audit Services is granted free and unrestricted access to any and all of our records, physical properties, technologies, management, and employees.
In addition, our Loan Review Group provides an independent assessment of the quality of our extensions of credit and credit-risk-management practices, and all business lines that create or influence credit risk are subject to full and unrestricted reviews by the Loan Review Group. This group is also granted free and unrestricted access to any and all of our records, physical properties, technologies, management and employees, and reports directly to the RC.
In addition to the primary risks that we manage, climate-related risk has been identified as an emerging risk. Climate-related risk refers to the risk of loss or change in business activities arising from climate change and represents a transverse risk that could impact other risks within our risk-management framework, such as credit risk from negatively impacted borrowers, reputation risk from increased stakeholder concerns, and operational risk from physical climate risks. Refer to section titled Climate-Related Risk within this section for more information.
Loan and Operating Lease Exposure
The following table summarizes the exposures from our loan and operating-lease activities.
(a)Includes $368 million and $495 million of consumer mortgage loans in our legacy mortgage portfolio at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
(b)Represents the current balance of conforming mortgages originated directly to the held-for-sale portfolio.
The risks inherent in our loan and operating lease exposures are largely driven by changes in the overall economy, used vehicle and housing prices, unemployment levels, real personal income, and their impact on our borrowers. The potential financial statement impact of these exposures varies depending on the accounting classification and future expected disposition strategy. We retain most of our consumer automotive loans as they complement our core business model, but we do sell loans from time to time on an opportunistic basis. We ultimately manage the associated risks based on the underlying economics of the exposure. Our operating lease residual risk may be more volatile than credit risk in stressed macroeconomic scenarios. While all operating leases are exposed to potential reductions in used vehicle values, only loans where we take possession of the vehicle are affected by potential reductions in used vehicle values.
•Finance receivables and loans - Loans that we have the intent and ability to hold for the foreseeable future or until maturity, or loans associated with an on-balance-sheet securitization classified as a secured borrowing. Finance receivables and loans are reported at their amortized cost, which includes the principal amount outstanding, net of unamortized deferred fees and costs on originated loans, unamortized premiums and discounts on purchased loans, unamortized basis adjustments arising from the designation of finance receivables and loans as the hedged item in qualifying fair value hedge relationships, and cumulative principal charge-offs. We refer to the amortized cost basis less the allowance for loan losses as the net carrying value in finance receivables and loans. We manage the economic risks of these exposures, including credit risk, by adjusting underwriting standards and risk limits, augmenting our servicing and collection activities (including loan modifications and restructurings), and optimizing our product and geographic concentrations. Additionally, we may elect to account for certain loans at fair value. Changes in the fair value of these loans are recognized in a valuation allowance separate from the allowance for loan losses and are reflected in current period earnings. We may use market-based instruments, such as derivatives, to hedge changes in the fair value of these loans.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
•Loans held-for-sale - Loans that we do not have the intent and ability to hold for the foreseeable future or until maturity. These loans are recorded on our balance sheet at the lower of their net carrying value or fair market value and are evaluated by portfolio and product type. We manage the economic risks of these exposures, including market and credit risks, in various ways including the use of market-based instruments, such as derivatives.
•Off-balance-sheet securitized loans - Loans that we transfer off-balance sheet to nonconsolidated VIEs. Our exposure is primarily limited to customary representation, warranty, and covenant provisions. Similar to finance receivables and loans, we manage the economic risks of these exposures through activities including servicing and collections.
•Whole-loan sales - Loans that we transfer off-balance sheet to third-party investors. Our exposure is primarily limited to customary representation, warranty and covenant provisions. Similar to finance receivables and loans, we manage the economic risks of these exposures through activities including servicing and collections.
•Operating lease assets - The net book value of the automotive assets we lease includes the expected residual values upon remarketing the vehicles at the end of the lease and is reported net of accumulated depreciation. We are exposed to fluctuations in the expected residual value upon remarketing the vehicle at the end of the lease, and accordingly at contract inception, we determine pricing based on the projected residual value of the leased vehicle. This evaluation is primarily based on a proprietary model, which includes variables such as age, expected mileage, seasonality, segment factors, vehicle type, economic indicators, production cycle, automotive manufacturer incentives, and shifts in used vehicle supply. This internally generated data is compared against third-party, independent data for reasonableness. Periodically, we revise the projected value of the leased vehicle at termination based on current market conditions and adjust depreciation expense appropriately over the remaining life of the contract. At termination, our actual sales proceeds from remarketing the vehicle may be higher or lower than the estimated residual value resulting in a gain or loss on remarketing recorded through depreciation expense. The balance sheet reflects both the operating lease asset as well as any associated rent receivables. The operating lease rent receivable is accrued when collection is reasonably assured and presented as a component of other assets. The operating lease asset is reviewed for impairment in accordance with applicable accounting standards.
Refer to the section titled Critical Accounting Estimates within this MD&A and Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is defined as the risk of loss arising from an obligor not meeting its contractual obligations to us. Credit risk includes consumer credit risk, commercial credit risk, and counterparty credit risk.
Credit risk is a major source of potential economic loss to us. Credit risk is monitored by the RC, executive leadership team, and our associates. Together, they oversee credit decisioning, account servicing activities, and credit-risk-management processes, and manage credit risk exposures within our risk appetite. In addition, our Loan Review Group provides an independent assessment of the quality of our credit portfolios and credit-risk-management practices and reports its findings to the RC on a regular basis.
To mitigate risk, we have implemented specific policies and practices across business lines, utilizing both qualitative and quantitative analyses. This reflects our commitment to maintaining an independent and ongoing assessment of credit risk and credit quality. Our policies require an objective and timely assessment of the overall quality of the consumer and commercial loan and operating lease portfolios. This includes the identification of relevant trends that affect the collectability of the portfolios, segments of the portfolios that are potential problem areas, loans and operating leases with potential credit weaknesses, and the assessment of the adequacy of internal credit risk policies and procedures. Our consumer and commercial loan and operating lease portfolios are subject to regular stress tests that are based on economic scenarios developed and distributed by the FRB to assess how the portfolios may perform in a severe economic downturn. In addition, we establish and maintain underwriting policies and limits across our portfolios and higher risk segments (for example, nonprime) based on our risk appetite.
Another important aspect to managing credit risk involves the need to carefully monitor and manage the performance and pricing of our loan products with the aim of generating appropriate risk-adjusted returns. When considering pricing, various granular risk-based factors are considered such as expected loss rates, loss volatility, anticipated operating costs, and targeted returns on equity. We carefully monitor credit losses and trends in credit losses relative to expected credit losses at contract inception. We closely monitor our loan performance and profitability in light of forecasted economic conditions and manage credit risk and expectations of losses in the portfolio.
We manage credit risk based on the risk profile of the borrower, the source of repayment, the underlying collateral, and current market conditions. We monitor the credit risk profile of individual borrowers, various segmentations (for example, geographic region, product type, industry segment), as well as the aggregate portfolio. We perform quarterly analyses of the consumer automotive, consumer mortgage, consumer other, and commercial portfolios to assess the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses based on historical and anticipated trends. Refer to Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Additionally, we utilize numerous collection strategies to mitigate loss and provide ongoing support to customers in financial distress. For consumer automotive loans, we work with customers when they become delinquent on their monthly payment. In lieu of repossessing their vehicle, we may offer several types of assistance to aid our customers based on their willingness and ability to repay their loan. Loss mitigation may include payment extensions and rewrites of the loan terms. For mortgage loans, as part of certain programs, we offer mortgage
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
loan modifications to qualified borrowers. These programs are in place to provide support to our mortgage customers in financial distress, including maturity extensions, delinquent interest capitalization, changes to contractual interest rates, and principal forgiveness.
Furthermore, we manage our credit exposure to financial counterparties based on the risk profile of the counterparty. Within our policies we have established standards and requirements for managing counterparty risk exposures in a safe and sound manner. Counterparty credit risk is derived from multiple exposure types including derivatives, securities trading, securities financing transactions, and certain cash balances. For more information on derivative counterparty credit risk, refer to Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We employ an internal team of economists to enhance our planning and forecasting capabilities. This team conducts industry and market research, monitors economic risks, and helps support various forms of scenario planning. This group closely monitors macroeconomic trends given the nature of our business and the potential impacts on our exposure to credit risk. During 2021, the U.S. economy has continued to recover from shutdowns that resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic. After peaking at 14.7%, as adjusted, in April 2020, the unemployment rate declined to 3.9% as of December 31, 2021. As a result of the economic disruption from COVID-19, sales of light motor vehicles fell to an annual pace of 8.6 million, as adjusted, in April 2020, a 49-year low, before recovering to an average 15.0 million annual pace during the year ended December 31, 2021. Sales of new light motor vehicles remain below the pre-pandemic annual pace of 17.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, driving an increase in used vehicle values, as further described in the section below titled Operating Lease Vehicle Terminations and Remarketing. Additionally, used vehicle values may also be impacted by availability or changes in customer preferences, including alternative transportation methods such as public transportation, vehicle sharing, and ride hailing.
Consumer Credit Portfolio
Our consumer loan portfolio primarily consists of automotive loans, first-lien mortgages, home equity loans, personal loans, and credit card loans. Loan losses in our consumer loan portfolio are influenced by general business and economic conditions including unemployment rates, bankruptcy filings, and home and used vehicle prices. Additionally, our consumer credit exposure is significantly concentrated in automotive lending.
Credit risk management for the consumer loan portfolio begins with the initial underwriting and continues throughout a borrower’s credit life cycle. We manage consumer credit risk through our loan origination and underwriting policies and the credit approval process. We use proprietary credit-scoring models to differentiate the expected default rates of credit applicants enabling us to better evaluate credit applications for approval and to tailor the pricing and financing structure according to this assessment of credit risk. We continuously monitor and routinely update the inputs of the credit scoring models. These and other actions mitigate but do not eliminate credit risk. Ineffective evaluations of a borrower’s creditworthiness, fraud, or changes in the applicant’s financial condition after approval could negatively affect the quality of our portfolio, resulting in loan losses.
Our servicing activities are another important factor in managing consumer credit risk. Servicing activities consist of collecting and processing customer payments, responding to customer concerns and inquiries, processing customer requests (including those for payoff quotes, total-loss handling, and payment modifications), maintaining a perfected security interest in the financed vehicle, engaging in collections activity, and disposing of off-lease and repossessed vehicles. Servicing activities are generally consistent across our Automotive Finance operations; however, certain practices may be influenced by state laws.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the credit performance of the consumer loan portfolio reflected our underwriting strategy to originate a diversified portfolio of consumer automotive loan assets, including new, used, prime and nonprime finance receivables and loans, high-quality jumbo and LMI mortgage loans that are acquired through bulk loan purchases and direct-to-consumer mortgage originations, as well as point-of-sale personal lending through Ally Lending. Additionally, beginning in December 2021 with the acquisition of Fair Square, financial information related to our credit card business is included within Corporate and Other. Credit performance of the consumer loan portfolio was impacted by fiscal and monetary stimulus deployed by governmental authorities to partially mitigate the adverse effects from the COVID-19 pandemic on households and businesses. The carrying value of our nonprime consumer automotive loans before allowance for loan losses represented approximately 11.3% and 11.7% of our total consumer automotive loans at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. For information on our consumer credit risk practices and policies regarding delinquencies, nonperforming status, and charge-offs, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table includes consumer finance receivables and loans recorded at amortized cost.
(a)Includes nonaccrual TDR loans of $714 million and $745 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
(b)Loans are generally in nonaccrual status when principal or interest has been delinquent for 90 days or more, or when full collection is not expected. Refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our accounting policies for finance receivables and loans.
(c)Certain finance receivables and loans are included in fair value hedging relationships. Refer to Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(d)Includes outstanding CSG loans of $8.6 billion and $8.2 billion at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively, and RV loans of $763 million and $1.1 billion at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
(e)Excludes finance receivables of $7 million and $8 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively, for which we have elected the fair value option.
Total consumer finance receivables and loans increased $9.0 billion at December 31, 2021, compared with December 31, 2020. The increase consists of $4.6 billion of consumer automotive finance receivables and loans, $2.9 billion of consumer mortgage finance receivables and loans and $1.6 billion of consumer other finance receivables and loans. The increase was primarily due to an increase in consumer automotive finance receivables and loans, primarily related to continued momentum in our used vehicle lending, as well as an increase in consumer mortgage finance receivables and loans as a result of bulk loan purchases and direct-to-consumer origination volume, which exceeded loan pay-offs. Growth in consumer other finance receivables and loans was related to the acquisition of Fair Square, as well as Ally Lending loan originations, which outpaced portfolio runoff.
Total consumer nonperforming finance receivables and loans at December 31, 2021, decreased $182 million to $1.2 billion from December 31, 2020. The decrease in our consumer automotive loan portfolio was driven by strong credit performance, while the decrease in our consumer mortgage portfolio was driven by strong consumer payment activity due to favorable macroeconomic conditions. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in our consumer other portfolio related to the acquisition of Fair Square. Refer to Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Nonperforming consumer finance receivables and loans as a percentage of total outstanding consumer finance receivables and loans were 1.2% and 1.5% at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Total consumer TDRs outstanding at December 31, 2021, increased $239 million since December 31, 2020, to $2.2 billion. Results primarily reflect a $239 million increase in our consumer automotive loan portfolio. This increase was driven by an increase in deferrals offered through our established risk management policies and practices to customers subsequent to a COVID-19 deferral, where the loan modification in connection with other factors resulted in a TDR classification. Refer to Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Consumer automotive loans accruing and past due 30 days or more decreased $157 million to $1.7 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, which was driven by strong credit performance.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table includes consumer net charge-offs from finance receivables and loans at amortized cost and related ratios.
(a)Net charge-off ratios are calculated as net charge-offs divided by average outstanding finance receivables and loans excluding loans measured at fair value and loans held for sale during the period for each loan category.
Our net charge-offs from total consumer finance receivables and loans were $258 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $713 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net charge-offs for our consumer automotive portfolio decreased by $465 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, driven by strong payment performance, elevated recoveries, and lower loss severity as a result of elevated used vehicle values. While economic conditions have improved since the beginning of the pandemic, and we have taken a number of actions including the utilization of loan modification programs to support our customers and manage credit risk, we may incur higher net charge-offs in future periods as a result of continued economic dislocation resulting from the impacts of COVID-19.
The following table summarizes total consumer loan originations for the periods shown. Total consumer loan originations include loans classified as finance receivables and loans held-for-sale during the period.
(a)Excludes bulk loan purchases associated with our Mortgage Finance operations, and includes $3.4 billion of loans originated as held for sale for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $2.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(b)Includes acquired loans related to our Ally Lending business, for which we have elected the fair value option measurement.
(c)Excludes credit card loans which are revolving in nature.
Total consumer loan originations increased $16.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, was driven by increased consumer demand, higher financed transaction amounts, and increased application flow and decisioning speeds in the consumer automotive portfolio. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was also impacted by growth in the direct-to-consumer mortgage business driven by the lower interest rate environment in 2021. Additionally, originations for the year ended December 31, 2020, were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic that temporarily shut down or restricted operations at automotive dealers. These restrictions, along with the industry-wide halt of new vehicle production, drove a significant decrease in industry automotive light vehicle sales.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table shows the percentage of consumer automotive and consumer mortgage finance receivables and loans by state concentration based on amortized cost. Total consumer automotive loans were $78.3 billion and $73.7 billion at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. Total consumer mortgage loans were $18.0 billion and $15.1 billion at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
(a)Presentation is in descending order as a percentage of total consumer finance receivables and loans at December 31, 2021.
We monitor our consumer loan portfolio for concentration risk across the states in which we lend. The highest concentrations of consumer loans are in California and Texas, which represented an aggregate of 26.4% and 24.7% of our total outstanding consumer finance receivables and loans at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. Our consumer mortgage loan portfolio concentration within California, which is primarily composed of high-quality jumbo mortgage loans, generally aligns to the California share of jumbo mortgages nationally.
Repossessed and Foreclosed Assets
We classify an asset as repossessed or foreclosed, which is included in other assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheet, when physical possession of the collateral is taken. We dispose of the acquired collateral in a timely fashion in accordance with regulatory requirements. For more information on repossessed and foreclosed assets, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Repossessed consumer automotive loan assets in our Automotive Finance operations were $120 million and $186 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively, and foreclosed mortgage assets were $1 million and $2 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Commercial Credit Portfolio
Our commercial portfolio consists primarily of automotive loans through the extension of wholesale floorplan financing, automotive dealer term real estate loans, and automotive fleet financing, as well as other commercial loans from our Corporate Finance operations. Wholesale floorplan loans are secured by the vehicles financed (and all other vehicle inventory), which provides strong collateral protection in the event of dealership default. Additional collateral (for example, a blanket lien over all dealership assets) or other credit enhancements (for example, personal guarantees from dealership owners) are typically obtained to further mitigate credit risk. Furthermore, in some cases, we may benefit from situations where an automotive manufacturer repurchases vehicles. These repurchases may serve as an additional layer of protection in the event of repossession of new-vehicle dealership inventory or dealership franchise termination.
Within our commercial portfolio, we utilize proprietary risk rating models that are fundamental to managing credit risk exposure consistently across various types of commercial borrowers and captures critical risk factors for each borrower. The ratings are used for many areas of credit risk management, including loan origination, portfolio risk monitoring, management reporting, and loan loss reserves analyses. Therefore, the rating systems are critical to an effective and consistent credit-risk-management framework.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the credit performance of the commercial portfolio remained strong. While nonperforming finance receivables and loans increased as a result of specific exposures within our Corporate Finance operations, our net charge-offs remained low. For information on our commercial credit risk practices and policies regarding delinquencies, nonperforming status, and charge-offs, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table includes total commercial finance receivables and loans reported at amortized cost.
(a)Includes nonaccrual TDR loans of $117 million and $125 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
(b)Loans are generally in nonaccrual status when principal or interest has been delinquent for 90 days or more, or when full collection is not expected. Refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our accounting policies for finance receivables and loans.
(c)Other commercial and industrial primarily includes senior secured commercial lending largely associated with our Corporate Finance operations.
Total commercial finance receivables and loans outstanding decreased $5.3 billion from December 31, 2020, to $24.0 billion at December 31, 2021. Results primarily reflect a $6.9 billion decrease in our commercial automotive loan portfolio within the commercial and industrial receivables class due to lower dealer inventory levels, driven by strong consumer demand for vehicles that outpaced lower automotive production levels due to the global semiconductor chip shortage. This decrease was partially offset by a $1.6 billion increase to commercial other loans within the commercial and industrial portfolio class, driven primarily by asset-based lending, mostly through our Corporate Finance lender finance vertical, which provides asset managers with partial funding for their direct lending activities.
Total commercial nonperforming finance receivables and loans were $257 million at December 31, 2021, reflecting an increase of $96 million compared to December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the downgrade of four exposures to nonaccrual status within commercial other in our Commercial and Industrial portfolio class. This increase was partially offset by a decrease due to lower dealer inventory levels in our commercial automotive portfolio driven by lower production levels due to the global semiconductor chip shortage. Nonperforming commercial finance receivables and loans as a percentage of outstanding commercial finance receivables and loans increased to 1.1% at December 31, 2021, compared to 0.5% at December 31, 2020.
Total commercial TDRs outstanding at December 31, 2021, decreased $32 million since December 31, 2020, to $171 million. The decrease was primarily driven by a reduction in the outstanding balances of several existing TDRs, partially offset by the restructuring of one exposure within commercial other in our Commercial and Industrial portfolio class. The decrease was also impacted by the restructuring of three exposures within our commercial automotive portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The following table includes total commercial net charge-offs from finance receivables and loans at amortized cost and related ratios.
(a)Net charge-off ratios are calculated as net charge-offs divided by average outstanding finance receivables and loans excluding loans measured at fair value and loans held for sale during the period for each loan category.
Our net charge-offs from total commercial finance receivables and loans were $11 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net charge-offs of $51 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by our Corporate Finance portfolio and included the partial net charge-off of two exposures in 2021. These charge-offs were lower than the total charge-offs related to two exposures, including the full charge-off of one exposure during the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was also impacted by the charge-offs of four exposures in our commercial automotive portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Commercial Real Estate
The commercial real estate portfolio consists of finance receivables and loans issued primarily to automotive dealers. Commercial real estate finance receivables and loans were $4.9 billion and $5.0 billion at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents the percentage of total commercial real estate finance receivables and loans by state concentration based on amortized cost.
Commercial Criticized Exposure
Finance receivables and loans classified as special mention, substandard, or doubtful are reported as criticized. These classifications are based on regulatory definitions and generally represent finance receivables and loans within our portfolio that have a higher default risk or have already defaulted. These finance receivables and loans require additional monitoring and review including specific actions to mitigate our potential loss.
Total criticized exposures decreased $2.2 billion from December 31, 2020, to $1.8 billion at December 31, 2021, and represented 7.3% and 13.6% of total commercial finance receivables and loans at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to lower dealer inventory levels in our commercial automotive portfolio driven by continued lower production levels as automotive manufacturers work to return to pre-pandemic levels along with improved portfolio performance. This decrease was also driven by a lower number of special mention accounts within commercial other in our Commercial and Industrial receivables class.
The following table presents the percentage of total commercial criticized finance receivables and loans by industry concentration based on amortized cost.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We adopted CECL on January 1, 2020. The CECL standard introduced a new accounting model to measure credit losses for financial assets measured at amortized costs. In contrast to the previous incurred loss model, CECL requires credit losses for financial assets measured at amortized cost to be determined based on the total current expected credit losses over the life of the financial asset or group of assets.
Under CECL, our modeling processes incorporate the following considerations:
•a single forecast scenario for macroeconomic factors incorporated into the modeling process;
•a 12-month reasonable and supportable forecast period for macroeconomic factors with a reversion to the historical mean on a straight-line basis over a 24-month period; and
•data from the historical mean will be calculated from January 2008 through the most current period available, which includes data points from the most recent recessionary period.
Our quantitatively determined allowance under CECL is impacted by certain forecasted economic factors as further described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For example, our consumer automotive allowance for loan losses is most sensitive to state-level unemployment rates. Our process for determining the allowance for loan losses considers a borrower’s willingness and ability to pay and considers other factors, including loan modification programs. In addition to our quantitative allowance for loan losses, we also incorporate
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
qualitative adjustments that may relate to idiosyncratic risks, changes in current economic conditions that may not be reflected in quantitatively derived results such as the impacts associated with COVID-19. We also monitor model performance, using model error and related assessments, and we may incorporate qualitative reserves to adjust our quantitatively determined allowance if we observe deterioration in model performance.
Through December 2021, forecasted economic variables utilized in our quantitative allowance processes were updated to reflect the current macroeconomic environment and our future expectations, which included (but were not limited to) the following: the unemployment rate declining to approximately 4% in the fourth quarter of 2022, before reverting to the historical mean of approximately 7% by November 2024, deceleration of GDP growth as measured on a quarter-over-quarter seasonally adjusted annualized rate basis, and new light vehicle sales on a seasonally adjusted annualized rate basis nearing approximately 17 million units in late-2022. Given the stabilization in the macroeconomic environment during the year ended December 31, 2021, changes in the macroeconomic variables did not have a significant impact on the allowance for loan losses through our quantitative reserving process. We continue to utilize our qualitative allowance framework to reassess and adjust management reserve levels to account for ongoing uncertainty and volatility in the macroeconomic environment, including the global supply chain and manufacturing challenges, workforce participation, inflation, and other complexities stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic. Our overall allowance for loan losses decreased $16 million from the prior year to $3.3 billion at December 31, 2021, representing 2.7% as a percentage of total finance receivables as of December 31, 2021, compared to 2.8% as of December 31, 2020.
The following tables present an analysis of the activity in the allowance for loan losses on finance receivables and loans.
n/m = not meaningful
(a)Refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our charge-off policies.
(b)Consumer mortgage provision benefit includes $1 million related to Mortgage Finance and $13 million related to our legacy mortgage portfolio. Consumer other provision expense includes $55 million related to personal lending and $108 million related to our credit card portfolio. Commercial provision benefit includes a provision benefit of $30 million related to commercial automotive and $21 million related to commercial real estate, and a provision expense of $39 million related to commercial other within the commercial and industrial portfolio class.
(c)Includes $12 million of allowance for credit losses recognized on PCD loans acquired in the Fair Square acquisition. Refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
(d)Coverage percentages are based on the allowance for loan losses related to finance receivables and loans excluding those loans held at fair value as a percentage of the amortized cost.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
n/m = not meaningful
(a)Refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our charge-off policies.
(b)Consumer mortgage provision expense includes $7 million related to Mortgage Finance and a provision benefit of $17 million related to our legacy mortgage portfolio. Commercial provision expense includes $28 million related to commercial automotive and $150 million related to commercial other within the Commercial and Industrial portfolio class, and $15 million related to Commercial Real Estate.
(c)Coverage percentages are based on the allowance for loan losses related to finance receivables and loans excluding those loans held at fair value as a percentage of the amortized cost.
The allowance for consumer loan losses as of December 31, 2021, increased $9 million compared to December 31, 2020, reflecting decreases of $133 million in the consumer automotive allowance and $6 million in the consumer mortgage allowance, offset by an increase of $148 million in the consumer other allowance. The decreases in both our consumer automotive and consumer mortgage allowance were primarily driven by reserve declines associated with improvement in the macroeconomic environment as the economy has continued to recover, partially offset by higher reserves resulting from continued portfolio growth. The increase in the consumer other allowance was primarily driven by the establishment of reserves related to the Fair Square acquisition, as well as continued growth in Ally Lending, partially offset by reserve declines associated with improvement in the macroeconomic environment.
The allowance for commercial loan losses as of December 31, 2021, decreased $25 million compared to December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by reserve declines within our commercial automotive portfolio associated with improvement in the macroeconomic environment as the economy has continued to recover, as well as reserve decreases due to lower commercial automotive portfolio balances for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The provision for consumer credit losses decreased $993 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in provision for consumer credit losses was primarily driven by a reserve increase within the consumer automotive portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2020, associated with deterioration in the macroeconomic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, compared to a reserve decline during the year ended December 31, 2021, as the macroeconomic environment continued to recover. Additionally, the provision decrease during the year ended December 31, 2021, was driven by lower net charge-offs in our consumer automotive portfolio as we continue to experience strong credit performance driven by favorable economic and operating conditions.
The provision for commercial credit losses decreased $205 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in provision for commercial credit losses was primarily driven by a reserve increase within the commercial automotive and other commercial and industrial portfolios during the year ended December 31, 2020, associated with deterioration in the macroeconomic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, compared to a reserve decline during 2021, as the macroeconomic environment continued to recover.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Allowance for Loan Losses by Type
The following table summarizes the allocation of the allowance for loan losses by product type.
Insurance/Underwriting Risk
The underwriting of our products includes an assessment of the risk to determine acceptability and categorization for appropriate pricing. The acceptability of a particular risk is based on expected losses, expenses and other factors specific to the product in question. With respect to VSCs, considerations include the quality of the vehicles produced, the price of replacement parts, repair labor rates, and new model introductions. Insurance risk also includes event risk, which is synonymous with pure risk, or hazard risk, and presents no chance of gain, only of loss.
We mitigate losses by the active management of claim settlement activities using experienced claims personnel and the evaluation of current period reported claims. Losses for these events may be compared to prior claims experience, expected claims, or loss expenses from similar incidents to assess the reasonableness of incurred losses.
In some instances, reinsurance is used to reduce the risk associated with volatile business lines, such as catastrophe risk in vehicle inventory insurance. Our vehicle inventory insurance product is covered by excess-of-loss protection, including catastrophe coverage for weather-related events. In addition, loss control techniques such as storm path monitoring to assist dealers in preparing for severe weather help to mitigate loss potential.
In accordance with industry and accounting practices and applicable insurance laws and regulatory requirements, we maintain reserves for reported losses, losses incurred but not reported, losses expected to be incurred in the future for contracts in force and loss adjustment expenses. The estimated values of our prior reported loss reserves and changes to the estimated values are routinely monitored by credentialed actuaries. Our reserve estimates are regularly reviewed by management; however, since the reserves are based on estimates and numerous assumptions, the ultimate liability may differ from the amount estimated.
Market Risk
Our financing, investing, and insurance activities give rise to market risk, or the potential change in the value of our assets (including securities, assets held-for-sale, loans and operating leases) and liabilities (including deposits and debt) due to movements in market variables, such as interest rates, credit spreads, foreign-exchange rates, equity prices, off-lease vehicle prices, and other equity investments.
The impact of changes in benchmark interest rates on our assets and liabilities (interest rate risk) represents an exposure to market risk and can affect interest rate sensitivities and cash flows when compared to our expectations. We primarily use interest rate derivatives to manage our interest rate risk exposure.
The fair value of our credit-sensitive assets is also exposed to credit spread risk. Credit spread is the amount of additional return over the benchmark interest rates that an investor would demand for taking exposure to the credit risk of an instrument. Generally, an increase in credit spreads would result in a decrease in a fair value measurement.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
We are also exposed to foreign-currency risk primarily from Canadian denominated assets and liabilities. We enter into foreign currency hedges to mitigate foreign exchange risk.
We also have exposure to changes in the value of equity securities. We have exposure to equity securities with readily determinable fair values primarily related to our Insurance operations. For such equity securities, we use equity derivatives to manage our exposure to equity price fluctuations. In addition, we are exposed to changes in the value of other equity investments without readily determinable fair market values. Refer to Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. We may experience changes in the valuation of these investments, which may cause volatility in our earnings.
The composition of our balance sheet, including shorter-duration consumer automotive loans and variable-rate commercial loans, coupled with the continued funding shift toward retail deposits, partially mitigates market risk. Additionally, we maintain risk-management controls that measure and monitor market risk using a variety of analytical techniques including market value and sensitivity analysis. Refer to Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
LIBOR Transition
We continue to monitor regulatory, legislative, and industry developments surrounding the LIBOR transition and the impact of those developments to us. In March 2021, the United Kingdom Financial Conduct Authority and the administrator of LIBOR announced that U.S. dollar LIBOR settings will cease to be provided or cease to be representative after June 30, 2023. The publication of all other LIBOR settings ceased to be provided or ceased to be representative as of December 31, 2021. In November 2020, U.S. banking agencies issued guidance encouraging banks to stop entering new contracts that use U.S. dollar LIBOR as a reference rate as soon as practicable but no later than December 31, 2021. Additionally, in October 2021, U.S. banking agencies emphasized their expectation that supervised institutions with LIBOR exposure continue to progress toward an orderly transition away from LIBOR, including clarification on the meaning of new LIBOR contracts, considerations when assessing appropriateness of alternative reference rates, and expectations for fallback language in new or updated contracts. U.S. banking regulators have stated that safe-and-sound practices include conducting the due diligence necessary to ensure that alternative rate selections are appropriate for the supervised institution’s products, risk profile, risk management capabilities, customer and funding needs, and operational capabilities. This due diligence includes understanding how the chosen reference rate is constructed and being aware of any fragilities associated with that rate and the markets that underlie it.
The discontinuation of LIBOR or LIBOR-based rates presents risks to our business, as further described in the section titled Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this report. In recognition of the significance of LIBOR cessation, in July 2018, Ally formed an enterprise-wide LIBOR transition program that devotes numerous resources throughout all levels of the organization to facilitate the transition to alternative reference rates. Our program spans impacted business lines and functions to evaluate risks associated with the transition, while taking into account specific considerations related to our customers, products and instruments, and counterparty exposures. Through this program, we continue to plan for and guide the transition away from LIBOR to alternative reference rates, and evaluate the impacts and potential impacts to our existing and future contracts with customers and counterparties, financial forecasts, operational processes, technology, modeling, and vendor relationships. Our program is also subject to the governance and oversight of our Board through the RC and certain executive committees, including the ALCO and the ERMC.
We continue to make progress on our transition efforts, including the development of new products and agreements that utilize alternative reference rates, such as Prime and SOFR. We continue to engage our commercial automotive dealer customers with transitioning their existing wholesale floorplan financing agreements from LIBOR to Prime as appropriate. Additionally, we continue to reduce our LIBOR exposure through other strategic actions. For example, during 2021, we executed the sale of a portion of our adjustable-rate mortgage loans that were tied to LIBOR, and redeemed our Series 2 TRUPS with an interest rate linked to LIBOR and replaced these regulatory capital instruments with new preferred stock referencing treasury rates. We also advanced our efforts of transitioning existing bilateral commercial automotive lending arrangements from LIBOR to alternative rates, commenced direct-to-consumer mortgage lending in our held-for-investment channel using SOFR, and commenced originating corporate-finance loans using SOFR. In alignment with the November 2020 guidance and subsequent clarifications from U.S. banking regulators, we also updated our policies and procedures and established enhanced governance to adhere to safe-and-sound practices with regard to new LIBOR contracts and existing LIBOR exposures beyond December 31, 2021, and are planning to transition our remaining exposure to alternative rates prior to the cessation of the remaining U.S. dollar LIBOR tenors, which will no longer be published after June 30, 2023.
Our ongoing LIBOR transition program includes monitoring of our operations and the progress of our broader transition efforts. As part of this, we collect and analyze business-line level data about our LIBOR exposure on a monthly basis. Our exposure to LIBOR-based contracts is significantly concentrated within certain of our finance receivables and loans, primarily related to commercial automotive loans and corporate-finance loans, among other arrangements. Our commercial automotive loan portfolio is primarily composed of wholesale floorplan financing to automotive dealers. A significant portion of our wholesale floorplan finance receivables are invoiced utilizing a LIBOR-based reference rate and, as such, represents our largest exposure to LIBOR based on notional dollar amount. Smaller loan portfolios that utilize contracts containing LIBOR-based reference rates include our corporate-finance loans and lending commitments, and our adjustable-rate mortgage loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had a notional amount of $35.6 billion of loan exposure that references LIBOR, which includes approximately $13.2 billion of associated LIBOR-based loans outstanding.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Fair Value Sensitivity Analysis
The following table presents a fair value sensitivity analysis of our assets and liabilities using isolated hypothetical movements in specific market rates. The analysis assumes adverse instantaneous, parallel shifts in market-exchange rates, interest rate yield curves, and equity prices. Additionally, since only adverse fair value impacts are included, the natural offset between asset and liability rate sensitivities that arise within a diversified balance sheet, such as ours, may not be considered.
(a)Refer to the section below titled Net Financing Revenue Sensitivity Analysis for information on the interest rate sensitivity of our financial instruments.
(b)Includes $1.1 billion of equity securities and $260 million of equity securities without a readily determinable fair value at December 31, 2021. For additional information on equity securities without a readily determinable fair value, refer to Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net Financing Revenue Sensitivity Analysis
Interest rate risk represents one of our most significant exposures to market risk. We actively monitor the level of exposure to movements in interest rates and take actions to mitigate adverse impacts these movements may have on future earnings. We use a sensitivity analysis of net financing revenue as our primary metric to measure and manage the interest rate risk of our financial instruments.
We prepare forward-looking baseline forecasts of net financing revenue taking into consideration anticipated future business growth, asset/liability positioning, and interest rates based on the implied forward curve. The analysis is highly dependent upon a variety of assumptions including the repricing characteristics of retail deposits with both contractual and non-contractual maturities. We continually monitor industry and competitive repricing activity along with other market factors when contemplating deposit pricing assumptions.
Simulations are then used to assess changes in net financing revenue in multiple interest rate scenarios relative to the baseline forecast. The changes in net financing revenue relative to the baseline are defined as the sensitivity. Our simulations incorporate contractual cash flows and repricing characteristics for all assets, liabilities, and off-balance sheet exposures and incorporate the effects of changing interest rates on the prepayment and attrition rates of certain assets and liabilities. Our simulation does not assume any specific future actions are taken to mitigate the impacts of changing interest rates.
The net financing revenue sensitivity tests measure the potential change in our pretax net financing revenue over the following 12 months. We test a number of alternative rate scenarios, including immediate and gradual parallel shocks to the implied market forward curve. Management also evaluates nonparallel shocks to interest rates and stresses to certain term points on the yield curve in isolation to capture and monitor a number of risk types. Relative to our baseline forecast, our net financing revenue over the next 12 months is expected to increase by $15 million if interest rates remain unchanged.
The following table presents the pretax dollar impact to baseline forecasted net financing revenue over the next 12 months assuming various shocks to the implied market forward curve as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
(a)Gradual changes in interest rates are recognized over 12 months.
(b)Our models currently assume rates do not go below zero.
The implied forward rate curve was steeper at December 31, 2021, as interest rates were at or near historical lows across the curve on December 31, 2020. The impact of this change is reflected in our baseline net financing revenue projections. As of December 31, 2021, we
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
expect upward interest rate shock scenarios to have a modest impact to the baseline forecast as the repricing of our asset base, combined with the benefit of our pay fixed swap position, is expected to largely offset assumed repricing of our liabilities, primarily deposits.
The exposure in the downward interest rate shock scenarios is largely driven by floating-rate assets and prepayment risk, largely offset by assumed repricing of liquid deposits.
Our risk position is influenced by the impact of hedging activity, which primarily consists of interest rate swaps designated as fair value hedges of certain fixed-rate assets and fixed-rate debt instruments, and pay-fixed interest rate swaps designated as cash flow hedges of certain floating-rate debt instruments. The size, maturity, and mix of our hedging activities are adjusted as our balance sheet, ALM objectives, and interest rate environment evolve over time.
Operating Lease Residual Risk Management
We are exposed to residual risk on vehicles in the consumer operating lease portfolio. This operating lease residual risk represents the possibility that the actual proceeds realized upon the sale of returned vehicles will be lower than the projection of these values used in establishing the pricing at lease inception. However in certain instances, some automotive manufacturers have provided their guarantee for portions of our residual exposure, as further described in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Our operating lease portfolio, net of accumulated depreciation was $10.9 billion and $9.6 billion as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. The expected lease residual value of our operating lease portfolio at scheduled termination was $8.6 billion and $7.9 billion as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. For information on our valuation of automotive operating lease residuals including periodic revisions through adjustments to depreciation expense based on current and forecasted market conditions, refer to the section titled Critical Accounting Estimates-Valuation of Automotive Operating Lease Assets and Residuals within this MD&A.
•Priced residual value projections - At contract inception, we determine pricing based on the projected residual value of the leased vehicle. This evaluation uses a proprietary model, which includes variables such as age, expected mileage, seasonality, segment factors, vehicle type, economic indicators, production cycle, automotive manufacturer incentives, and unanticipated shifts in used vehicle supply, as well as expert judgment. This internally generated data is compared against third-party, independent data for reasonableness. Periodically, we revise the projected value of the leased vehicle at termination based on current market conditions and adjust depreciation expense over the remaining life of the contract as necessary. At termination, our actual sales proceeds from remarketing the vehicle may be higher or lower than the estimated residual value resulting in a gain or loss on remarketing recorded through depreciation expense.
•Remarketing abilities - Our ability to efficiently process and effectively market off-lease vehicles affects the disposal costs and the proceeds realized from vehicle sales. Vehicles can be remarketed through auction (internet and physical), sale to dealer, sale to lessee, and other methods. The results within these channels vary, with physical auction typically resulting in the lowest-priced outcome.
•Manufacturer vehicle and marketing programs - Automotive manufacturers influence operating lease residual results in the following ways:
◦The brand image of automotive manufacturers and consumer demand for their products affects residual risk.
◦The discontinuation of, or stylistic changes to, a certain make or model may affect the value of existing vehicles.
◦Automotive manufacturer marketing programs may influence the used vehicle market for those vehicles through programs such as incentives on new vehicles, programs designed to encourage lessees to terminate their operating leases early in conjunction with the acquisition of a new vehicle (referred to as pull-ahead programs), and special rate used vehicle programs.
•Used vehicle market - We have exposure to changes in used vehicle prices. General economic conditions, used vehicle supply and demand, and new vehicle availability and market prices heavily influence used vehicle prices.
Operating Lease Vehicle Terminations and Remarketing
The following table summarizes the volume of operating lease terminations and average gain per vehicle, as well as our methods of vehicle sales at lease termination, stated as a percentage of total operating lease vehicle disposals.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
We recognized an average gain per vehicle of $2,693 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an average gain per vehicle of $1,193 for 2020. The increase in remarketing performance was primarily due to continued new vehicle supply constraints coupled with increased demand for used vehicles, despite downward adjustments to the rate of depreciation expense in recent periods. The number of off-lease vehicles remarketed during the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 20%, compared to 2020, primarily due to impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which reduced vehicle remarketing activity at auction sites and lowered dealer demand in the first two quarters of 2020, as well as increases in demand for used vehicles in recent periods. The remarketing channel mix for dealer and lessee buyouts increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to supply constraints increasing dealer demand for off-lease vehicles, as well as increases in new vehicle prices that are causing a shift in consumer preference. The shift in off-lease vehicle disposition mix is expected to continue in the near term and may limit our ability to optimize remarketing proceeds.
Operating Lease Portfolio Mix
We monitor the concentration of our outstanding operating leases. Our exposure to Stellantis vehicles represented approximately 81% and 89% of our operating lease units as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
The following table presents the mix of operating lease assets by vehicle type, based on volume of units outstanding.
Business/Strategic Risk
Business/strategic risk is embedded in every facet of our organization and is one of our primary risk types. It is the risk resulting from the pursuit of business activities that turn out to be unsuccessful due to a variety of both controllable and non-controllable factors. We aim to mitigate this risk within our business lines through portfolio diversification, product innovations, close monitoring of the execution of our strategic and capital plan, and ensuring flexibility of the cost base.
Our strategic plan is reviewed and approved annually by our Board, as are the capital plan and financial business plan. With oversight by our Board, executive management seeks to consistently apply core operating principles while executing our strategic plan within the risk appetite approved by the RC. The executive management team continuously monitors business performance throughout the year to assess strategic risk and find early warning signals so that risks can be proactively managed. Executive management regularly reviews actual performance versus the plan, updates our Board via reporting routines, and implements changes as deemed appropriate.
Significant strategic actions, such as capital actions, material acquisitions or divestitures, and recovery and resolution plans are reviewed and approved by our Board as required. At the business level, as we introduce new products, we monitor their performance relative to expectations. With oversight by our Board, executive management evaluates changes to the financial forecast and risk, capital, and liquidity positions throughout the year.
Reputation Risk
Reputation risk is the risk arising from negative public opinion on Ally’s business practices, whether true or not, that could cause a decline in customer satisfaction, brand sentiment, our customer base, revenue, or result in litigation towards Ally. Reputation risk may result from many of our activities, including those related to the management of our business/strategic, operational, and credit risks. We manage reputation risk through established policies and controls in our businesses and risk-management processes to mitigate reputation risks in a timely manner through proactive monitoring and identification of potential reputation risk events. We have established processes and procedures to respond to events that give rise to reputation risk, including educating individuals and organizations that influence public opinion, external communication strategies to mitigate the risk, and informing key stakeholders of potential reputation risks. Primary responsibility for the identification, escalation, and resolution of reputation risk issues resides with our business lines. Our “LEAD” core values and “Do it Right” philosophy further strengthen our efforts to mitigate reputational risks by promoting a transparent culture so that any associate, at any time, can and should call attention to risks that need to be addressed and taken into account. Our organization and governance structures provide oversight of reputation risks, and key risk indicators are reported regularly and directly to management and the RC, which provide primary oversight of reputation risk.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk of loss or harm arising from inadequate or failed processes or systems, human factors, or external events and is inherent in all of our risk-generating activities. Such risk can manifest in various ways, including errors, business interruptions, and inappropriate behavior of employees, and can potentially result in financial losses and other damage to us. Operational risk includes business disruption risk, fraud risk, human capital risk, legal risk, model risk, process execution and management risk, and supplier (third party) risk.
•Business disruption risk - The risk of significant disruption to our operations resulting from natural disasters, pandemics, external technology outages, or other external events.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
•Fraud risk - The risk from deliberate misrepresentation or concealment of information material to a transaction with the intent to deceive another and that is reasonably relied on or used in decision making. Fraud can occur internally (for example, employees) or externally (for example, criminal activity, third-party suppliers).
•Human capital risk - The risk caused by high turnover, inadequate or improper staffing levels, departure/unavailability of key personnel, or inadequate training and includes our exposure to worker’s compensation and employment litigation.
•Legal risk - The risk arising from the potential that unenforceable contracts, lawsuits, or adverse judgments can disrupt or otherwise negatively affect our operations or condition.
•Model risk - The potential for adverse consequences from decisions based on incorrect or misused model assumptions, inputs, outputs, and reports. This risk may include fundamental errors within the model that produce inaccurate outputs or that the model is used incorrectly or inappropriately.
•Process execution and management risk - The risk caused by failure to execute or adhere to policies, standards, procedures, processes, controls, and activities as designed and documented.
•Supplier (third party) risk - The risk associated with third-party suppliers and their delivery of products or services and effect on overall business performance. This includes a supplier’s failure to comply with information technology requirements, information and physical security, laws, rules, regulations, and legal agreements.
To monitor and mitigate such risk, we maintain a system of policies and a control framework designed to provide a sound and well-controlled operational environment. This framework employs practices and tools designed to maintain risk identification, risk governance, risk and control assessment, risk testing and monitoring, and transparency through risk reporting mechanisms. The goal is to maintain operational risk at appropriate levels based on our financial strength, the characteristics of the businesses and the markets in which we operate, and the related competitive and regulatory environment.
Information Technology/Cybersecurity Risk
Information technology/cybersecurity risk includes risk resulting from the failure of, or insufficiency in, information technology (for example, a system outage) or intentional or accidental unauthorized access, sharing, removal, tampering, or disposal of company and customer data or records.
We and our service providers rely extensively on communications, data-management, and other operating systems and infrastructure to conduct our business and operations. Failures or disruptions to these systems, including cloud-based services, or infrastructure from cyberattacks or other events may impede our ability to conduct business and operations and may result in business, reputational, financial, regulatory, or other harm.
We and other financial institutions continue to be the target of various cyberattacks, including through the introduction of malware, phishing attacks, denial-of-service, or other security breaches, as part of an effort to disrupt the operations of financial institutions or obtain confidential, proprietary, or other information or assets of Ally, our customers, employees, or other third parties with whom we transact.
Cybersecurity and the continued development of our controls, processes, and systems to protect our technology infrastructure, customer information, and other proprietary information or assets remain a critical and ongoing priority. We recognize that cyber-related risks continue to evolve and have become increasingly sophisticated, and as a result we continuously evaluate the adequacy of our preventive and detective measures.
In order to help mitigate cybersecurity risks, we devote substantial resources to protect us from cyber-related incidents. We regularly assess vulnerabilities and threats to our environment utilizing various resources including independent third-party assessments to evaluate whether our layered system of controls effectively mitigates risk. Additionally, we engage external expertise to perform comprehensive institutional-wide simulations for senior management, which evaluates our preparedness to respond to crisis events, including cybersecurity threats.
We also invest in new technologies and infrastructure in order to respond to evolving risks within our environment. We continue to partner with other industry peers in order to share knowledge and information to further our security environment and invest in training and employee awareness to cyber-related risks. Additionally, as a further protective measure, we maintain insurance coverage that, subject to terms and conditions, may cover certain aspects of cybersecurity and information risks; however, such insurance may not be sufficient to cover all losses. Management monitors operational metrics and data surrounding cybersecurity operations, and the organization monitors compliance with established limits in connection with our risk appetite. Senior leadership regularly reviews, questions, and challenges such information.
The Technology Committee assists the Board in overseeing information-technology and information-security risks (including cybersecurity risk) and our management of them commensurate with our structure, risk profile, complexity, activities, and size. Our RC reviews reports and other information from the Technology Committee in approving our information-technology and information-security risk appetite and otherwise exercising oversight of our independent risk-management program. Our Board and the AC also undertake reviews as appropriate. The Information Technology Risk Committee is responsible for supporting the Chief Risk Officer’s oversight of our
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
management of cybersecurity and other risks involving our communications, data-management, and other operating systems and infrastructure. Additionally, our cybersecurity program is regularly assessed by Audit Services, which reports directly to the AC. The business lines are also actively engaged in overseeing the service providers that supply or support the operating systems and infrastructure on which we depend and, with effective challenge from the independent risk-management function, managing related operational and other risks.
Notwithstanding these risk and control initiatives, we may incur losses attributable to information technology/cybersecurity risk from time to time, and there can be no assurance these losses will not be incurred in the future or will not be substantial. For further information on cybersecurity, technology, systems, and infrastructure, refer to the section titled Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Compliance Risk
Compliance risk is the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to reputation resulting from failure to comply with laws, regulations, rules, other regulatory requirements, or codes of conduct and other standards of self-regulatory organizations applicable to the banking organization (applicable rules and standards). Examples of such risks include compliance with regulations set forth by banking agencies including fair and responsible banking, anti-money laundering, or community reinvestment act, risks associated with offering our products or services, or risks associated with deviating from internal policies and procedures including those that are established to promote sound risk-management and internal-control practices. Compliance risk also includes fiduciary risk, which includes risks arising from our duty to exercise loyalty, act in the best interest of our clients, and care for assets according to an appropriate standard of care. This risk generally exists to the extent that we exercise discretion in managing assets on behalf of a customer.
We recognize that an effective compliance program, including driving a culture of compliance, plays a key role in managing and overseeing compliance risk, and that a proactive compliance environment and program are essential to help meet various legal, regulatory, or other requirements or expectations. To manage compliance risk, we maintain a system of policies, change-management protocols, control frameworks, and other formal governance structures designed to provide a holistic enterprise approach to managing such risks, which includes consideration of identifying, assessing, monitoring, and communicating compliance risks throughout Ally. Our compliance function provides independent, enterprise-wide oversight of compliance-risk exposures and related risk-management practices and is led by the Chief Compliance Officer who reports to our Chief Executive Officer. The Chief Compliance Officer has the authority and responsibility for the oversight and administration of our Enterprise Compliance Program, which includes ongoing reporting of significant compliance-related matters to our Board, the RC, and various management committees established to govern compliance-related risks. The Compliance Risk Management Committee, established by the Chief Compliance Officer, serves to facilitate compliance risk management and to oversee the implementation of our compliance risk-management strategies and covers compliance matters across the enterprise including matters impacting customers, products, geographies, and services.
Conduct Risk
Conduct risk is the risk of customer harm, employee harm, reputational damage, regulatory sanction, or financial loss resulting from the behavior of our employees and contractors toward customers, counterparties, other employees and contractors, or the markets in which we operate.
Management is responsible for driving a culture consistent with our “LEAD” core values and “Do it Right” philosophy. We maintain an enterprise-wide Conduct Risk Management program that establishes the requirements for managing conduct risk.
Under our governance framework, incentive compensation is subject to review and recoupment so as to appropriately consider and not encourage imprudent risk-taking. All incentive pay, whether paid or unpaid, vested or not vested, is subject to recoupment if based on, without limitation, material misstatements, misrepresentations, or fraud, or if the employee recipient failed to identify, raise, or assess issues with respect to financial loss or reputational risk to us or otherwise engaged in or contributed to other conduct adverse to us.
We manage conduct risk through a variety of enterprise programs, policies, and procedures. Associates complete required training at on-boarding, and annually thereafter, to affirm their compliance with our Code of Conduct and Ethics. Training programs and other resources set expectations surrounding appropriate conduct, ethical behavior, and a culture of compliance with applicable laws, regulations, policies, and standards. Officers and employees are expected to take personal responsibility for maintaining the highest standards of honesty, trustworthiness, and ethical behavior; to understand and manage the risks associated with their positions; and to escalate concerns about risk management (including reporting of potential violations of the Code of Conduct and Ethics, our policies, or other laws and regulations). Employee conduct is considered through various human resources and management activities including associate recruiting, on-boarding, performance management, incentive programs and compensation, conflicts of interest, and corrective action. Oversight of conduct risk is performed by Enterprise Risk Management.
Employee engagement surveys provide valuable insight into employee views and opinions about the company’s culture and conduct. The Ethics Hotline (independently managed, available to associates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week) and Open-Door Process provide avenues for employees to report concerns or incidents of potential misconduct. Human Resources, Employee Relations, and Enterprise Fraud, Security, and Investigations have established processes and procedures for investigating and addressing cases of potential fraud or employee misconduct.
Climate-Related Risk
We have identified and defined climate-related risk as an emerging risk. Pursuant to our risk-management framework, emerging risks include those that have yet to create a material impact or would only arise during stressful or unlikely circumstances.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Climate-related risk is generally categorized into two major categories: (1) risk related to the transition to a lower-carbon economy (transition risk) and (2) risk related to the physical impacts of climate change. Transition risk considers how changes in policy, technology, and market preference could pose operational, financial and reputational risk to companies. Physical risk from climate change can be acute or chronic. Acute physical risk refers to risks that are event-driven such as increased severity of extreme weather events, including tornadoes, hurricanes, or floods. Chronic physical risks refer to long-term shifts in climate patterns, such as sustained higher temperatures, that may, for example, cause sea levels to rise.
As the impacts of climate change become more evident, we have recognized (1) the importance of understanding, preparing for and taking timely preventive action against potentially material climate-change impacts, (2) increasing investor demand for consistent and comparable climate-change risk data, (3) changing federal policy focus as a result of rejoining the Paris Climate Agreement and an increase in regulatory discussion about potential requirements and oversight, and (4) that Ally’s commitment to “Do It Right” extends to the conservation of environmental resources to promote a sustainable future for our customers, employees, stockholders and the communities in which we live and operate. Specifically, Ally has:
•Defined climate-related risk as an emerging risk within our risk-management framework.
•Appointed an Environmental Sustainability Risk Executive reporting to our Chief Risk Officer and established a sustainability office staffed with employees focused on adopting sustainability measures and developing and executing a comprehensive enterprise strategy on climate-related risks and opportunities.
•Included sustainability and climate-related matters in executive level forums and Board education.
•Performed our first assessment and calculation of our greenhouse gas emissions including Scope 1 emissions (direct emissions from owned or controlled sources), Scope 2 emissions (indirect emissions from the generation of purchased electricity, steam, heating and cooling consumed by the company), and relevant Scope 3 emissions (all other indirect emissions that occur in the company’s value chain) for fiscal year 2020.
•Submitted our inaugural CDP (formally the Carbon Disclosure Project) climate change questionnaire in July 2021.
•Completed a formal ESG Stakeholder Assessment that includes customers, investors, community partners, local governments and employees to gain perspective on ESG priorities and their importance to Ally.
•Executed Ally’s carbon neutrality strategy for 2020 Scope I and II emissions through a combined purchase of carbon offsets and Green-e Energy Certified renewable energy credits.
•Committed to developing a comprehensive enterprise environmental sustainability strategy focusing on greater data collection, aggregation and analysis, with the goal of aligning with the recommendations from the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures in assessing and reporting on our exposures to climate-related risks and opportunities consistent with the financial industry.
•Prioritized sustainable facilities by purchasing or leasing LEED certified buildings that accounted for approximately 29% of the total square footage in Ally facilities as of December 31, 2021.
•Announced the “Green Teams” initiative to engage Ally employees in support of environmental volunteer opportunities within local communities where Ally operates.
Refer to the section titled Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this report for information on climate-related risks.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Liquidity Management, Funding, and Regulatory Capital
Overview
The purpose of liquidity management is to enable us to meet loan and operating lease demand, debt maturities, deposit withdrawals, and other cash commitments under both normal operating conditions as well as periods of economic or financial stress. Our primary objective is to maintain cost-effective, stable and diverse sources of funding capable of sustaining the organization throughout all market cycles. Sources of funding include both retail and brokered deposits and secured and unsecured market-based funding across various maturity, interest rate, and investor profiles. Additional liquidity is available through a pool of unencumbered highly liquid securities, repurchase agreements, and advances from the FHLB of Pittsburgh.
We define liquidity risk as the risk that an institution’s financial condition or overall safety and soundness is adversely affected by the actual or perceived inability to liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding or to easily unwind or offset specific exposures without significantly lowering market prices because of inadequate market depth or market disruptions. Liquidity risk can arise from a variety of institution-specific or market-related events that could have a negative impact on cash flows available to the organization. Effective management of liquidity risk positions an organization to meet cash flow obligations caused by unanticipated events. Managing liquidity needs and contingent funding exposures has proven essential to the solvency of financial institutions.
The ALCO, chaired by the Corporate Treasurer, is responsible for overseeing our funding and liquidity strategies. Corporate Treasury is responsible for managing our liquidity positions within limits approved by ALCO, the ERMC, and the RC. As part of managing liquidity risk, Corporate Treasury prepares monthly forecasts depicting anticipated funding needs and sources of funds, executes our funding strategies, and manages liquidity under normal as well as more severely stressed macroeconomic environments. Oversight and monitoring of liquidity risk are provided by Independent Risk Management.
The monthly liquidity forecasts demonstrate our ability to generate and obtain adequate amounts of cash to meet loan and operating lease demand, debt maturities, deposit withdrawals, and other cash commitments under normal operating conditions throughout the forecast horizon (currently through December 2024). Refer to Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of the scheduled maturity of long-term debt as of December 31, 2021. In recent years, we have become less reliant on market-based funding, reducing our exposure to disruptions in wholesale funding markets.
Funding Strategy
Liquidity and ongoing profitability are largely dependent on the timely and cost-effective access to retail deposits and funding in various segments of the capital markets. We focus on maintaining diversified funding sources across a broad base of depositors, lenders, and investors to meet liquidity needs throughout different economic cycles, including periods of financial distress. These funding sources include retail and brokered deposits, public and private asset-backed securitizations, unsecured debt, and FHLB advances. Our access to diversified funding sources enhances funding flexibility and results in a more cost-effective funding strategy over the long term. We evaluate funding markets on an ongoing basis to achieve an appropriate balance of unsecured and secured funding sources and maturity profiles.
We manage our funding to achieve a well-balanced portfolio across a spectrum of risk, maturity, and cost-of-funds characteristics. Optimizing funding at Ally Bank continues to be a key part of our long-term liquidity strategy. We optimize our funding sources at Ally Bank by growing retail deposits, maintaining active public and private securitization programs, managing a prudent maturity profile of our brokered deposit portfolio, utilizing repurchase agreements, and continuing to access funds from the FHLB.
Essentially all asset originations are directed to Ally Bank to reduce parent company exposures and funding requirements, and to utilize our growing consumer deposit-taking capabilities. This allows us to use bank funding for an increasing proportion of our automotive finance and other assets and to provide a sustainable long-term funding channel for the business, while also improving the cost of funds for the enterprise.
Liquidity Risk Management
Multiple metrics are used to measure liquidity risk, manage the liquidity position, identify related trends, and monitor these trends and metrics against established limits. These metrics include comprehensive stress tests that measure the sufficiency of the liquidity portfolio over stressed horizons ranging from overnight to 12 months, stability ratios that measure longer-term structural liquidity, and concentration ratios that enable prudent funding diversification. In addition, we have established internal management routines designed to review all aspects of liquidity and funding plans, evaluate the adequacy of liquidity buffers, review stress testing results, and assist management in the execution of its funding strategy and risk-management accountabilities.
Our liquidity stress testing is designed to allow us to operate our businesses and to meet our contractual and contingent obligations, including unsecured debt maturities, for at least 12 months, assuming our normal access to funding is disrupted by severe market-wide and enterprise-specific events. We maintain available liquidity in the form of cash and unencumbered highly liquid securities, and available committed secured credit facilities. This available liquidity is held at various legal entities, and is subject to regulatory restrictions and tax implications that may limit our ability to transfer funds across entities.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table summarizes our total available liquidity.
(a)Includes unencumbered U.S. federal government, U.S. agency and corporate debt securities.
(b)Includes committed secured credit facilities for which we had sufficient assets available to be pledged as collateral as of the reporting date.
(c)Funding from committed secured credit facilities is available on request in the event excess collateral resides in certain facilities or the extent incremental collateral is available and contributed to the facilities. All remaining committed secured facilities were terminated during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Recent Funding Developments
Key funding highlights from January 1, 2021, to date were as follows:
•We terminated our demand note offering and as of March 1, 2021, we repaid all outstanding balances under this program.
•On April 22, 2021, we issued $1.35 billion of preferred stock, Series B, and used the proceeds to redeem $1.4 billion, or 56,000,000 shares of the Series 2 TRUPS outstanding, effective May 24, 2021.
•On June 2, 2021, we issued $1.0 billion of preferred stock, Series C, and used the proceeds to redeem an additional $1.04 billion, or 41,600,000 shares of the Series 2 TRUPS outstanding, effective July 2, 2021. On September 15, 2021, we announced our intent to redeem the remaining $191 million or 7,650,000 shares of the Series 2 TRUPS outstanding. The redemption was effectuated on October 15, 2021. At December 31, 2021, we had no Series 2 TRUPS outstanding.
•On November 2, 2021, we issued $750 million of senior unsecured notes maturing November 2028, which provided additional liquidity at Ally Financial.
•We prepaid $176 million of unsecured retail term notes during the year ended December 31, 2021, as we continue to shift our overall funding toward more cost-effective funding.
•All remaining committed secured facilities were terminated during the year ended December 31, 2021, as we continue to shift our overall funding toward a greater mix of cost-effective deposit funding.
Funding Sources
The following table summarizes our sources of funding and the amount outstanding under each category for the periods shown.
(a)Includes $216 million and $360 million of retail term notes at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
(b)Includes hedge basis adjustment as described in Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Refer to Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of the scheduled maturity of long-term debt at December 31, 2021.
Deposits
Ally Bank is a digital direct bank with no branch network that obtains retail deposits directly from customers. We offer competitive rates and fees on a full spectrum of retail deposit products, including online savings accounts, money-market demand accounts, CDs, interest-
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
bearing checking accounts, trust accounts, and IRAs. Our primary funding source is retail deposits, which provide us with stable, low-cost funding. We believe retail deposits are less sensitive to interest rate changes, market volatility, or changes in credit ratings when compared to other funding sources. Retail deposits constituted 85% of our total funding sources at December 31, 2021. In addition, we utilize brokered deposits, which are obtained through third-party intermediaries.
The following table shows Ally Bank’s total primary retail deposit customers and deposit balances as of the end of each of the last five quarters.
(a)Brokered deposit balances include a deposit related to Ally Invest customer cash balances deposited at Ally Bank by a third party of $1.9 billion as of both March 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
(b)Other deposits include mortgage escrow and other deposits. Additionally, beginning on June 30, 2021, other deposits also include a deposit related to Ally Invest customer cash balances deposited at Ally Bank by a third party of $2.1 billion as of December 31, 2021, $2.0 billion as of September 30, 2021, and $1.9 billion as of June 30, 2021, driven by revisions to brokered-deposit regulations by the FDIC.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our total deposit base grew $4.5 billion and we added approximately 226,000 retail deposit customers, ending with 2.5 million retail deposit customers as of December 31, 2021. The growth in total deposits has been driven by strong growth in retail deposits, partially offset by a reduction in brokered deposits. Total retail deposits increased $10.3 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily within our online savings product, bringing the total retail deposits portfolio to $134.7 billion as of December 31, 2021. Strong customer acquisition and retention rates, reflecting the strength of the brand, continue to drive the growth in retail deposits.
We continue to advance our digital capabilities and deliver incremental value to our retail deposit customers beyond competitive rates. In early 2020, we launched our smart savings tools and have continued to deliver enhancements, improving our customer’s digital banking experience and providing unique opportunities to organize and build their savings. In addition, on June 2, 2021, we announced the elimination of all overdraft fees across our retail deposit products for all customers. This change is the latest example of our “Do It Right” commitment for our customers.
We continue to be recognized for the experience and value we provide our customers. In 2021, Ally Bank’s checking account earned national Bank On certification from the Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund (CFE). The organization recognized Ally’s existing checking account, which goes above and beyond CFE criteria, for providing lower- and moderate-income consumers with a safe, affordable path to join the financial mainstream and achieve financial stability. In October 2021, MONEY® Magazine named Ally to its “Best Online Bank” list for the fourth consecutive year, as well as the ninth time in the past eleven years, and in June 2021, Kiplinger named Ally Bank the “Best Internet Bank” for the fifth consecutive year. For additional information on our deposit funding by type, refer to Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Securitizations and Secured Financings
In addition to building a larger deposit base, we maintain a presence in the securitization markets to finance our automotive loan portfolios. Securitizations and secured funding transactions, collectively referred to as securitization transactions due to their similarities, allow us to convert our automotive-finance receivables into cash earlier than what would have occurred in the normal course of business.
As part of these securitization transactions, we sell assets to various SPEs in exchange for the proceeds from the issuance of debt and other beneficial interests in the assets. The activities of the SPEs are generally limited to acquiring the assets, issuing and making payments on the debt, paying related expenses, and periodically reporting to investors.
These SPEs are separate legal entities that assume the risks and rewards of ownership of the receivables they hold. The assets of the SPEs are not available to satisfy our claims or those of our creditors. In addition, the SPEs do not invest in our equity or in the equity of any of our affiliates. Our economic exposure related to the SPEs is generally limited to cash reserves, retained interests, and customary representation, warranty, and covenant provisions. We manage securitization execution risk by maintaining a diverse domestic and foreign investor base.
We typically agree to service the assets transferred in our securitization transactions for a fee, and we may be entitled to other related fees. The total amount of servicing fees earned is disclosed in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We may also retain a portion of senior and subordinated interests issued by the SPEs. Subordinate interests typically provide credit support to the more highly rated senior interest in a securitization transaction and may be subject to all or a portion of the first-loss position related to the sold assets.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
These securitization transactions may meet the criteria to be accounted for as off-balance-sheet securitization transactions if we do not hold a potentially significant economic interest or do not provide servicing or asset management functions for the financial assets held by the securitization entity. Certain of our securitization transactions may meet the required criteria to be accounted for as off-balance-sheet securitization transactions; therefore, they are accounted for as secured borrowings. We did not have any off-balance sheet securitization exposures at December 31, 2021. For information regarding our securitization activities, refer to Note 1 and Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We also have access to funding through advances with the FHLB. These advances are primarily secured by consumer mortgage finance receivables and loans and investment securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had pledged $18.0 billion of assets to the FHLB resulting in $14.0 billion in total funding capacity with $6.3 billion of debt outstanding.
At December 31, 2021, $27.4 billion of our total assets were restricted as collateral for the payment of debt obligations accounted for as secured borrowings. Refer to Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Unsecured Financings
We have short-term and long-term unsecured debt outstanding from retail term note programs. These programs are composed of callable fixed-rate instruments with fixed maturity dates. There were $216 million of retail term notes outstanding at December 31, 2021. In November 2021, we issued $750 million of senior unsecured notes maturing November 2028. In 2020, we accessed the unsecured debt capital markets four times, and collectively raised $2.8 billion through the issuance of senior notes composed of institutional term debt. We have also historically obtained unsecured funding from the sale of floating-rate demand notes under our demand notes program. However, on March 1, 2021, we terminated the offering of our demand notes program, and redeemed in full all outstanding demand notes. Refer to Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our outstanding short-term borrowings and long-term unsecured debt.
Other Secured and Unsecured Short-term Borrowings
We have access to repurchase agreements. A repurchase agreement is a transaction in which the firm sells financial instruments to a buyer, typically in exchange for cash, and simultaneously enters into an agreement to repurchase the same or substantially the same financial instruments from the buyer at a stated price plus accrued interest at a future date. The securities sold in repurchase agreements include U.S. government and federal agency obligations. As of December 31, 2021, we had no debt outstanding under repurchase agreements.
Additionally, we have access to the FRB Discount Window and can borrow funds to meet short-term liquidity demands. However, the FRB is not a primary source of funding for day-to-day business. Instead, it is a liquidity source that can be accessed in stressed environments or periods of market disruption. We had assets pledged and restricted as collateral to the FRB totaling $2.4 billion as of December 31, 2021. We had no debt outstanding with the FRB as of December 31, 2021.
Guaranteed Securities
Certain senior notes (collectively, the Guaranteed Notes) issued by Ally Financial Inc. (referred to within this section as the Parent) are unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several basis by IB Finance, a subsidiary of the Parent and the direct parent of Ally Bank, and Ally US LLC, a subsidiary of the Parent (together, the Guarantors, and the guarantee provided by each such Guarantor, the Note Guarantees). The Guarantors are primary obligors with respect to payment when due, whether at maturity, by acceleration or otherwise, of all payment obligations of the Parent in respect of the Guaranteed Notes pursuant to the terms of the applicable indenture. At both December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the outstanding principal balance of the Guaranteed Notes was $2.0 billion, with the last scheduled maturity to take place in 2031.
The Note Guarantees rank equally in right of payment with the applicable Guarantor’s existing and future unsubordinated unsecured indebtedness and are subordinate to any secured indebtedness of the applicable Guarantor to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. The Note Guarantees are structurally subordinate to indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables and lease obligations, and in the case of Ally Bank, its deposits) of any nonguarantor subsidiaries of the applicable Guarantor to the extent of the value of the assets of such subsidiaries.
The Note Guarantees and all other obligations of the Guarantors will terminate and be of no further force or effect (i) upon a permissible sale, disposition, or other transfer (including through merger or consolidation) of a majority of the equity interests (including any sale, disposition or other transfer following which the applicable Guarantor is no longer a subsidiary of the Parent), of the applicable Guarantor, or (ii) upon the discharge of the Parent’s obligations related to the Guaranteed Notes.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following tables present summarized financial data for the Parent and the Guarantors on a combined basis. The Guarantors, both of which the Parent is deemed to possess control over, are fully consolidated after eliminating intercompany balances and transactions. Summarized financial data for nonguarantor subsidiaries is excluded.
(a)There is a significant variation in the customary relationship between pretax income (loss) and income tax benefit due to our accounting policy elections and other adjustments.
(b)Excludes the Parent’s and Guarantors’ share of income of all nonguarantor subsidiaries.
(a)Excludes investments in all nonguarantor subsidiaries.
Cash Flows
The following summarizes the activity reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. While this information may be helpful to highlight certain macro trends and business strategies, the cash flow analysis may not be as helpful when analyzing changes in our net earnings and net assets. We believe that in addition to the traditional cash flow analysis, the discussion related to liquidity, dividends, and ALM herein may provide more useful context in evaluating our liquidity position and related activity.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $4.0 billion and $3.7 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Operating cash inflows were higher as compared to the prior year as our operating environment and results are returning to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels.
Net cash used in investing activities was $11.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $8.4 billion for 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $6.2 billion in net cash outflows related to purchases of available for sale securities and a decrease in net cash inflows of $12.5 billion related to higher originations of loans held-for-investment.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $3.8 billion, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $25 million for 2020. The change was primarily attributable to a decrease of $11.8 billion in net cash inflows related to deposits and a $1.9 billion increase in repurchases of common stock. This activity was offset by a $9.4 billion decrease in net cash outflows related to long term debt issuance and repayments and a $2.3 billion increase in net cash inflows from preferred shares issuances.
Capital Planning and Stress Tests
Under the tailoring framework described in the section titled Basel Capital Framework of Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we are generally subject to supervisory stress testing on a two-year cycle and exempted from mandated company-run capital stress testing requirements. We are also required to submit an annual capital plan to the FRB. Our annual capital plan must include an assessment of our expected uses and sources of capital and a description of all planned capital actions over a nine-quarter planning horizon, including any issuance of a debt or equity capital instrument, any dividend or other capital distribution, and any similar action that the FRB determines could have an impact on our capital. The plan must also include a detailed description of our process for assessing capital adequacy, including a discussion of how we, under expected and stressful conditions, will maintain capital commensurate with our risks and above the minimum regulatory capital ratios, will serve as a source of strength to Ally Bank, and will maintain sufficient capital to continue our operations by maintaining ready access to funding, meeting our obligations to creditors and other counterparties, and continuing to serve as a credit intermediary.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
We submitted our 2020 capital plan in April 2020, which included planned capital distributions to common stockholders through share repurchases and cash dividends over the nine-quarter planning horizon. In June 2020, the FRB provided us with the results of the supervisory stress test, additional industry-wide sensitivity analyses conducted in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, and our preliminary stress capital buffer requirement. As described earlier in the section titled Basel Capital Framework, we updated our capital plan in light of revised stress scenarios from the FRB and submitted our updated plan to the FRB in November 2020. In December 2020, the FRB publicly disclosed summary results of its second round of supervisory stress testing and extended its deadline for notifying firms about whether their stress capital buffer requirements will be recalculated to March 31, 2021. On March 25, 2021, the FRB further extended this deadline to June 30, 2021. On June 24, 2021, we received notification from the FRB that our stress capital buffer requirement would not be recalculated in connection with the second round of 2020 supervisory stress testing.
In June 2020, the FRB announced several actions to ensure that large firms, such as Ally, would remain resilient despite the economic uncertainty from the COVID-19 pandemic, including for the third quarter of 2020 (1) the suspension of repurchases by any firm of its common stock, except repurchases relating to issuances of common stock related to employee stock ownership plans, and (2) the disallowance of any increase by a firm in the amount of its common-stock dividends and the imposition of a common-stock dividend limit equal to the average of the firm’s net income for the four preceding calendar quarters. These restrictions were extended by the FRB for the fourth quarter of 2020. In December 2020, the FRB extended and modified these restrictions for the first quarter of 2021 to limit aggregate common-stock dividends and share repurchases to an amount equal to the average of the firm’s net income for the four preceding calendar quarters subject to specified exceptions. On March 25, 2021, the FRB extended these modified restrictions for the second quarter of 2021 and announced that, for a firm such as Ally that is not subject to the 2021 supervisory stress test and on a two-year cycle, the additional restrictions will end after June 30, 2021, and the firm’s stress capital buffer requirement based on the June 2020 supervisory stress test results will remain in place. On January 11, 2021, our Board authorized a stock-repurchase program, permitting us to repurchase up to $1.6 billion of our common stock from time to time from the first quarter of 2021 through the fourth quarter of 2021 subject to restrictions imposed by the FRB. On July 12, 2021, our Board authorized an increase in the maximum amount of this stock-repurchase program, from $1.6 billion to $2.0 billion. On January 10, 2022, our Board authorized a stock-repurchase program, permitting us to repurchase up to $2.0 billion of our common stock from time to time from the first quarter of 2022 through the fourth quarter of 2022, and an increase in our cash dividend on common stock from $0.25 per share for the fourth quarter of 2021 to $0.30 per share for the first quarter of 2022.
In January 2021, the FRB issued a final rule effective April 5, 2021, to align its capital planning and stress capital buffer requirements with the tailoring framework. Under the final rule, unless otherwise directed by the FRB in specified circumstances, Ally and other Category IV firms are generally no longer required to calculate forward-looking projections of revenues, losses, reserves, and pro forma capital levels under scenarios provided by the FRB. Each firm continues to be required, however, to provide a forward-looking analysis of income and capital levels under expected and stressful conditions that are designed by the firm. In addition, for Category IV firms, the final rule updated the frequency of calculating the portion of the stress capital buffer derived from the supervisory stress test to every other year. These firms have the ability to elect to participate in the supervisory stress test-and receive a correspondingly updated stress capital buffer requirement-in a year in which they would not generally be subject to the supervisory stress test. During a year in which a Category IV firm does not undergo a supervisory stress test, the firm would receive an updated stress capital buffer requirement that reflects its updated planned common-stock dividends. The final rule also includes reporting and other changes consistent with the tailoring framework. Ally did not opt into the 2021 supervisory stress test but will be subject to the 2022 supervisory stress test, with submissions due by April 5, 2022.
We submitted our 2021 capital plan on April 5, 2021, which includes planned capital distributions to common stockholders through share repurchases and cash dividends over the nine-quarter planning horizon and other capital actions. During the second quarter of 2021, we issued $1.35 billion of Series B Preferred Stock and $1.0 billion of Series C Preferred Stock, both of which qualify as additional Tier 1 capital under U.S. Basel III. The proceeds from these issuances were used to redeem a portion of the Series 2 TRUPS then outstanding. Refer to Note 15 and Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details about these instruments and capital actions. In June 2021, we submitted an updated capital plan to the FRB reflecting these capital actions and the increases in our stock-repurchase program and common-stock dividend described above. This updated capital plan was used by the FRB to recalculate Ally’s final stress capital buffer requirement, which was announced in August 2021 and remained unchanged at 3.5%. Our ability to make capital distributions, including our ability to pay dividends or repurchase shares of our common stock, will continue to be subject to the FRB’s review and our internal governance requirements, including approval by our Board. The amount and size of any future dividends and share repurchases also will be subject to various factors, including Ally’s capital and liquidity positions, accounting and regulatory considerations (including any restrictions that may be imposed by the FRB), impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic, financial and operational performance, alternative uses of capital, common-stock price, and general market conditions, and may be extended, modified, or discontinued at any time.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Regulatory Capital
We became subject to U.S. Basel III on January 1, 2015, although a number of its provisions-including capital buffers and certain regulatory capital deductions-were subject to phase-in periods. For further information on U.S. Basel III, refer to the section titled Regulation and Supervision in Part I, Item 1 of this report, and Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table presents selected regulatory capital data under U.S Basel III.
(a)Tier 1 leverage ratio equals Tier 1 capital divided by adjusted quarterly average total assets, which both reflect adjustments for disallowed goodwill, certain intangible assets, and disallowed deferred tax assets.
(b)We have elected to delay recognizing the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital until after a two-year deferral period, which for us extended through December 31, 2021. Beginning on January 1, 2022, we are required to phase in 25% of the previously deferred estimated capital impact of CECL, with an additional 25% to be phased in at the beginning of each subsequent year until fully phased in by the first quarter of 2025. Refer to Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
(c)In connection with our issuances of non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock in the second and third quarter of 2021, we redeemed a portion of the Series 2 TRUPS outstanding. In September 2021, we announced our intent to redeem the remaining shares of the Series 2 TRUPS outstanding without issuing a replacement capital instrument. The redemption was effectuated on October 15, 2021. Refer to Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details about our redemptions of Series 2 TRUPS, and Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details about our issuances of non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock.
(d)Contains deferred tax assets required to be deducted from capital under U.S. Basel III.
(e)Primarily comprises adjustments related to our accumulated other comprehensive income opt-out election, which allows us to exclude most elements of accumulated other comprehensive income from regulatory capital.
(f)Risk-weighted assets are defined by regulation and are generally determined by allocating assets and specified off-balance sheet exposures to various risk categories.
Credit Ratings
The cost and availability of unsecured financing are influenced by credit ratings, which are intended to be an indicator of the creditworthiness of a particular company, security, or obligation. Lower ratings result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. This is particularly true for certain institutional investors whose investment guidelines require investment-grade ratings on term debt and the two highest rating categories for short-term debt (particularly money-market investors).
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Nationally recognized statistical rating organizations rate substantially all our debt. The following table summarizes our current ratings and outlook by the respective nationally recognized rating agencies.
(a)Fitch affirmed our senior unsecured debt rating of BBB- and short-term rating of, and changed the outlook to Stable from Negative on March 30, 2021.
(b)Moody’s upgraded our senior unsecured rating to Baa3 from Ba1, upgraded our short-term rating to P-3 from Non-Prime and changed the outlook to Stable from Rating Under Review on August 27, 2021.
(c)Standard & Poor’s affirmed our senior unsecured debt rating of BBB-, affirmed our short-term rating of A-3, and changed the outlook to Stable from Negative on March 25, 2021.
(d)DBRS upgraded our senior unsecured debt rating from BBB (low) to BBB and upgraded our short-term rating to R-2 (high) on February 18, 2022.
As illustrated by the issuer ratings above, as of December 31, 2021, Ally holds an investment-grade rating from all the respective nationally recognized rating agencies.
Rating agencies indicate that they base their ratings on many quantitative and qualitative factors, which may include capital adequacy, liquidity, asset quality, business mix, level and quality of earnings, and the current operating, legislative, and regulatory environment. Rating agencies themselves could make or be required to make substantial changes to their ratings policies and practices-particularly in response to legislative and regulatory changes. Potential changes in rating methodology, as well as in the legislative and regulatory environment, and the timing of those changes could impact our ratings, which as noted above could increase our borrowing costs and reduce our access to capital.
A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities, and the ratings are subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating agency. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Insurance Financial Strength Ratings
Substantially all of our Insurance operations have an FSR and an Issuer Credit Rating (ICR) from A.M. Best. The FSR is intended to be an indicator of the ability of the insurance company to meet its senior most obligations to policyholders. Lower ratings generally result in fewer opportunities to write business, as insureds, particularly large commercial insureds, and insurance companies purchasing reinsurance have guidelines requiring high FSR ratings. On October 13, 2021, A.M. Best affirmed the FSR for Ally Insurance Group of A- (excellent), affirmed the ICR of a-, and maintained a Stable outlook.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Accounting policies are integral to understanding our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make certain judgments and assumptions, on the basis of information available at the time of the financial statements, in determining accounting estimates used in the preparation of these statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain of our critical accounting policies requiring significant management assumptions and judgment are described in this section. An accounting estimate is considered critical if the estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made. If actual results differ from our judgments and assumptions, then it may have an adverse impact on the results of operations and cash flows. Our management has discussed the development, selection, and disclosure of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board, and the Audit Committee has reviewed our disclosure relating to these estimates.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We maintain an allowance for loan losses (the allowance) to reflect the net amount expected to be collected from our lending portfolios. The allowance is maintained at a level that management considers to be adequate based upon ongoing quarterly assessments and evaluations using relevant available information, which includes both internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions. Additions and reductions to the allowance are charged to current period earnings through the provision for credit losses; amounts determined to be uncollectible are charged directly against the allowance, net of amounts recovered on previously charged-off accounts. Expected recoveries do not exceed the total of amounts charged-off or expected to be charged-off. The allowance is measured using statistically-estimated models that are designed to correlate customer and collateral quality, as well as certain macroeconomic variables to expected future credit losses. The macroeconomic data used in the models is based on forecasted variables for the next 12 months. Beyond this forecast period, we revert to a historical average for each of the variables on a straight-line basis over 24 months. Our baseline macroeconomic forecast is consistent with the 50th percentile in a distribution of possible economic outcomes.
The consumer portfolio segments consist of loans that generally share similar risk characteristics within our Automotive Finance operations, Mortgage Finance operations, and our personal lending and credit card operations, both of which are included within Corporate and Other. The allowance model for each consumer portfolio segment is calculated using either internal or third-party proprietary statistical models and other risk indicators applied to pools of loans that share similar risk characteristics. Loans that do not share similar risk
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
characteristics are evaluated individually. For additional information regarding the allowance calculation for the consumer portfolio segments, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The commercial portfolio segment is composed of loans that may or may not share similar risk characteristics within our Automotive Finance operations and Corporate Finance operations. Loans that have similar risk characteristics are pooled and evaluated collectively for loan losses using proprietary risk rating models. Loans that do not share similar risk characteristics are evaluated individually. Credit losses for loans evaluated individually within this segment are measured based on the present value of expected future cash flows, discounted at the loans’ effective interest rate, or the observable market price or the fair value of collateral, whichever is determined to be the most appropriate. Estimated costs to sell the collateral on an undiscounted basis are included in the measurement if we intend to sell the underlying collateral as opposed to operating it. For additional information regarding the allowance calculation for the commercial portfolio segment, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The determination of the allowance is influenced by numerous assumptions and factors that may materially affect estimates of loss. The critical assumptions underlying the allowance include: (i) segmentation of each portfolio based on common risk characteristics; (ii) the development of reasonable and supportable forecasts of future macroeconomic conditions; and (iii) evaluation by management of borrower, collateral, and geographic information. Management monitors the adequacy of the allowance and makes adjustments as the assumptions in the underlying analyses change to reflect an estimate of expected lifetime loan losses at the reporting date, based on the best information available at that time.
The allowance reflects management’s estimate of expected credit losses over the contractual term of our lending portfolio and involves significant judgment, which could materially affect the provision for credit losses and, therefore, net income. For additional information regarding our portfolio segments and classes, allowance for loan losses, and other credit quality indicators, refer to Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Macroeconomic Sensitivity Analysis
We perform a sensitivity analysis using scenarios derived from widely published macroeconomic forecasts to quantify the sensitivity of our baseline forecast to both favorable and unfavorable changes in macroeconomic conditions. These scenarios are based on fixed probabilities of occurrence.
•The favorable (or upside) scenario is consistent with the 10th percentile in a distribution of possible economic outcomes and implies that there is a 10% chance that the realized economy will be better than the defined path and a 90% chance that the realized economy will be worse than the defined path.
•The unfavorable (or downside) scenario is consistent with the 90th percentile in a distribution of possible economic outcomes and implies that there is a 90% chance that the realized economy will be better than the defined path and a 10% chance that the realized economy will be worse than the defined path.
As of December 31, 2021, results of this sensitivity analysis indicate that the favorable scenario would reduce our allowance for loan losses by 2% and the unfavorable scenario would increase our allowance for loan losses by 9%. These results are estimates that are directly tied to the timing, severity, and duration of changes in the independently and instantaneously shocked macroeconomic scenario. Actual loss sensitivities and resulting estimates of consolidated allowance for loan losses may be influenced by numerous other factors including, but not limited to, the actual evaluation of macroeconomic conditions, future government and management actions, and other quantitative and qualitative information and adjustments. Therefore, this sensitivity analysis is hypothetical and is not intended to represent our expectation of changes in our estimate of expected credit losses due to a change in the macroeconomic environment.
Valuation of Automotive Operating Lease Assets and Residuals
We have significant investments in vehicles in our operating lease portfolio. In accounting for operating leases, management must make a determination at the beginning of the operating lease contract of the estimated realizable value (i.e., residual value) of the vehicle at the end of the lease. Residual value represents an estimate of the market value of the vehicle at the end of the lease term. At contract inception, we determine pricing based on the projected residual value of the vehicle. This evaluation is primarily based on a proprietary model, which includes variables such as age of the vehicle, expected mileage, seasonality, segment factors, vehicle type, economic indicators, production cycle, automotive manufacturer incentives, and shifts in used vehicle supply. This internally generated data is compared against third-party, independent data for reasonableness. The customer is obligated to make payments during the term of the lease for the difference between the purchase price and the contract residual value plus rental charges. However, since the customer is not obligated to purchase the vehicle at the end of the contract, we are exposed to a risk of loss to the extent the value of the vehicle is below the residual value estimated at contract inception.
To account for residual risk, we depreciate automotive operating lease assets to expected realizable value on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The estimated realizable value is initially based on the expected residual value established at contract inception. Periodically, we review the projected value of the leased vehicle at termination based on current market conditions, and other relevant data points, and adjust depreciation expense as necessary over the remaining term of the lease. Management periodically performs a detailed review of the estimated realizable value of vehicles to assess the appropriateness of the carrying value of operating lease assets. Impairment of operating lease assets is assessed upon the occurrence of a triggering event. Triggering events are systemic, observed events impacting the used vehicle market such as shocks to oil and gas prices that may indicate impairment of the operating lease asset. Impairment is determined to exist if the expected
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
undiscounted cash flows generated from the operating lease assets are less than the carrying value of the operating lease assets. If the operating lease assets are impaired, they are written down to their fair value as estimated by discounted cash flows. There were no such impairment charges in 2021, 2020, or 2019.
Our depreciation methodology for operating lease assets considers management’s expectation of the value of the vehicles upon lease termination, which is based on numerous assumptions and factors influencing used vehicle values. The critical assumptions underlying the estimated carrying value of automotive operating lease assets include: (i) estimated market value information obtained and used by management in estimating residual values, (ii) proper identification and estimation of business conditions, (iii) our remarketing abilities, and (iv) automotive manufacturer vehicle and marketing programs. Changes in these assumptions could have a significant impact on the operating lease residual value. Expected residual values include estimates of payments from automotive manufacturers related to residual support and risk-sharing agreements, if any. To the extent an automotive manufacturer is not able to fully honor its obligation relative to these agreements, our depreciation expense would be negatively impacted.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We use fair value measurements to record fair value adjustments to certain instruments and to determine fair value disclosures. Refer to Note 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of valuation methodologies used to measure material assets and liabilities at fair value and details of the valuation models, key inputs to those models, and significant assumptions utilized. We follow the fair value hierarchy set forth in Note 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in order to prioritize the inputs utilized to measure fair value. We review and modify, as necessary, our fair value hierarchy classifications on a quarterly basis, which can result in reclassifications between hierarchy levels.
We have numerous internal controls in place to address risks inherent in estimating fair value measurements. Significant fair value measurements are subject to detailed analytics and management review and approval. We have an established risk management policy and model validation program. This model validation program establishes a controlled environment for the development, implementation, and operation of models used to generate fair value measurements and change procedures. Further, this program uses a risk-based approach to determine the frequency at which models are to be independently reviewed and validated. Additionally, a wide array of operational controls governs fair value measurements, including controls over the inputs into and the outputs from the fair value measurement models. For example, we backtest the internal assumptions used within models against actual performance. We also monitor the market for recent trades, market surveys, or other market information that may be used to benchmark model inputs or outputs. Certain valuations will also be benchmarked to market indices when appropriate and available. We have scheduled model or input recalibrations that occur on a periodic basis but will recalibrate earlier if significant variances are observed as part of the backtesting or benchmarking noted above.
Considerable judgment is used in forming conclusions from market observable data used to estimate our Level 2 fair value measurements and in estimating inputs to our internal valuation models used to estimate our Level 3 fair value measurements. Level 3 inputs such as interest rate movements, prepayment speeds, credit losses, and discount rates are inherently difficult to estimate. Changes to these inputs can have a significant effect on fair value measurements and amounts that could be realized. Refer to the section titled Fair Value Sensitivity Analysis within this MD&A for a sensitivity analysis of changes in interest rates, foreign-currency exchange rates, and equity prices.
Determination of Provision for Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes predominantly in the United States. We file income tax returns in approximately 50 jurisdictions: federal, state, and local. The laws and regulations of each jurisdiction are complex and may be subject to different interpretations. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining consolidated income tax expense for each jurisdiction. Our interpretations of tax laws are subject to audits by various jurisdictions. Potential difference in the interpretation or changes in the tax laws may result in additional accrual of income tax expense or benefit, which could be material to our reported results. We consistently monitor new and reassess existing tax laws for changes and adjust our tax estimates accordingly.
Our provision for income taxes is comprised of current and deferred income taxes. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and recent results of operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results and incorporate assumptions about the amount of future state, federal, and foreign pretax operating income. These assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider three years of cumulative operating income (loss).
As of each reporting date, we consider existing evidence, both positive and negative, that could impact our view with regard to future realization of deferred tax assets. We currently hold deferred tax asset attributes related to net operating tax loss and foreign tax credit carryforwards. We perform regular assessments to determine whether our tax attributes are realizable. As of December 31, 2021, we continue to believe it is more likely than not that the benefit for certain foreign tax credit carryforwards and state net operating loss carryforwards will not be realized. In recognition of this risk, we continue to provide a partial valuation allowance on these deferred tax assets relating to these carryforwards and it is reasonably possible that the valuation allowance may change in the next 12 months.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
For additional information regarding our provision for income taxes, refer to Note 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information related to recently adopted accounting standards.
Statistical Tables
The accompanying supplemental information should be read in conjunction with the more detailed information, including our Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto, which appears elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Net Interest Margin Table
The following table presents an analysis of net yield on interest-earning assets (or net interest margin) excluding discontinued operations for the periods shown.
n/m = not meaningful
(a)Average balances are calculated using an average daily balance methodology.
(b)Includes the effects of derivative financial instruments designated as hedges. Refer to Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about the effects of our hedging activities.
(c)Nonperforming finance receivables and loans are included in the average balances. For information on our accounting policies regarding nonperforming status, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(d)Yield includes gains on the sale of off-lease vehicles of $344 million, and $127 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Excluding the loss or gain on sale, the annualized yield would be 6.05%, and 4.93%, for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
(e)Represents interest expense on tax liabilities included in other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The interest expense on tax liabilities is included in the net yield on interest-earning assets and excluded from the interest spread. For more information on our accounting policies regarding income taxes, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(f)Net interest spread represents the difference between the rate on total interest-earning assets and the rate on total interest-bearing liabilities.
(g)Net yield on interest-earning assets represents net financing revenue and other interest income as a percentage of total interest-earning assets.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents an analysis of the changes in net financing revenue and other interest income, volume, and rate.
n/m = not meaningful
(a)Changes in interest not solely due to volume or yield/rate are allocated in proportion to the absolute dollar amount of change in volume and yield/rate.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
Finance Receivables and Loans
The table below shows the maturity of the finance receivables and loans portfolio and the distribution between fixed and floating interest rates based on the stated terms of the loan agreements. This portfolio is reported based on amortized cost.
(a)Includes loans with revolving terms (for example, wholesale floorplan loans, which are included within Commercial and Industrial, and credit cards).
(b)Loan maturities are based on the remaining maturities under contractual terms.
(c)Includes RV loans. RV lending was discontinued in 2018.
(d)Includes $7 million of finance receivables for which we have elected the fair value option.
Deposit Liabilities
The following table presents the average balances and interest rates paid for types of domestic deposits.
(a)Average balances are calculated using an average daily balance methodology.
(b)Includes brokered certificates of deposit average balance of $5.5 billion and $11.4 billion as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K
The following table presents the amounts of uninsured certificates of deposit, segregated by time remaining until maturity.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $16.3 billion of deposits that are estimated to be uninsured. In some instances, deposits in excess of federal insurance limits may be insured based upon the number of account owners, beneficiaries, and accounts held.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Ally Financial Inc. • Form 10-K