Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “ALSP Orchid Acquisition Corporation I” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to ALSP Orchid Acquisition Corporation I. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
ALSP Orchid Acquisition Corporation I is a blank check company incorporated on August 31, 2021, as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization, or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. The Company has generated no operating revenues to date and does not expect to generate operating revenues until we consummate our initial business combination. The Company’s sponsor is ALSP Orchid Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, which is owned and controlled by Accelerator Life Sciences Partners II, LP an affiliate of our sponsor.
The registration statement for the Company’s initial public offering was declared effective by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on November 18, 2021. On November 23, 2021, the Company consummated its initial public offering of 17,250,000 units at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of approximately $172.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $10.0 million, inclusive of approximately $6.0 million in deferred underwriting commissions. Each unit consists of one Class A ordinary share and one half warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, the Company consummated the private placement of 915,000 private placement units at a price of $10.00 per private placement unit to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $9.2 million. Each private placement unit is identical to the Units sold in our initial public offering, subject to certain limited exceptions.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering and private placement, approximately $176 million of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in a trust account, located in the United States, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee. The funds in the Trust Account will be invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations (collectively “Permitted Investments”), until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an initial business combination or (ii) the distribution of the assets held in the trust account. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied toward consummating an initial business combination.
If the Company is unable to complete an initial business combination within 15 months from the closing of our initial public offering (or during any Extension Period), under certain circumstances, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to the Company to pay our income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, proceed to commence a voluntary liquidation and thereby a formal dissolution of our Company, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to consummate an initial business combination within 15 months (or during any Extension Period) from the close of our initial public offering.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $1.3 million in working capital, including approximately $1.1 million in its operating bank account
For the period from August 31, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $397,674, which was due to changes in working capital of $247,366, our net loss of $144,643, and interest income on investments held in the trust account of $5,665.
For the period from August 31, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $176,219,076 was the result of the amount of net proceeds of $175,950,000 from our Public Offering being deposited to the trust account and the prepayment of the non-current portion of our Director’s & Officer’s insurance.
For the period from August 31, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $177,700,207 was comprised of $169,050,000 in proceeds from the issuance of units in our Public Offering net of underwriter’s discount paid and $9,150,000 in proceeds from the issuance of our private placement units, and $25,000 in proceeds from the issuance of Class B ordinary shares to our Sponsor, offset in part by the payment of $524,793 for offering costs associated with the Public Offering, including repayment of $228,000 advanced from an affiliate of our Sponsor.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021, had been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover for certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, an advance of approximately $228,000 from an affiliate of our sponsor and the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. The Company fully repaid the advance to the related party on January 27, 2022. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, such loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that our Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units of the post business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the private placement units. Except as set forth above, the terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. To date, there are no amounts outstanding under any working capital loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that it will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective candidates for our initial business combination, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
All activity up to December 31, 2021, was in preparation for our formation, our initial public offering and, since the closing of our initial public offering, a search for business combination candidates. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination.
For the period from August 31, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $144,643 which consisted of $110,308 in general and administrative expenses, $40,000 of related party administrative fees, partially offset by $5,665 of income from our investments held in the trust account.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that the Company believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company has identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the trust account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the trust account are classified as trading securities, which are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of investments held in trust account are included in gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in trust account in the statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in trust account are determined using available market information, other than for investments in open-ended money market funds with published daily net asset values (“NAV”), in which case the Company uses NAV as a practical expedient to fair value. The NAV on these investments is typically held constant at $1.00 per unit.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the Class A ordinary shares sold as part of the Units in our initial public offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with our initial business combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s amended and restated memorandum and articles of association. In accordance with FASB ASC Topic 480 (“ASC 480”), conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 17,250,000 Class A ordinary shares, representing the public shares, subject to possible redemption at the redemption amount were presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260 (“ASC 260”), “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in our initial public offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 9,082,500 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted loss per ordinary share is the same as basic loss per ordinary share for the periods presented.
In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the redeemable Class A shares and the non-redeemable Class A and Class B shares (“Non-redeemable shares”), the Company first considered the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares, including the accretion of Class A redeemable shares to redemption value which represents the difference between the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, net of offering costs, and the redemption value of the redeemable shares of $10.20 per share. Subsequent to calculating the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares, the Company split the amount to be allocated pro rata between redeemable Class A shares and non-redeemable shares for the period from August 31, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, reflective of the respective participation rights.
Warrants
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”).The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own ordinary shares, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding. For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The warrants issued in our initial public offering and Private Placement are equity classified.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our audited financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Shares and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed on the effective date of our initial public offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to demand that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain registration rights which provides that the Company will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period, which occurs (i) in the case of the founder shares, as described in Note 4, and (ii) in the case of the private placement units and the respective Class A ordinary shares underlying the private placement warrants, 30 days after the completion of an initial business combination.
The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to our initial public offering to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per unit, less underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters exercised this option in full on November 23, 2021.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of our initial public offering, or $3,450,000. Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of 3.5% or $6,037,500 of the gross proceeds of our initial public offering held in the Trust Account solely upon the completion of the Company’s initial business combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. The Company will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. The Company is electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, the Company may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.