Item 7
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Alpha Healthcare Acquisition Corp. III. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K
includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K.
Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on January 21, 2021 as a Delaware corporation for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the private placement of the Private Placement Units, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, activities necessary to prepare for and complete our Initial Public Offering, and activities related to identifying a potential target for an initial business combination. Since our Initial Public Offering, we have not generated any operating revenues, and do not expect to generate any operating revenues, until after completion of our initial business combination. $8,091 of dividend and interest income has been earned in the Trust Account through December 31, 2021. We will continue to generate non-operating income
in the form of dividend and interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the Trust Account. As a result of being a public company, we have incurred, and will continue to incur, legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance expenses, as well as due diligence expenses related to potential targets.
For the period from January 21, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $329,382, which consisted of formation and general and administrative costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On July 29, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 15,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 455,000 Private Placement Units to the Sponsor at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit generating gross proceeds of $4,550,000. We incurred $9,897,599 in transaction costs, including $3,000,000 of underwriting fees, $1,186,448 representing the fair value of the Founder Shares transferred from the Sponsor to certain investors as an incentive to purchase the Units, underwriting fees of $5,250,000 that will be paid only if a business combination is entered into, and $461,151 of other offering costs.
On August 3, 2021, the Underwriters exercised their option to purchase 444,103 additional Units for the total amount of $4,441,030 resulting from the partial over-allotment exercise. The Company also issued 8,882 Private Placement Units, generating additional $88,820 in gross proceeds. Transaction costs related to the Underwriters’ partial over-allotment exercise amounted to $247,506, consisting of $88,820 of underwriting fees, deferred underwriting fees of $155,436 that will be paid only if a business combination is entered into, and $3,250 of other offering costs.
Following our initial public offering, the sale of the Private Placement Units and the exercise of the over-allotment option, a total of $154,441,030 was placed in the Trust Account, and we had $1,550,000 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash outside the Trust Account of $774,192 available for working capital needs.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into placement units of the post-business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per placement unit at the option of the lender. The placement units would be identical to the units.
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on July 26, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $5,405,436.05 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
For the period from January 21, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $329,382, which consisted of formation and general and administrative costs.
The $774,192 held outside of the Trust Account as of December 31, 2021, may not be sufficient to allow the Company to operate for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of the financial statements, assuming that a Business Combination is not consummated during that time. The Company may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from its Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. The Company’s officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, the Company may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, assuming a Business Combination is not consummated. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
The Company believes that the proceeds raised in the initial public offering and the funds potentially available from loans from the sponsor or any of their affiliates will be sufficient to allow the Company to meet the expenditures required for operating its business. However, if the estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to the initial Business Combination. Moreover, the Company may need to obtain additional financing either to complete the Business Combination or because the Company becomes obligated to redeem a significant number of public shares upon completion of the Business Combination, in which case the Company may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On January 21, 2021, the Sponsor subscribed to purchase 3,593,750 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Founder Shares”) for an aggregate price of $25,000. On January 25, 2021, the Sponsor paid $25,000, or approximately $0.00696 per share, to cover for certain offering and formation costs in consideration for 3,593,750 Founder Shares. On March 1, 2021, the Company effected a 1:1.2 stock split of its common stock which resulted in an aggregate of 4,312,500 shares of Class B common stock outstanding. All shares and associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the stock split. On August 3, 2021, the Underwriters exercised their option to purchase 444,103 additional Units out of the total 2,250,000 available under the over-allotments and the forfeiture provisions lapsed for 111,026 Founder Shares. The remaining 451,464 Founder Shares were forfeited upon the expiration of the 45-day period
reserved for the exercise of over-allotment option.
At the date of our initial public offering, the Sponsor also transferred to certain investors a total of 225,000 of Founders shares as a compensation for their commitment to purchase the Public Units sold in our initial public offering. The Company estimated the aggregate fair value of these shares to be $1,186,448, or $5.27 per share. The fair value of the Non-Risk
Incentive Private Shares was determined to be a contribution from the Sponsor for offering costs in accordance with Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5T. These offering costs were allocated to the Units and charged to shareholder’s equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering.
At the date of our initial public offering, the Sponsor also transferred to certain other investors the total of 600,900 of Founders shares (“Risk Incentive Private Shares”) as a compensation for their commitment to acquire at least 9.9% of the Units sold in our initial public offering. These Risk Incentive Private Shares are subject to forfeiture if the investors sell their Units prior to the closing of the initial Business Combination. The fair value of these Risk Incentive Private Shares is equal to the fair value of the Non-Risk
Incentive Private Shares. Due to the high probability of forfeiture, the fair value of these Risk Incentive Private Shares will be recorded as a capital contribution from the Sponsor upon the closing of the initial Business Combination The Sponsor, directors and executive officers have agreed not to transfer, assign or sell (i) any of their Founder Shares until the earliest of (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of the Company’s shares of Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day
period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of its public shareholders having the right to exchange their common stock for cash, securities or other property, and (ii) any of their Private Placement Units, placement shares, Private Placement Warrants and Class A common stock issued upon conversion or exercise thereof until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination (the “Lock-up”). Any
permitted transferees will be subject to the same restrictions and other agreements of the Sponsor and directors and executive officers with respect to any Founder Shares, Private Placement Units, placement shares, Private Placement Warrants and Class A common stock issued upon conversion or exercise thereof.
Private Placement
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor purchased 455,000 placement units, at a purchase price of $4,550,000, in a private placement. Each Private Placement Unit is identical to the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering except as described below. A portion of the proceeds from the Private Placement Units was added to the proceeds from the Public Offering to be held in the Trust Account. If the Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Units will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law).
Resulting from the partial over-allotment exercise on August 3, 2021, the Company also issued 8,882 Private Placement Units, generating additional $88,820 in gross proceeds.
On January 25, 2021, the Company issued an unsecured promissory note to the Sponsor, pursuant to which the Company may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $300,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the Proposed Public Offering. This loan is non-interest bearing,
unsecured, and due at the earlier of (i) the date on which the Company consummates the initial public offering and (ii) the date on which the Company determines not to conduct an initial public offering of its securities, upon request from the Company the Sponsor. Any loan balances were to be repaid upon the closing of the Proposed Public Offering out of the initial public offering proceeds not held in the Trust Account. The Company made no borrowings under the promissory note.
Due to Related Party
The balance of $2,275 as of December 31, 2021, represents general and administrative costs paid by the Sponsor on behalf the Company.
Administrative Service Fee
The Company has agreed, commencing on the date that the Company’s securities are first listed on the Nasdaq, to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of an aggregate of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services. For the period from January 21, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, administrative fees incurred and paid to the Sponsor totaled $51,000. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
Related Party Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s Sponsor, an affiliate of the Sponsor, or the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of notes may be converted upon consummation of a Business Combination into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants will be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no written agreements in place for the Working Capital Loans.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares, placement units (including securities contained therein) and units (including securities contained therein) that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the placement warrants and any shares of Class A common stock and warrants (and underlying Class A common stock) that may be issued upon conversion of the units issued as part of the working capital loans and Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of the founder shares, will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to the registration rights agreement requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to our Class A common stock). The holders of the majority of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company registers such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of an initial business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidated damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than the underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $5,405,436 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. There were no critical accounting policies that contained significant judgment or estimates. Refer to Note 2 for the Company’s accounting policies.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.