ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
There are statements in this Report that are not historical facts. These “forward-looking statements” can be identified by use of terminology such as “believe,” “hope,” “may,” “anticipate,” “should,” “intend,” “plan,” “will,” “expect,” “estimate,” “project,” “positioned,” “strategy” and similar expressions. You should be aware that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that are beyond our control. For a discussion of these risks, you should read this entire Report carefully, especially the risks discussed under “Risk Factors.” Although management believes that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements included in this Report are reasonable, they do not guarantee our future performance, and actual results could differ from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements. The assumptions used for purposes of the forward-looking statements specified in the following information represent estimates of future events and are subject to uncertainty as to possible changes in economic, legislative, industry, and other circumstances. As a result, the identification and interpretation of data and other information and their use in developing and selecting assumptions from and among reasonable alternatives require the exercise of judgment. To the extent that the assumed events do not occur, the outcome may vary substantially from anticipated or projected results, and, accordingly, no opinion is expressed on the achievability of those forward-looking statements. In the light of these risks and uncertainties, there can be no assurance that the results and events contemplated by the forward-looking statements contained in this Report will in fact transpire. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of their dates. We expressly disclaim any obligation or intention to update or revise any forward-looking statements.
Overview and Highlights
Company Background
Alpine 4 Holdings, Inc. (“we” or the “Company”), was incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware on April 22, 2014. We are a publicly traded conglomerate that is acquiring businesses that fit into its disruptive DSF business model of Drivers, Stabilizers, and Facilitators. At Alpine 4, we understand the nature of how technology and innovation can accentuate a business. Our focus is on how the adaptation of new technologies even in brick and mortar businesses can drive innovation. We also believe that our holdings should benefit synergistically from each other and that the ability to have collaboration across varying industries can spawn new ideas and create fertile ground for competitive advantages. This unique perspective has culminated in the development of our Blockchain-enabled Enterprise Business Operating System called SPECTRUMebos.
As of the date of this Report, the Company was a holding company that owned fourteen operating subsidiaries:
-
A4 Corporate Services, LLC;
-
ALTIA, LLC;
-
Quality Circuit Assembly, Inc.;
-
Morris Sheet Metal, Corp;
-
JTD Spiral, Inc.;
-
Excel Construction Services, LLC;
-
SPECTRUMebos, Inc.;
-
Vayu (US), Inc.;
-
Thermal Dynamics, Inc.;
-
Alternative Laboratories, LLC.;
-
Identified Technologies Corporation;
-
ElecJet Corp.;
-
DTI Services Limited Liability Company (doing business as RCA Commercial Electronics); and
-
Global Autonomous Corporation.
Starting in the first quarter of 2020, we also created additional subsidiaries to act as silo holding companies, organized by industries. These silo subsidiaries are A4 Construction Services, Inc. (“A4 Construction”), A4 Manufacturing, Inc. (“A4 Manufacturing”), and A4 Technologies, Inc. (“A4 Technologies”), A4 Aerospace Corporation (“A4 Aerospace”), and A4 Defense Services, Inc. (“A4 Defense Services”). All of these holding companies are Delaware corporations. Each is authorized to issue 1,500 shares of common stock with a par value of $0.01 per share, and the Company is the sole shareholder of each of these subsidiaries.
Business Strategy
What We Do:
Alexander Hamilton in his “Federalist paper #11”, said that our adventurous spirit distinguishes the commercial character of America. Hamilton knew that our freedom to be creative gave American businesses a competitive advantage over the rest of the world. We believe that Alpine 4 also exemplifies this spirit in our subsidiaries and that our greatest competitive advantage is our highly diverse business structure combined with a culture of collaboration.
It is our mandate to grow Alpine 4 into a leading, multi-faceted holding company with diverse subsidiary holdings with products and services that not only benefit from one another as a whole, but also have the benefit of independence. This type of corporate structure is about having our subsidiaries prosper through strong onsite leadership while working synergistically with other Alpine 4 holdings. The essence of our business model is based around acquiring B2B companies in a broad spectrum of industries via our acquisition strategy of DSF (Drivers, Stabilizer, Facilitator). Our DSF business model (which is discussed more below) offers our shareholders an opportunity to own small-cap businesses that hold defensible positions in their individual market space. Further, Alpine 4’s greatest opportunity for growth exists in the smaller to middle-market operating companies with revenues between $5 to $150 million annually. In this target-rich environment, businesses generally sell at more reasonable multiples, presenting greater opportunities for operational and strategic improvements that have greater potential to enhance profit.
Driver, Stabilizer, Facilitator (DSF)
Driver: A Driver is a company that is in an emerging market or technology, that has enormous upside potential for revenue and profits, with a significant market opportunity to access. These types of acquisitions are typically small, brand new companies that need a structure to support their growth.
Stabilizer: Stabilizers are companies that have sticky customers, consistent revenue and provide solid net profit returns to Alpine 4.
Facilitators: Facilitators are our “secret sauce”. Facilitators are companies that provide a product or service that an Alpine 4 sister company can use as leverage to create a competitive advantage.
When you blend these categories into a longer-term view of the business landscape, you can then begin to see the value-driving force that makes this a truly purposeful and powerful business model. As stated earlier, our greatest competitive advantage is our highly diversified business structure combined with a collaborative business culture, that helps drive out competition in our markets by bringing; resources, planning, technology and capacity that our competitors simply don’t have. DSF reshapes the environment each subsidiary operates in by sharing and exploiting the resources each company has, thus giving them a competitive advantage that their peers don’t have.
How We Do It:
Optimization vs. Asset Producing
The process to purchase a perspective company can be long and arduous. During our due diligence period, we are validating and determining three major points, not just the historical record of the company we are buying. Those three major points are what we call the “What is, What Should Be and What Will Be”.
·
“The What Is” (TWI). TWI is the defining point of where a company is holistically in a myriad of metrics; Sales, Finance, Ease of Operations, Ownership and Customer Relations to name a few. Subsequently, this is usually the point where most acquirers stop in their due diligence. We look to define this position not just from a number’s standpoint, but also how does this perspective map out to a larger picture of culture and business environment.
·
“The What Should Be” (TWSB). TWSB is the validation point of inflection where we use many data inputs to assess if TWI is out of the norm with competitors, and does that data show the potential for improvement.
·
“The What Will Be” (TWWB). TWWB is how we seek to identify the net results or what we call Kinetic Profit (KP) between the TWI and TWSB. The keywords are Kinetic Profit. KP is the profit waiting to be achieved by some form of action or as we call it, the Optimization Phase of acquiring a new company.
Optimization: During the Optimization Phase, we seek to root up employees with in-depth training on various topics. Usually, these training sessions include; Profit and Expense Control, Production Planning, Breakeven Analysis and Profit Engineering to name a few. But the end game is to guide these companies to: become net profitable with the new debt burden placed on them post-acquisition, mitigate the loss of sales due to acquisition attrition (we typically plan on 10% of our customers leaving simply due to old ownership not being involved in the company any longer), potential replacement of employees that no longer wish to be employed post-acquisition and other ancillary issues that may arise. The Optimization Phase usually takes 12-18 months post-acquisition and a company can fall back into Optimization if it is stagnant or regresses in its training.
Asset Producing: Asset Producing is the ideal point where we want our subsidiaries to be. To become Asset Producing, subsidiary management must have completed prescribed training formats, proven they understand the key performance indicators that run their respective departments and finally, the subsidiaries they manage must have posted a net profit for 3 consecutive months.
Results of Operations
The following are the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $18,186,464 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, the increase in revenue related to $11,674,220 for Alt Labs (acquired in May 2021); $4,467,376 for TDI (acquired in May 2021); and $4,144,795 for QCA; offset by a decrease of $2,080,978 for APF. We expect our revenue to continue to grow during 2022.
Costs of revenue
Our cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $15,852,093 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, the increase in our cost of revenue related to $7,924,342 for Alt Labs; $3,393,740 for TDI; $4,112,489 for QCA. The increase in cost of revenue among all the different segments was the result of the increase in revenues as described above. We expect our cost of revenue to increase over the next year as our revenue increases, however at a lower rate year over year.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $18,464,076 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is a result of $6,777,081 related to Alt Labs; $1,356,518 related to TDI; $1,800,000 related to the repurchase of restricted stock units in March 2021; and $2,216,333 related to Vayu US (acquired in February 2021).
Other income (expenses)
Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased by $4,490,446 as compared to the same period in 2020. This decrease was primarily due to the gain on forgiveness of debt.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations since inception from the sale of common stock, capital contributions from stockholders, and from the issuance of notes payable and convertible notes payable. We expect to continue to finance our operations from our current operating cash flow and by the selling shares of our common stock and or debt instruments. In the first quarter of 2021, we raised approximately $55,000,000 through the sale of our common stock in public and private transactions. On November 26, 2021, a direct offering of common stock was issued raising $22,000,000 in cash.
In April and May 2020, the Company received seven loans under the Paycheck Protection Program of the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act totaling $3,896,107. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company also acquired four loans totaling $1,799,725 due to acquisitions. The loans had terms of 24 months and accrued interest at 1% per annum. The Company paid $88,159 for the loan assumed in connection with the Impossible acquisition, and the remaining $356,690 was forgiven. The remaining ten loans were forgiven in whole as provided in the CARES Act during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company also assumed an Economic Injury Disaster Loan (EIDL) in connection with the Vayu acquisition, which was still outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Management expects to have sufficient working capital for continuing operations from either the sale of its products or through the raising of additional capital through private offerings of our securities and improved cash flows from operations including the 2021 acquisitions. The Company also secured bank lines of credit totaling $18.8 million in 2021. Another $4.2 million was secured in March 2022. Additionally, the Company is monitoring additional businesses to acquire which management hopes will provide additional operating revenues to the Company. There can be no guarantee that the planned acquisitions will close or that they will produce the anticipated revenues on the schedule anticipated by management.
The Company also may elect to seek additional bank financing, engage in debt financing through a placement agent, or sell shares of its common stock in public or private offering transactions.
Liquidity Outlook
The Company’s financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”) applicable to a going concern, which contemplates realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business within one year after the date the consolidated financial statements are issued.
In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”), Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40), our management evaluates whether there are conditions or events, considered in aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
While the Company experienced a loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, of $19.4 million, and had a negative cash flow used in operations, there were several significant one-time / non-recurring items included in the $19.4 million net loss. These non-recurring items totaled $8.4 million, consisting of $612 thousand in new acquisitions expenses captured in professional fees, and other costs, $1.8 million for repurchase of restricted stock units, $3.0 million in write off of accounts receivables, $367 thousand in write off of intangibles and goodwill, $1.2 million to management for bonuses, and $1.4 million for a loss on equity investment.
The Company received a total of approximately $76.4 million in 2021 in the following two transactions:
-
The Company raised approximately $67.1 million in net proceeds in connection with a registered direct offering of its stock and;
-
The Company raised approximately $9.3 million in net proceeds in connection with an equity line of credit financing arrangement.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has positive working capital of $14.0 million. The Company has also secured bank financing totaling $18.8 million ($18.3 million in Lines of Credit and $0.5 million in capital expenditures lines of credit availability) of which $6.4 million was unused at December 31, 2021.
The Company plans to continue to generate additional revenue (and improve cash flows from operations) partly from the acquisitions of six operating companies which closed in 2021 combined with improved gross profit performance from the existing operating companies. The Company also plans to continue to raise funds through debt financing and the sale of shares through its planned at-the-market offering.
Based on the capital raise as indicated above and management’s plans to improve cash flows from operations, management believes the Company has sufficient working capital to satisfy the Company’s estimated liquidity needs for the next 12 months.
However, there is no assurance that management’s plans will be successful due to the current economic climate in the United States and globally.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. Preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates and in other instances changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. This applies in particular to useful lives and valuation of long-lived assets. Actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving our judgments and estimates.
Intangible Assets
The Company uses a third-party specialty valuation firm to value its intangible assets acquired in its business combination and asset acquisitions. The Company amortizes intangible assets with finite lives over their estimated useful lives, which range between one and fifteen years as follows:
The intangible assets with finite useful lives are reviewed for impairment when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the assets’ carrying amounts. In that event, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the long-lived assets. The Company has not changed its estimate for the useful lives of its intangible assets, but would expect that a decrease in the estimated useful lives of intangible assets by 20% would result in an annual increase to amortization expense of approximately $720,000, and an increase in the estimated useful lives of intangible assets by 20% would result in an annual decrease to amortization expense of approximately $480,000.
Construction Contracts
For the Company’s material construction contracts, estimates are used to determine the total estimated costs for a job and throughout the respective jobs’ progress and adjusted accordingly. Revenue is generally recognized over time as our performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as it is created or enhanced. Our fixed price construction projects generally use a cost-to-cost input method to measure our progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation as we believe it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as we incur costs on our contracts. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. For certain of our revenue streams, that are performed under time and materials contracts, our progress towards complete satisfaction of such performance obligations is measured using an output method as the customer receives and consumes the benefits of our performance completed to date. Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that estimates of costs to complete a performance obligation will be revised in the near-term. For those performance obligations for which revenue is recognized using a cost-to-cost input method, changes in total estimated costs, and related progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation, are recognized on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the revisions to the estimates are made. When the current estimate of total costs for a performance obligation indicates a loss, a provision for the entire estimated loss on the unsatisfied performance obligation is made in the period in which the loss becomes evident.
Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities
The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. Contract assets include unbilled amounts from our construction projects when revenues recognized under the cost-to-cost measure of progress exceed the amounts invoiced to our customers, as the amounts cannot be billed under the terms of our contracts. Such amounts are recoverable from our customers based upon various measures of performance, including achievement of certain milestones, completion of specified units or completion of a contract. In addition, many of our time and materials arrangements, are billed pursuant to contract terms that are standard within the industry, resulting in contract assets being recorded, as revenue is recognized in advance of billings. Our contract assets do not include capitalized costs to obtain and fulfill a contract. Contract assets are generally classified as current within the consolidated balance sheets.
Contract liabilities from our construction contracts arise when amounts invoiced to our customers exceed revenues recognized under the cost-to-cost measure of progress. Contract liabilities additionally include advanced payments from our customers on certain contracts. Contract liabilities decrease as we recognize revenue from the satisfaction of the related performance obligation.
Contract Retentions
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, accounts receivable included retainage billed under terms of our contracts. These retainage amounts represent amounts which have been contractually invoiced to customers where payments have been partially withheld pending the achievement of certain milestones, satisfaction of other contractual conditions or completion of the project.
For a summary of our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included under “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Form 10-K.