ITEM
7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The
following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction
with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary
Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes
forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a
result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item
1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We
are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on March 11, 2021 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange,
asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate
our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, our shares,
debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We
expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business
Combination will be successful.
Results
of Operations
We
have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31,
2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target
company for a Business Combination after the Initial Public Offering. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business
Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial
Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting,
accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business
Combination.
For the year ended December 31,
2021, we had a net loss of $52,509, which consisted of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $749 and offset by expense of $53,258.
Liquidity
and Capital Resources
On
December 15, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 11,500,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $115,000,000. Simultaneously
with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 330,000 Private Units to the Sponsor at a price of $10.00
per Private Unit generating gross proceeds of $3,300,000.
Following
the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $115,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $5,669,696
in transaction costs, including $2,300,000 of underwriting fees, $2,875,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $494,696 of other offering
costs.
For the year ended December 31,
2021, net cash used in operating activities was $142,451. Net loss of $52,509 was impacted by interest earned on investments of $749.
At
December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $115,000,744. We intend to use substantially all of the funds
held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, excluding deferred underwriting commissions,
to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share
capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the
Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions
and pursue our growth strategies.
At
December 31, 2021, we had cash of $387,858 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust
Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel
to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate
documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In
order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an
affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. Such
Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such notes out of the
proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working
capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such notes, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment.
Up to $1,500,000 of notes may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would
be identical to the Private Units.
In
order to complete a Business Combination, the Company will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from
its Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. The Company’s officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not
obligated to, loan the Company funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion,
to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, the Company may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company
is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but
not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These
conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern if a Business Combination is not
consummated.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We
have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We
do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to
as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have
not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments
of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual
Obligations
We
do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement
to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for certain general and administrative services, including office space, utilities and administrative
services, provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on December 15, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until
the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation.
The
underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering,
or $2,500,000. The deferred fee will be paid in cash upon the closing of a Business Combination from the amounts held in the Trust Account,
subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical
Accounting Policies
The
preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure
of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual
results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrants
The
Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s
specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards
Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging
(“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet
the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under
ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own ordinary shares and whether the warrant holders could
potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions
for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance
and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For
issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component
of equity at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants
are required to be recorded as liabilities at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter.
Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Ordinary
Shares Subject to Redemption
We
account for our ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”)
Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability
instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption
rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within
our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our
ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain
future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as commitments and contingencies, outside
of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying
value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in
the carrying amount of redeemable ordinary shares are affected by charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated
deficit if additional paid in capital equals to zero.
Net
Loss Per Ordinary Share
Our
statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in a manner
similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the redeemable shares and non-redeemable shares, the Company first considered the undistributed income (loss) allocable to both the redeemable shares and non-redeemable shares and the undistributed income (loss) is calculated using the total net loss less any dividends paid. The Company then allocated the undistributed income (loss) ratably based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding between the redeemable and non-redeemable shares. Any remeasurement of the accretion to redemption value of the ordinary shares subject to possible redemption was considered to be dividends paid to the public shareholders.
Offering
Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
Offering
costs consist of underwriting, legal, accounting, registration and other expenses incurred through the balance sheet date
that are directly related to the IPO. As of December 31, 2021, offering costs amounted to $5,669,696 consisting of
$2,300,000 of underwriting fees, $2,875,000 of deferred underwriting fees, and $494,696 of other offering costs. The Company
complies with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A “Expenses of
Offering”. The Company allocates offering costs between public shares, public rights and public warrants based on the
estimated fair values of public shares, public warrants, and public rights at the date of issuance.
Recent
Accounting Standard
Management
does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material
effect on our financial statements.