ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The statements contained in the following MD&A and elsewhere throughout this Quarterly Report on Form 10-K, including any documents incorporated by reference, that are not historical facts, including statements about our beliefs and expectations, are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include statements preceded by, followed by or that include the words “may,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “estimate,” “target,” “project,” “intend” and similar words or expressions. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections, or other characterizations of future events or circumstances are forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements, which reflect our management’s beliefs, objectives, and expectations as of the date hereof, are based on the best judgement of our management. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. Such forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions relating to factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in such statements, including, without limitation, the following: economic, social and political conditions, global economic downturns resulting from extraordinary events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and other securities industry risks; interest rate risks; liquidity risks; credit risk with clients and counterparties; risk of liability for errors in clearing functions; systemic risk; systems failures, delays and capacity constraints; network security risks; competition; reliance on external service providers; new laws and regulations affecting our business; net capital requirements; extensive regulation, regulatory uncertainties and legal matters; failure to maintain relationships with employees, customers, business partners or governmental entities; the inability to achieve synergies or to implement integration plans and other consequences associated with risks and uncertainties detailed in our filings with the SEC, including our most recent filings on Forms 10-K and 10-Q.
We caution that the foregoing list of factors is not exclusive, and new factors may emerge, or changes to the foregoing factors may occur, that could impact our business. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise these statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except to the extent required by the federal securities laws.
Certain information contained in this discussion and elsewhere in this report may include “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and is subject to the safe harbor created by that act. The safe harbor created by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act will not apply to certain “forward looking statements” because we issued “penny stock” (as defined in Section 3(a)(51) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 3(a)(51-1) under the Exchange Act) during the three year period preceding the date(s) on which those forward looking statements were first made, except to the extent otherwise specifically provided by rule, regulation or order of the Securities and Exchange Commission. We caution readers that certain important factors may affect our actual results and could cause such results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements which may be deemed to have been made in this Report or which are otherwise made by or on our behalf. For this purpose, any statements contained in this report that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “explore,” “consider,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” “plan,” or “propose” or the negative variations of those words or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Factors that may affect our results include, but are not limited to, the risks and uncertainties associated with:
● Our ability to raise capital necessary to sustain our anticipated operations and implement our business plan,
● Our ability to implement our business plan,
● Our ability to generate sufficient cash to survive,
● The degree and nature of our competition,
● The lack of diversification of our business plan,
● The general volatility of the capital markets and the establishment of a market for our shares, and
● Disruption in the economic and financial conditions primarily from the impact of past terrorist attacks in the United States, threats of future attacks, police, and military activities overseas and other disruptive worldwide political and economic events and environmental weather conditions.
We are also subject to other risks detailed from time to time in our other filings with Securities and Exchange Commission and elsewhere in this report. Any one or more of these uncertainties, risks and other influences could materially affect our results of operations and whether forward-looking statements made by us ultimately prove to be accurate. Our actual results, performance and achievements could differ materially from those expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether from new information, future events or otherwise.
Plan of Operation
The 2022 operational plan consists of:
1. Continue establishing and expanding the different segments associated with the expanded ALTD operations. The divisions include:
a. Altitude Chamber Technology Division
b. Tennis, Golf, Basketball, and Academic Academies Division
c. Soccer Academy Division, including RUSH Soccer
d. Water Manufacturing / Technology Division
e. Cleaning and Sanitation Division
f. Altitude Wellness Division
g. Altitude Online Learning Division
2. Adopt a comprehensive branding, marketing, digital and social media strategy for the revenue lines above.
3. Update a back-office administration plan and adopt a staffing and management hierarchy for the multi-discipline operation.
4. Plan to expand in complementary ways, including establishing a basketball division (estimated to be ready for student athletes in 2022) and swimming and lacrosse divisions) estimated to be ready for student athletes in 2023).
Commercial operations are in Port Saint Lucie, Florida.
No assurances can be given that any of these plans will come to fruition or that if implemented that they will necessarily yield positive results.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, during 2020 and continuing in 2021, the Company established policies and protocols to address safety considerations. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to affect the Company’s business, financial condition, liquidity, and the Company’s operating results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the period ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
We had $6,595,867 and $5,524,410 of revenue for the period ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. The increase in revenue is primarily due to the effects of COVID-19 in 2020 and in 2021, operations returning to a near pre-COVID-19 level.
Direct Costs of Revenue
Direct costs of revenue for the period ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were $2,862,941 and $2,217,974, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the period ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were $6,154,928 and $3,893,455, respectively. The increase in expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 were comprised primarily of stock-based compensation of $657,947 compared to $0, respectively, the increase in salary and related expenses, $2,396,915 compared to $1,478,414, respectively, and the increase in rent expenses, $648,080 compared to $98,209, respectively. Rent expenses were affected by COVID-19 in 2020 and a new contract in 2021 for additional leased facilities.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income for the period ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were $580,385 and $461,721, respectively. For the periods ending 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized gains on settlement of debt of $53,008 and $0, respectively, and gain on the forgiveness of the PPP loans, $614,972 and $507,207, respectively.
Net Loss
Net loss for the period ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 was $1,841,617 and $105,287, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had a cash balance of $423,165 and negative working capital of $1,117,979 at December 31, 2021.
The Company’s anticipated capital requirements for the next 12 months will consist of expenses of being a public company and general and administrative expenses all of which we currently estimate will cost $325,000, excluding revenue related expenses and salaries. In the event there are unanticipated expenses and we need additional funds, we may seek to raise additional funding that we require in the form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock. However, we cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of our common stock to fund such additional expenses. We currently do not have any agreements, arrangements or understandings with any person or entity to obtain funds through bank loans, lines of credit or any other sources.
Going Concern
Several conditions and events cast substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. On a consolidated basis, the Company has incurred significant operating losses since inception. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had a net loss of $1,841,617. As of December 31, 2021, we had a working capital deficit of $1,117,979 and an accumulated deficit of $2,917,881.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Operating activities during the period ended December 31, 2021 used $1,690,239 of net cash. Net cash provided by investing activities was $2,155 for the period ended December 31, 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities of $1,977,246 was received from the issuance of common stock and shareholder advances during the period ended December 31, 2021. Operating activities during the period ended December 31, 2020 used $898,790 of net cash. Net cash used in investing activities was $11,667 for the period ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities of $794,185 was received from the issuance of common stock and shareholder advances during the period ended December 31, 2020.
In 2020, the Company was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and in 2021, the Company was going back to a near pre-COVID-19 level.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues, or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates in the accompanying financial statements include the amortization period for intangible assets, valuation and impairment valuation of intangible assets, valuation of share-based payments.
Changes in Accounting Principles. No significant changes in accounting principles were adopted during fiscal 2020 and 2019.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. The Company accounts for long-lived assets in accordance with the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ASC 360-10, “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.” This statement requires that long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements. The Company measures their financial assets and liabilities in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. For certain of our financial instruments, including cash, accounts payable, accrued expenses and short-term loans the carrying amounts approximate fair value due to their short maturities.
We have adopted accounting guidance for financial and non-financial assets and liabilities. The adoption did not have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position, or liquidity. This standard defines fair value, provides guidance for measuring fair value and requires certain disclosures. This standard does not require any new fair value measurements, but rather applies to all other accounting pronouncements that require or permit fair value measurements. This guidance does not apply to measurements related to share-based payments. This guidance discusses valuation techniques, such as the market approach (comparable market prices), the income approach (present value of future income or cash flow), and the cost approach (cost to replace the service capacity of an asset or replacement cost). The guidance utilizes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels. The following is a brief description of those three levels:
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable, either directly or indirectly. These include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore developed using estimates and assumptions developed by us, which reflect those that a market participant would use.
Revenue Recognition. Our sales are generated from three revenue streams: 1) contracts with customers for the design, development, manufacture, and installation of simulated altitude athletic equipment, 2) sports training and academic tuition, and 3) water filtration systems. For the simulated athletic equipment and the water filtration systems, we provide our products under fixed-price contracts. Under fixed-price contracts, we agree to perform the specified work for a pre-determined price. To the extent our actual costs vary from the estimates upon which the price was negotiated, we will generate more or less profit or could incur a loss.
We account for a contract after it has been approved by all parties to the arrangement, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
We evaluate the products or services promised in each contract at inception to determine whether the contract should be accounted for as having one or more performance obligations. The products and services in our contracts are typically not distinct from one another due to their complex relationships, customization, and the significant contract management functions required to perform under the contract. Accordingly, our contracts are typically accounted for as one performance obligation, except for the simulated altitude athletic equipment whereas there is a service obligation over a period of time.
We determine the transaction price for each contract based on the consideration we expect to receive for the products or services being provided under the contract.
In regard to the simulated altitude athletic equipment and the water filtration systems, we recognize revenue as performance obligations are satisfied and the customer obtains control of the products and services. In determining when performance obligations are satisfied, we consider factors such as contract terms, payment terms and whether there is an alternative future use of the product or service. Substantially all of our revenue is recognized over time as we perform under the contract because if our customer were to terminate the contract for reasons other than our non-performance, we would have the right to recover damages which would include, among other potential damages, the right to payment for our work performed to date plus a reasonable profit to deliver products or services that do not have an alternative use to us.
In regard to the sports training and academics tuition revenue recognition policy, the tuition is recognized over the course of the training period which is typically a semester. In determining when performance obligations are satisfied, we consider factors as to actual attendance at the academy. We would have the right to recover damages which would include, among other potential damages, the right to payment for our work performed to date.
Stock-Based Compensation. The Company accounts for stock-based instruments issued to employees in accordance with ASC Topic 718. ASC Topic 718 requires companies to recognize in the statement of operations the grant-date fair value of stock options and other equity-based compensation issued to employees. The value of the portion of an award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense over the requisite service periods using the straight-line attribution method.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. The Company establishes an allowance for doubtful accounts to ensure trade receivable are not overstated due to non-collectability. The Company’s allowance is based on a variety of factors, including age of the receivable, significant one-time events, historical experience, and other risk considerations. The Company had an allowance at December 31, 2021 and 2020 of $205,455 and $0, respectively. The Company had bad debt expense of $205,455 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not had a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or results of its operations.