Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements (and notes thereto) for the year ended December 31, 2021 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in “Risk factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a global leader in computational science and artificial intelligence enabling organizations across broad industry segments to drive smarter decisions in an increasingly connected world. We deliver software and cloud solutions in the areas of simulation, high-performance computing (“HPC”), data analytics, and artificial intelligence (“AI”). Our products and services help create a more sustainable future for our planet.
Our simulation and AI-driven approach to innovation is powered by our broad portfolio of high-fidelity and high-performance physics solvers, our market-leading technology for optimization and HPC, and our end-to-end platform for developing AI and Internet of Things (“IoT”) solutions. Our integrated suite of software optimizes design performance across multiple disciplines encompassing structures, motion, fluids, thermal, electromagnetics, system modeling, and embedded systems, while also providing AI solutions and true-to-life visualization and rendering. Our HPC solutions maximize the efficient utilization of complex compute resources and streamline the workflow management of compute-intensive tasks for applications including AI, modeling and simulation, and visualization. Our data analytics, AI and IoT products include data preparation, data science, MLOps, orchestration, and visualization solutions that fuel engineering, scientific, and business decisions.
Altair’s software products represent a comprehensive, open architecture solution for simulation, HPC, data analytics, and AI to empower decision making for improved product design and development, manufacturing, energy management and exploration, financial services, health care, and retail operations. We believe Altair’s solutions are compelling due to their openness and usability.
Altair’s products offer a comprehensive set of technologies to design and optimize high-performance, efficient, innovative and sustainable products and processes in an increasingly connected world. Our products are categorized by:
•
Physics Simulation and Concept Design;
•
High Performance and Cloud Computing; and
•
Data Analytics, AI, IoT and Smart Product Development.
Altair also provides Client Engineering Services, or CES, to support our customers with long-term ongoing expertise. This has the benefit of embedding us within customers, deepening our understanding of their processes, and allowing us to more quickly perceive trends in the overall market. Our presence at our customers’ sites helps us to better tailor our software products’ research and development, or R&D, and sales initiatives.
Licensing
There are two licensing methods we employ to deliver our software solutions:
•
Most products are available under our unique, patented units-based licensing model known as Altair Units.
•
A small subset of our products is available on a node-locked, or hardware specific, and named-user basis. This is especially true for our high-performance computing solutions.
Altair pioneered a patented units-based subscription licensing model for software and other digital content. This units-based subscription licensing model allows flexible and shared access to our offerings, along with over 150 partner products. Our customers license a pool of units for their organizations giving individual users access to our portfolio of software applications as well as our growing portfolio of partner products. We believe our units-based subscription licensing model lowers barriers to adoption, creates broad engagement, encourages users to work within our ecosystem, and increases revenue. This, in turn, helps drive our recurring software license rate which has been on average approximately 90% over the past five years. Each year approximately 60% of new software revenue comes from expansion within existing customers.
Recent Business Developments
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, The World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19, a pandemic and a public health emergency of international concern. The global spread of COVID-19, including new and emerging variants, has created significant volatility and uncertainty since March 2020 and may continue into the future.
The ensuing discussion is provided to summarize the impacts of COVID-19 upon the Company, inclusive of some of the principal measures undertaken by the Company to date to respond to the pandemic. It is difficult to predict with any level of precision the broad effects of COVID-19 on specific industries or individual companies. Locally or regionally imposed restrictions in concert with the duration of pandemic conditions, along with the development and distribution of vaccines, may create disparate impacts across the globe, including the primary countries or regions in which the Company and its customers operate.
We have adopted several measures in response to COVID-19 adhering to local and regional restrictions, including instructing employees to work from home, adjusting our expenses and cash flow to correlate with potential declines in billings and cash collections from customers, shifting certain of our customer events to online-only webcasts and restricting non-critical business travel by our employees. Historically, a portion of field sales, professional services and other activities were conducted in person. Currently, because of travel restrictions related to COVID-19, substantially all of our sales, professional services and other activities are being conducted virtually. We continue to actively monitor business conditions and government mandates related to COVID-19 and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers and shareholders.
Throughout this period, our response is focused on maintaining the health and safety of our employees, customers, and partners. We are committed to, and we believe we are capable of continuing to provide the same excellent level of service and technical support for our customers during these uncertain times. Our team is highly experienced with remote collaboration, as it is a normal part of our global culture. During this crisis, customers working remotely can move their existing licenses from their on-premises servers to servers utilizing hosted Altair Units, or request temporary term-based software licenses for increased productivity and security. We are also providing access to an increased number of online training, marketing and sales resources.
We have converted our business to being capable of operating nearly 100% remote as required or recommended under COVID-19 restrictions, leveraging our global technology infrastructure. While we are capable of sustained operations working remotely, we expect we will gradually resume normalized operations, when permitted, based on local conditions and restrictions, with the primary focus of preserving employee welfare, while continuing to support customers.
COVID-19’s impact on some of our customers has primarily contributed to the decrease in revenue for client engineering services. While we continue to robustly engage with our customers, primarily virtually, to mitigate the uncertain extent of the negative impact of COVID-19 on our customers, our ability to attract, serve, retain, or expand customers will continue to be uncertain. Existing and potential customers may choose to reduce or delay technology spending in response to COVID-19, or attempt to renegotiate contracts and obtain concessions, which may materially and negatively impact our operating results, financial condition and prospects. We are unable to accurately predict the full impact that COVID-19 will have due to numerous uncertainties, including the full scope of the disease, the duration of the outbreak, the number and intensity of subsequent waves of infections, actions that may be taken by governmental authorities, the impact to the businesses of our customers and partners, the development of treatments and vaccines, and other factors identified in Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, we may experience material adverse impacts to our business as a result of any economic recession or depression that has occurred or may occur in the future. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our business, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition.
Business combinations
In December 2021, we acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of two related privately held companies, World Programming Limited and December 2015 Software Limited (together “World Programming”), from the stockholders named therein.
World Programming is an enterprise software company based in the UK having approximately 500 customers globally and focused on data analytics for financial services, insurance, manufacturing, life sciences, energy, consumer products, and retail applications. World Programming’s platform supports development and execution of multi-language software solutions leveraging popular languages used in data science including Python, R, and the SAS language in a single program.
The Company expects this acquisition to be accretive, broaden its market opportunities, and contribute to long-term growth goals.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we completed another business acquisition that was individually insignificant to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The aggregate purchase price of this acquisition was allocated to assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated fair values.
We believe that our recent acquisitions result in certain benefits, including expanding our portfolio of software and products and enabling us to better serve our customer’s requests for data analytics and simulation technology. However, to realize some of these anticipated benefits, the acquired businesses must be successfully integrated. The success of these acquisitions will depend in part on our ability to realize these anticipated benefits. We may fail to realize the anticipated benefits of these acquisitions for a variety of reasons.
Factors affecting our performance
We believe that our future success will depend on many factors, including those described below. While these areas present significant opportunity, they also present risks that we must manage to achieve successful results. If we are unable to address these challenges, our business, operating results and prospects could be harmed. See Part I, Item 1A. - Risk Factors included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Seasonality and quarterly results
Our billings have historically been highest in the first and fourth quarters of any calendar year and may vary in future quarters. The timing of recording billings and the corresponding effect on our cash flows may vary due to the seasonality of the purchasing patterns of our customers. In addition, the timing of the recognition of revenue, the amount and timing of operating expenses, including employee compensation, sales and marketing activities, and capital expenditures, may vary from quarter-to-quarter which may cause our reported results to fluctuate significantly. In addition, we may choose to grow our business for the long-term rather than to optimize for profitability or cash flows for a particular shorter-term period. This seasonality or the occurrence of any of the factors above may cause our results of operations to vary and our financial statements may not fully reflect the underlying performance of our business.
Foreign currency fluctuations
Because of our substantial international operations, we are exposed to foreign currency risks that arise from our normal business operations, as well as our transactions that are denominated in foreign currencies, including the Euro, British Pound Sterling, Indian Rupee, Japanese Yen, and Chinese Yuan. To identify changes in our underlying business without regard to the impact of currency fluctuations, we evaluate certain of our operating results both on an as reported basis, as well as on a constant currency basis.
Business segments
We have identified two reportable segments: Software and Client Engineering Services:
•
Software -Our Software segment includes software and software related services. The software component of this segment includes our portfolio of software products including our solvers and optimization technology products, high-performance computing software applications and hardware products, modeling and visualization tools, data analytics and analysis products, IoT platform and analytics tools as well as support and the complementary software products we offer through our Altair Partner Alliance, or APA. The APA includes technologies ranging from computational fluid dynamics and fatigue to manufacturing process simulation and cost estimation. The software related services component of this segment includes consulting, implementation services, and training focused on product design and development expertise and analysis from the component level up to complete product engineering at any stage of the lifecycle.
•
Client Engineering Services - Our client engineering services, or CES, segment provides client engineering services to support our customers with long-term, ongoing expertise. We operate our CES business by hiring engineers and data scientists for placement at a customer site for specific customer-directed assignments. We employ and pay them only for the duration of the placement.
Our other businesses which do not meet the criteria to be separate reportable segments are combined and reported as “Other” which represents innovative services and products, including toggled, our LED lighting business. toggled is focused on developing and selling next-generation solid state lighting technology along with communication and control protocols based on our intellectual property for the direct replacement of fluorescent light tubes with LED lamps. Other businesses combined within Other include potential services and product concepts that are still in their development stages.
For additional information about our reportable segments and other businesses, see Note 17 in the Notes to consolidated financial statements in Item 15, Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of results of operations
Revenue
We primarily derive revenue from the licensing of our software, which includes our units-based subscription licensing model and for term and perpetual software licenses, as well as software related services. Our CES business derives revenue from providing engineers and data scientists to support our customers’ long-term, ongoing projects.
Software
Software revenue is principally comprised of subscription licenses, and to a lesser extent, perpetual licenses and associated maintenance and support fees. Subscriptions are typically governed by contracts with annual terms which include product updates, maintenance and support. We generally recognize software license revenue up front, while maintenance and support revenue is generally recognized over the term of the contract. To a much lesser extent, Software also includes revenue from the sale of hardware products.
Software includes consulting, implementation services and training. Our software related services team is comprised of approximately 350 highly technical people globally. We focus on establishing a strong working relationship with the user community allowing us to offer guidance and expertise throughout their product creation process. We generally recognize revenue for software related services as those services are performed.
Software related services
Consulting services from product design and development projects are considered distinct performance obligations and are provided to customers on a time-and-materials, or T&M, or fixed-price basis. Altair recognizes services revenue from our T&M contracts using input-based estimates, utilizing direct labor and contractually agreed-upon hourly rates as the input measure. For fixed-price contracts, software services revenue is recognized over time using a method that measures the extent of progress towards completion of a performance obligation, generally using a cost-input method where revenue is recognized based on the proportion of total cost incurred to estimated total costs at completion. If output or input measures are not available or cannot be reasonably estimated, revenue is recognized upon completion of the services.
Client engineering services
We operate our CES business by hiring engineers and data scientists for placement at a customer site for specific customer-directed assignments. We employ and pay them only for the duration of the placement.
Our CES business generates revenue from placing simulation specialists, industrial designers, design engineers, materials experts, development engineers, manufacturing engineers, and information technology specialists. We recognize CES revenue based upon hours worked and contractually agreed-upon hourly rates.
Other
Our Other revenue consists primarily of revenue related to our LED lighting business operated out of our wholly-owned subsidiary, toggled. toggled designs, and sources through contract manufacturers, LED lighting and related products for sale to consumers and businesses. We also generate revenue through royalties from licensing toggled technology to third-party manufacturers and resellers.
Cost of revenue
Cost of software
Cost of software revenue consists of expenses related to software licensing, hardware sales and customer support. Significant expenses include employee compensation and related costs for support team members, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, as well as hardware costs, travel costs, certain data center and facility costs and royalties for third-party software products available to customers through our products or as part of our APA.
Cost of software related services
Cost of software related services revenue consists of personnel and related costs, such as salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, as well as travel expenses and certain data center and facility costs.
Cost of client engineering services
Cost of engineering services revenue consists primarily of employee compensation and related costs. We employ and pay them only for the duration of the placement at a customer site.
Cost of other
Cost of other revenue includes the cost of LED lighting products and freight related to products sold to retail and commercial sales channels.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses, as defined and discussed below, support all the products and services that we provide to our customers and, as a result, they are presented in an aggregate total.
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related costs associated with our development team, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, professional consulting and development fees, and stock-based compensation expense. Our research and development efforts are focused on enhancing the functionality, breadth and scalability of our software, addressing new use cases, and developing additional innovative technologies. Timely development of new products is essential to maintaining our competitive position, and we release new versions of our software on a regular basis. All software development costs are expensed as incurred as our current software development process is essentially completed concurrent with the establishment of technological feasibility.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related costs associated with our sales and marketing staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, commissions and stock-based compensation, as well as costs relating to our marketing and business development programs including trade shows and events. We intend to continue to invest resources in our sales and marketing initiatives to drive growth and extend our market position.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of employee compensation and related costs for executive, finance, legal, human resources, recruiting, and employee-related information technology and administrative personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense, professional fees for external legal and accounting services, depreciation, facilities, recruiting and other consulting services.
Amortization of intangible assets
Amortization of intangible assets consists primarily of amortization of intangibles associated with acquisitions. We expect to incur additional amortization expenses resulting from future strategic acquisitions.
Other operating income
Other operating income consists primarily of government subsidies, primarily in France, in the form of grant income associated with certain of our research and development activities and other items as disclosed.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists of interest expense on our outstanding indebtedness and amortization of debt issuance costs.
Other (income) expense, net
Other (income) expense, net is comprised primarily of foreign currency exchange gains and losses generated from the settlement and remeasurement of transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of our operating units and interest income on invested cash.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense is comprised primarily of income taxes related to United States, foreign, and state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. Income tax expense also includes taxes withheld outside of the United States attributable to remittances to the Company from certain foreign subsidiaries. We record interest and penalties related to income tax matters as income tax expense. We expect the amount of income tax expense (benefit), if any, to vary each reporting period depending upon fluctuations in our quantum and tax jurisdictional mix of income (loss). We have substantial United States net operating loss carryforwards with no expiration period for losses generated
2018 onwards, and tax credit carryforwards which began to expire in 2018. The ability to utilize these tax attributes is highly dependent upon our ability to generate taxable income in the United States in the future.
Our future effective annual tax rate may be materially impacted by the amount of benefits and charges from tax amounts associated with our foreign earnings that are taxed at rates different from the federal statutory rate, the taxation of the foreign earnings in the U.S. under the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income, or GILTI, regime, changes in valuation allowances, level of profit before tax, accounting for uncertain tax positions, stock-based compensation, business combinations, payments to the Company from certain foreign subsidiaries, closure of statute of limitations, settlements of tax audits, and changes in tax laws including United States tax law changes that were enacted in December 2017. A significant amount of our earnings is generated in our EMEA and APAC regions. Our future effective tax rates may be adversely affected to the extent earnings are lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory tax rates.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had gross deferred tax assets, or DTAs, of $153.7 million and $133.4 million, respectively, primarily related to net operating loss carryforwards, tax credits, share-based compensation, lease obligations and employee benefits. We are entitled to a United States federal tax deduction when non-qualified stock options, or NSOs, are exercised. This deduction, in conjunction with other expected deferred tax asset reversals, resulted in an increase in the valuation allowance of $20.4 million in 2021 for the United States DTAs. Our ability to utilize any net operating losses or tax credits may be limited under provisions of the Code if we undergo an ownership change after our IPO (generally defined as a greater than 50-percentage point cumulative change (by value) in the equity ownership of certain stockholders over a rolling three-year period). We also inherited net operating losses, or NOLs, from the acquisition of Datawatch and Univa, which are subject to specific limitations on usage. We may also be unable to realize our tax credit carryforwards which began to expire in 2018.
Based on the evidence available, including a lack of taxable earnings in the United States, we recorded a valuation allowance against substantially all of our net deferred tax assets in the United States. If a change in judgment regarding this valuation allowance were to occur in the future, we will record a potentially material deferred tax benefit, which could result in a favorable impact on our effective tax rate in that period. The utilization of tax attributes to offset taxable income reduces the amount of deferred tax assets subject to a valuation allowance.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, or the Tax Act, was enacted on December 22, 2017. The Tax Act reduced the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%, required companies to pay a one-time transition tax on earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously tax deferred and created new taxes on certain foreign sourced earnings.
The Tax Act subjects a U.S. shareholder to current tax on Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income, or GILTI, earned by certain foreign subsidiaries. The impact of GILTI resulted in no incremental tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to a full valuation allowance on U.S. net deferred tax assets. We have made an accounting policy election to treat taxes due under the GILTI provision as a current period expense. In addition, the recently enacted CARES Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (CAA) provide relief to U.S. federal corporate taxpayers through temporary adjustments to net operating loss rules, changes to limitations on interest expense deductibility, and the acceleration of available refunds for minimum tax credit carryforwards. The CARES Act and the CAA did not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Results of operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations and certain financial data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)
Billings consists of our total revenue plus the change in our deferred revenue, excluding deferred revenue from acquisitions. For more information about Billings and our other non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, see “Non-GAAP financial measures” contained herein.
(2)
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted for income tax expense (benefit), interest expense, interest income and other, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, restructuring charges, asset impairment charges and other special items as determined by management. For more information about Adjusted EBITDA and our other non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, see “Non-GAAP financial measures” contained herein.
(3)
We define Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. For a reconciliation of Free Cash Flow to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, see “Non-GAAP financial measures” contained herein.
Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased $62.3 million, or 13%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Software
The 16% increase in our software revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily the result of growth across all three geographic regions, and supported by increases in new and expansion business, as well as retention in our renewal base.
Software related services
Software related services revenue increased 20% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily the result of an increase in customer demand for these services as businesses begin to recover from effects of COVID-19.
Client engineering services
CES revenue decreased 11% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily a result of our CES customers response to COVID-19, including furloughed staff positions and reduced CES staff working hours.
Other
Other revenue remained consistent for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of revenue
Software
Cost of software revenue increased $9.5 million, or 16%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Employee compensation and related expense increased $3.4 million, primarily due to increased headcount and compensation in the current year. Employee compensation was lower in the prior year as a result of temporary compensation reductions made in the second and third quarters of 2020. Stock-based compensation expense increased $3.2 million, third-party consulting fees increased $0.9 million, and we incurred $1.0 million of restructuring expense in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Software related services
Cost of software related services revenue increased 9% for the year ended December 31, 2021, driven by the increase in revenue, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the current year expense was primarily attributable to increased employee compensation of $2.0 million. Employee compensation was lower in the prior year as a result of temporary compensation reductions made in the second and third quarters of 2020.
Client engineering services
Cost of CES revenue decreased 11% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, consistent with the change in CES revenue. We have managed CES headcount and compensation to match our customers’ demand for our staffing resources, and therefore our costs have moved accordingly.
Other
The cost of other revenue increased 15% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is related to inventory obsolescence, product costs and shipping fees.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased $53.9 million, or 15%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in gross profit was primarily attributable to the increase in software revenue combined with a relatively smaller increase in cost of revenue.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses, as discussed below, support all the products and services that we provide to our customers and, as a result, they are reported and discussed in the aggregate.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased $25.0 million, or 20%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Employee compensation and related expense increased $14.6 million, primarily due to increased headcount and compensation in the current year. Employee compensation was lower in the prior year as a result of temporary compensation reductions made in the second and third quarters of 2020. Stock-based compensation expense and cloud hosting expense increased $8.2 million and $2.0 million, respectively, and we incurred $1.7 million of restructuring expense in the year ended December 31, 2021. These increases were partially offset a decrease in consulting fees of $1.0 million.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $21.3 million, or 19%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Employee compensation and related expense increased $11.0 million, primarily due to increased headcount and compensation in the current year. Employee compensation was lower in the prior year as a result of temporary compensation reductions made in the second and third quarters of 2020. Stock-based compensation expense increased $8.6 million, and we incurred $1.8 million of restructuring expense in the year ended December 31, 2021. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in travel and marketing expense of $0.8 million from suspension or reductions of certain in-person sales and marketing activities as a result of COVID-19.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $5.1 million, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Stock-based compensation expense increased $3.2 million, and employee compensation and related expense increased $1.2 million, primarily due to increased headcount and compensation in the current year. Employee compensation was lower in the prior year as a result of temporary compensation reductions made in the second and third quarters of 2020. Travel expense and facilities costs increased $0.7 million and $0.6 million, respectively, and we incurred $0.5 million of restructuring expense in the year ended December 31, 2021. These increases were partially offset by a $0.9 million decrease in cloud hosting expense in the current year.
Amortization of intangible assets
Amortization of intangible assets increased $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily attributable to an increase in intangible assets resulting from acquisitions in the current year and in late 2020.
Other operating income, net
Other operating income, net was consistent for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The provision for credit losses decreased $0.7 million in the current year, while the prior year period includes a $1.0 million gain recognized from settlements related to a historical acquisition.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of an increase in the amortization of the debt discount on our convertible notes.
Other expense (income), net
Other expense, net was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.9 million of other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily a result of $1.9 million in losses from foreign currency fluctuations in the United States dollar relative to other functional currencies during the year ended December 31, 2021, and a $0.6 million decrease in interest income in the current year due to lower interest rates as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income tax expense
The effective tax rate was (2,953%) and 617% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The tax rate is affected by the Company being a U.S. resident taxpayer, the tax rates in the U.S. and other jurisdictions in which the Company operates, the relative amount of income earned by jurisdiction and the relative amount of losses or income for which no benefit or expense is recognized due to a valuation allowance. The effective tax rate was impacted by the geographic income mix in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily related to a United States pre-tax loss of $27.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, for which a tax benefit was not recognized due to the valuation allowance, compared to a United States pre-tax loss of $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, for which a tax benefit was not recognized due to the valuation allowance. Income tax expense also includes taxes withheld outside of the United States attributable to remittances to the Company from certain foreign subsidiaries for which offsetting tax credits are not recognizable due to valuation allowance considerations.
Net loss
Net loss decreased by $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to an increase in revenue, partially offset by increases in employee compensation and related expense, stock-based compensation expense and restructuring charges and a decrease in income tax expense in the current year, as described above.
For information regarding the comparison of results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, please see Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP financial measures
We monitor the following key non-GAAP (United States generally accepted accounting principles) financial and operating metrics to help us evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions. In analyzing and planning for our business, we supplement our use of GAAP financial measures with non-GAAP financial measures, including Billings as a liquidity measure, Adjusted EBITDA as a performance measure and Free Cash Flow as a liquidity measure.
Billings. Billings consists of our total revenue plus the change in our deferred revenue, excluding deferred revenue from acquisitions during the period. Given that we generally bill our customers at the time of sale but typically recognize a portion of the related revenue ratably over time, management believes that Billings is a meaningful way to measure and monitor our ability to provide our business with the working capital generated by upfront payments from our customers.
Billings increased by $59.4 million, or 12%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in Billings was attributable to an increase in Software segment billings.
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted for income tax expense (benefit), interest expense, interest income and other, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, restructuring charges, asset impairment charges and other special items as determined by management. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a meaningful measure of performance as it is commonly utilized by us and the investment community to analyze operating performance in our industry.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $28.0 million, or 49%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily attributable to the increase in gross profit, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses.
Free Cash Flow. Free Cash Flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as cash flow provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. We believe that Free Cash Flow is useful in analyzing our ability to service and repay debt, when applicable, and return value directly to stockholders.
Free Cash Flow increased by $27.0 million, or 101%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in Free Cash Flow was primarily attributable to an increase in our cash-related profitability for the year ended December 31, 2021.
These non-GAAP financial measures reflect an additional way of viewing aspects of our business that, when viewed with our GAAP results and the accompanying reconciliations to corresponding GAAP financial measures included in the tables below, may provide a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be relied upon to the exclusion of GAAP financial measures and are by definition an incomplete understanding of the Company and must be considered in conjunction with GAAP measures.
We believe that the non-GAAP measures disclosed herein are only useful as an additional tool to help management and investors make informed decisions about our financial and operating performance and liquidity. By definition, non-GAAP measures do not give a full understanding of the Company. To be truly valuable, they must be used in conjunction with the comparable GAAP measures. In addition, non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized. It may not be possible to compare these financial measures with other companies’ non-GAAP financial measures having the same or similar names. We strongly encourage investors to review our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
Reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures
The following tables provide reconciliations of revenue to Billings, net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA, and net cash provided by operating activities to Free Cash Flow:
Billings
Adjusted EBITDA
(1)
Included for the year ended December 31, 2021, is $1.2 million currency gains on acquisition-related intercompany loans. Included for the year ended December 31, 2020, are $1.0 million of proceeds from settlements related to an historical acquisition and $0.6 million of severance expense. Included for the year ended December 31, 2019, are acquisition-related costs of $0.6 million, severance expenses of $0.4 million and impairment charges for royalty contracts of $1.0 million.
Free Cash Flow
Recurring Software License Rate. A key factor to our success is our recurring software license rate which we measure through billings, primarily derived from annual renewals of our existing subscription customer agreements. We calculate our recurring software license rate for a particular period by dividing (i) the sum of software term-based license billings, software license maintenance billings, and 20% of software perpetual license billings which we believe approximates maintenance as an element of the arrangement by (ii) the total software license, including all term-based subscriptions, maintenance and perpetual license billings from all customers for that period. Our recurring software license rate was 92% for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and 87% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and capital resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were $413.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and $150.0 million availability on our credit facility. We have outstanding debt in the form of convertible senior notes with a $230.0 million principal amount as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, Other accrued expenses and current liabilities includes a balance payable on an existing legal judgment against World Programming. We paid this judgment in January 2022, for $65.9 million.
For more than twenty trading days during thirty consecutive trading days ended December 31, 2021, the last reported sale price of our common stock exceeded 130% of the conversion price of the convertible senior notes. As a result, the convertible senior notes were convertible at the option of the holders, and the $199.7 million carrying amount of the convertible senior notes remains classified as a short-term liability as of December 31, 2021. We have the ability to settle the convertible notes in cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock at our own election.
We continue to evaluate possible acquisitions and other strategic transactions designed to expand our business. As a result, our expected uses of cash could change, our cash position could be reduced, or we may incur additional debt obligations to the extent we complete additional acquisitions.
We own an undeveloped parcel of land adjacent to our headquarters, which we may develop over the next few years. We have not yet determined the nature and scope of the overall timeline and investment beyond the immediate rezoning efforts necessary for our potential use in the future.
Our existing cash and cash equivalents may fluctuate during fiscal 2022, due to changes in our planned cash expenditures, including changes in incremental costs such as direct costs and integration costs related to acquisitions. Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of COVID-19 and global unrest. It is possible that certain customers may unilaterally decide to extend payments on accounts receivable, however the Company’s customer base is comprised primarily of larger organizations with typically strong liquidity and capital resources.
We believe that our existing cash balances, together with funds generated from operations and amounts available under our credit facility, will be sufficient to finance our operations and meet our foreseeable cash requirements for the next twelve months. We also believe that our financial resources, along with managing discretionary expenses, will allow us to manage the impact of COVID-19 on our business operations for the foreseeable future and withstand global unrest, which could include reductions in revenue and delays in payments from customers and partners. We will continue to evaluate our financial position as developments evolve relating to COVID-19 and global unrest.
Private placement financing
In September 2021, the Company issued 2,935,564 shares of its Class A common stock in a private placement to Matrix Capital Management Company LP, for aggregate proceeds of $200.0 million. Per the terms of the agreement, the shares are subject to a one-year lockup period. The Company expects to use the proceeds for general corporate purposes.
Revolving credit facility
We have a $150.0 million credit facility that was amended on June 5, 2019, to permit the issuance of the Convertible Notes and extend the maturity date of the credit facility to December 15, 2023 (“2019 Amended Credit Agreement”). The 2019 Amended Credit Agreement allows us to request that the aggregate commitments under the 2019 Amended Credit Agreement be increased by up to $50.0 million for a total of $200.0 million, subject to certain conditions.
As of December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding borrowings under the 2019 Amended Credit Agreement and there was $150.0 million available for future borrowing. The 2019 Amended Credit Agreement is available for general corporate purposes, including working capital, capital expenditures and permitted acquisitions.
The 2019 Amended Credit Agreement is secured by collateral including (i) substantially all of our properties and assets, and the properties and assets of our domestic subsidiaries but excluding any patents, copyrights, patent applications or copyright applications or any trade secrets or software products and (ii) pledges of the equity interests in all present and future domestic subsidiaries (subject to certain exceptions as provided for under the 2019 Amended Credit Agreement). Our direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries are guarantors of all of the obligations under the 2019 Amended Credit Agreement. In addition, the 2019 Amended Credit Agreement contains financial covenants which require, as of the end of each fiscal quarter, the maintenance of a minimum Interest Coverage Ratio of 3.0 to 1.0 a maximum Senior Secured Leverage Ratio of 3.0 to 1.0 and a maximum net Leverage Ratio of 5.0 to 1.0, as such terms are defined in the 2019 Amended Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants. For additional information about the 2019 Amended Credit Agreement, see Note 7 in the Notes to consolidated financial statements in Item 15, Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash flows
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, we had an aggregate of cash and cash equivalents of $413.7 million and $241.2 million, which we held for working capital purposes, acquisitions, and capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020,
respectively, $348.0 million and $187.9 million of this aggregate amount was held in the United States, and $60.2 million and $45.7 million was held in the APAC and EMEA regions with the remainder held in Canada, Mexico, and South America.
Other than statutory limitations, there are no significant restrictions on the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends or make other distributions to Altair. Based on our current liquidity needs and repatriation strategies, we expect that we can manage our global liquidity needs without material adverse tax implications.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1)
For information regarding a comparison of net cash provided/used in operating activities, investing activities and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, please see Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash provided by operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $61.6 million, which reflects an increase of $28.7 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was the result of changes to our working capital position for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $62.5 million, which reflects an increase of $13.4 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily the result of an increase in net cash payments of $13.0 million for business acquisitions for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $175.9 million, which reflects an increase in cash provided of $144.7 million compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 2,935,564 shares of our Class A common stock in a private placement for aggregate net proceeds of $200.0 million and we made a $30.0 million payment on our revolving credit facility. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had cash borrowings on our revolving credit facility of $30.0 million.
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
There were adverse effects of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to favorable effects of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Stock repurchase program
In February 2022, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program. Under the program, the Company is authorized to repurchase up to $50.0 million of the Company’s outstanding Class A Common Stock. As permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements and subject to market conditions and other factors, purchases under the program may be made from time to time in the open market at prevailing prices, or through privately negotiated transactions. The Company intends to use the share repurchase plan to opportunistically return capital to shareholders while still focusing on its primary goal of investing in the business to drive growth.
The authorization provides that: (1) the new stock repurchase program shall continue until the earlier of the date an aggregate of $50.0 million of common stock has been repurchased , or until suspended or terminated by the Board of Directors, in its sole discretion; and (2) all shares of common stock repurchased pursuant to the new program shall be retired and be available for use and reissuance for purposes as and when determined by the Board of Directors including, without limitation, pursuant to the Company's 2017 Equity Incentive Plan and the Company’s 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
Commitments
Our principal commitments as of December 31, 2021, consist of our $230.0 million Convertible Notes due in 2024.
For more than twenty trading days during thirty consecutive trading days ended December 31, 2021, the last reported sale price of our common stock exceeded 130% of the conversion price of the convertible senior notes. As a result, the convertible senior notes were convertible at the option of the holders, and the $199.7 million carrying amount of the convertible senior notes remains classified as a short-term liability as of December 31, 2021. We have the ability to settle the convertible notes in cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock at our own election. Conversion of the notes by noteholders may cause dilution to the ownership interests of existing stockholders. As of December 31, 2021, there have been no requests for conversion.
As of December 31, 2021, there was a balance payable on an existing legal judgment against World Programming. We paid this judgment in January 2022, for $65.9 million. Additionally, we have recorded a $20.3 million liability as part of the acquisition consideration of World Programming that is contingent upon the results of certain legal matters and will be settled in the Company’s Class A common stock.
As of December 31, 2021, we had a net benefit liability of $15.7 million associated with our pension and post-retirement benefit plans. For additional information on pension and other post-retirement benefits, including expected benefit payments for the next 10 years, see Note 14 in the Notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have non-cancelable contractual agreements primarily related to the hosting of our data storage processing, storage, and other computing services, as well as other commitments. We had $26.4 million in commitments, as of December 31, 2021, primarily due within three years.
We also have approximately $17.3 million of tax liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions. There is a high degree of uncertainty regarding the future cash outflows associated with these amounts. For additional discussion of uncertain tax positions, see Note 12 in the Notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical accounting estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting estimates discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these estimates relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and assumptions. Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for our significant accounting policies related to our critical accounting estimates.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenue from our Software and CES segments and our other businesses. Revenue is recognized by identifying a contract with a customer, identifying the performance obligations in the contract, determining the transaction price, allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Software
Software revenue includes product revenue from software product licensing arrangements, related services consisting of software maintenance and support in the form of post-contract customer support (PCS or maintenance) and professional services such as consulting and training services. Software products are sold to customers primarily under a term-based software licensing model and to a lesser degree, perpetual software licenses. We enter into contracts that include combinations of products, maintenance and services, which are accounted for as separate performance obligations with differing revenue recognition patterns.
Most term-based software license agreements include our patented units-based subscription model which allows customers to license a pool of units for their organizations, providing individual users flexible access to our portfolio of engineering software applications as well as to our growing portfolio of partner products. The amount of software usage is limited by the number of the units licensed by the customer. Revenue from these arrangements is fixed (based on the units licensed) and is not based on actual customer usage of each software product.
Revenue from term-based software licenses is classified as license software revenue. Term-based licenses are sold only as a bundled arrangement that includes the rights to a term software license and PCS, which includes unspecified technical enhancements and customer support. Maximizing the use of observable inputs, we determined that a majority of the estimated standalone selling price of the term-based license is attributable to the term license and a minority is attributable to the PCS. The license component is recognized as revenue upon the later of delivery of the licensed product or the beginning of the license period. The PCS is classified as maintenance revenue and is recognized ratably over the term of the contract, as we provide the PCS benefit over time.
In addition to term-based software licenses, we sell perpetual licenses. Typically, our perpetual licenses are sold with PCS, which includes unspecified technical enhancements and customer support. Revenue from the software component is classified as license software revenue and is recognized upon the later of delivery of the licensed product or the beginning of the license period. We allocate values in bundled perpetual and PCS arrangements based on the standalone selling prices of the perpetual license and PCS. Revenue from PCS is classified as maintenance revenue and is recognized ratably over the term of the contract, as we satisfy the PCS performance obligation over time.
Revenue from training, consulting and other services is recognized as the services are performed. For contracts in which the service consists of a single performance obligation, such as providing a training class to a customer, we recognize revenue upon completion of the performance obligation. For service contracts that are longer in duration and often include multiple performance obligations (for example, both training and consulting), we measure the progress toward completion of the obligations and recognize revenue accordingly. In measuring progress towards the completion of performance obligations, we typically utilize output-based estimates for services with contractual billing arrangements that are not based on time and materials, and estimate output based on the total tasks completed as compared to the total tasks required for each work contract. Input-based estimates are utilized for services that involve general consultations with contractual billing arrangements based on time and materials, utilizing direct labor as the input measure.
We also execute arrangements through indirect channel partners in which the channel partners are authorized to market and distribute our software products to end users of our products and services in specified territories. In sales facilitated by channel partners, the channel partner generally bears the risk of collection from the end-user customer. We recognize revenue from transactions with channel partners in a manner consistent with the direct sales described above for both perpetual and term-based licenses. Revenue from channel partner transactions is the amount remitted to us by the channel partners. This amount includes a fee for PCS that is compensation for providing technical enhancements and the second level of technical support to the end user, which is recognized over the period that PCS is to be provided. We do not offer right of return, product rotation or price protection to any of its channel partners.
Some of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. Judgment is required in determining whether each performance obligation is distinct. We allocate the transaction price for each contract to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling price, or SSP, for each performance obligation within each contract. The SSP is the price that we would sell a promised service separately to one of our customers. Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. We estimate SSP using information such as past transactions, internally approved pricing guidelines related to the performance obligations and other information reasonably available to us.
Non-income related taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are recorded on the consolidated balance sheet as accounts receivable, net and other accrued expenses and current liabilities. These amounts are reported on a net basis in the consolidated statements of operations and do not impact reported revenues or expenses. Certain hardware revenue is included within software revenue and is recognized when all revenue recognition criteria stated above are met, which is generally when the products are delivered to end customers.
Software related services
Consulting services from product design and development projects are considered distinct performance obligations and are provided to customers on a time-and-materials, or T&M, or fixed-price basis. Altair recognizes services revenue from our T&M contracts using
input-based estimates, utilizing direct labor and contractually agreed-upon hourly rates as the input measure. For fixed-price contracts, software services revenue is recognized over time using a method that measures the extent of progress towards completion of a performance obligation, generally using a cost-input method where revenue is recognized based on the proportion of total cost incurred to estimated total costs at completion. If output or input measures are not available or cannot be reasonably estimated, revenue is recognized upon completion of the services.
Acquisitions
We account for acquisitions of entities that include inputs and processes and have the ability to create outputs as business combinations. We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration of acquired businesses to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the transaction based upon their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price over those fair values is recorded as goodwill. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statements of operations.
We determine the estimated fair values using information available to us and engage independent third-party valuation specialists when necessary. We generally use an income approach to determine the fair value of intangible assets acquired. Estimating fair values can be complex and subject to significant business judgment. Critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from product sales, customer contracts and acquired technologies, expenses to operate the acquired business, and discount rates. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect either the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, these estimates are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Income taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Accounting for Income Taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates and statutes that will be in effect when those differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets can result from unused operating losses, research and development credits, foreign tax credit carryforwards, and deductions recorded for financial statement purposes prior to them being deductible on a tax return. Valuation allowances are provided against net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income and the reversal of taxable temporary differences. We consider, among other available information, scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, limitations on the availability of tax credit carryforwards, and other evidence assessing the potential realization of deferred tax assets. Adjustments to the valuation allowance are included in the tax provision in our consolidated statements of operations in the period they become known or can be estimated.
The valuation allowance is based on our estimates of taxable income for jurisdictions in which we operate and the period over which our deferred tax assets may be recoverable. Historically, we have had substantial United States tax credit carryforwards which began to expire in 2018. The ability to utilize these DTAs is highly dependent upon our ability to generate taxable income in the United States in the future.
We apply a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold to our accounting for tax uncertainties. We review all of our tax positions and make determinations as to whether our tax positions are more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the relevant taxing authorities. Only those benefits, or exposures, that have a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being sustained upon examination by taxing authorities are recognized. Interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recorded in income tax expense (benefit) in the consolidated statements of operations.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting guidance and the impact of this guidance on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 2 of the Notes to consolidated financial statements in Item 15, Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference.