Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The objectives of our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) are to provide users of our consolidated financial statements with the following:
•A narrative explanation from the perspective of management of our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect future results;
•Context to the consolidated financial statements; and
•Information that allows assessment of the likelihood that past performance is indicative of future performance.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report and the matters described under Item 1A. Risk Factors in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to Item 1. Business and Note 1. Background and Business Description for a description of our business and our key strategies to achieve our primary goal to maximize shareholder value.
Organization of Information
MD&A includes the following sections:
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ($ in millions)
AFG
During 2021, AFG progressed the development of its specialty property and casualty program insurance business. Developments included the following:
•AFG contributed $92 of additional capital to Everspan.
•Everspan received an 'A-' Financial Strength Rating from AM Best in February 2021.
•Everspan launched its specialty insurance program business in May 2021.
•To support expansion of the admitted insurance component of its business, during 2021 Everspan entered into stock purchase agreements to acquire four insurance shell companies. Such acquisitions will enhance Everspan's capabilities to launch new admitted programs, develop innovative products and provide enhanced flexibility to foster strategic relationships with prospective program partners. On October 1, 2021, Everspan completed the acquisition of Providence Washington Insurance Company (“PWIC”) from a subsidiary of Enstar Group Limited. PWIC holds certificates of authority in forty-seven states and territories. PWIC's legacy liabilities were fully ceded to reinsurers and Everspan also benefits from an unlimited, uncapped indemnity from Enstar Holdings (US) to mitigate any residual risk to these reinsurers. On January 3, 2022, Everspan completed the acquisition of the 21st Century Companies (three carriers) from a national insurance group that has a Financial Strength Rating of “A” (Excellent) from AM Best. The 21st Century Companies collectively possess certificates of authority in thirty-nine states. All legacy liabilities remain with affiliates of the sellers through reinsurance and contractual indemnities. The 21st Century Companies will be re-named during 2022.
•During 2021, AFG made minority investments in certain insurance related businesses, including insurtech platforms, that we believe will be synergistic to our specialty property & casualty program insurance or Managing General Agency/Underwriting businesses.
•See below AAC and Subsidiaries for the various 2021 activities relating to the financial guarantee business
In addition to its focus on Xchange, AFG is actively seeking to expand the MGA/U business though additional acquisitions and development of new MGA/U companies.
Net Assets
As of December 31, 2021, net assets of AFG, excluding its equity investments in subsidiaries, were $269.
(1)Includes surplus notes (fair value of $90) issued by AAC that are eliminated in consolidation.
AAC and Subsidiaries
A key strategy for Ambac is to increase the value of its investment in AAC by actively managing its assets and liabilities. Asset management primarily entails maximizing the risk-adjusted return on non-VIE invested assets and managing liquidity to help ensure resources are available to meet operational and strategic cash needs. These strategic cash needs include activities associated with Ambac's liability management and loss mitigation programs.
Asset Management
Investment portfolios are subject to internal investment guidelines, as well as limits on types and quality of investments
| Ambac Financial Group, Inc. 29 2021 FORM 10-K |
imposed by insurance laws and regulations. The investment portfolios of AAC and Ambac UK hold fixed maturity securities and various pooled investment funds. Refer to Note 4. Investments to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 in this Form 10-K for further details of fixed maturity investments by asset category and pooled investment funds by investment type.
At December 31, 2021, Ambac and its subsidiaries owned $609 of distressed Ambac-insured bonds, including significant concentrations of insured Puerto Rico and RMBS bonds.
Subject to internal and regulatory guidelines, market conditions and other constraints, Ambac may continue to opportunistically purchase or sell Ambac-insured securities, surplus notes and/or other Ambac issued securities, and may consider opportunities to exchange securities issued by it from time to time for other securities issued by it.
Liability and Insured Exposure Management
AAC's Risk Management Group focuses on the implementation and execution of risk reduction, defeasance and loss recovery strategies. Analysts evaluate the estimated timing and severity of projected policy claims as well as the potential impact of loss mitigation or remediation strategies in order to target and prioritize policies, or portions thereof, for commutation, reinsurance, refinancing, restructuring or other risk reduction strategies. For targeted policies, analysts will engage with issuers, bondholders and other economic stakeholders to negotiate, structure and execute such strategies. During 2021, Ambac completed risk reduction transactions consisting of quota share reinsurance, refinancings, and commutations of $2,695, of which, quota share reinsurance represented $1,695.
The following table provides a comparison of total, adversely classified ("ACC") and watch list credit net par outstanding in the insured portfolio at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Net par exposure within the U.S. public finance market includes capital appreciation bonds which are reported at the par amount at the time of issuance of the insurance policy as opposed to the current accreted value of the bonds.
The decrease in total, ACC and watch list credit net par outstanding resulted from active de-risking initiatives, as noted above, as well as scheduled maturities, amortizations, refundings and calls.
We have been paying claims for several years on most of our exposure to Puerto Rico, which consists of several different issuing entities (all below investment grade). These issuing entities, which have been part of the PROMESA restructuring process that began in 2016, each have their own credit risk profile attributable to discrete revenue sources, direct general obligation pledges, and/or general obligation guarantees.
On January 18, 2022, Judge Swain, U.S. District Court for the District of Puerto Rico, confirmed the modified Eighth
Amended Plan of Adjustment for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico ("Eighth Amended POA"). On January 20, 2022, Judge Swain approved the Qualifying Modifications for PRIFA and CCDA ("PRIFA QM" and "CCDA QM", respectively). Although the Eighth Amended POA, the PRIFA QM and CCDA QM remain subject to appeal (see Risk Factors- "Insured Portfolio Losses"), the Eighth Amended POA, PRIFA QM, and CCDA QM are expected to become effective on or before March 15, 2022. Consummation of the plan of adjustment and qualifying modifications will resolve the PROMESA restructuring process for the GO, PBA, PRIFA and CCDA issuing entities that have portions of their bonds insured by AAC. On the effective date of the Eighth Amended POA, PRIFA QM, and CCDA QM, and pursuant to bondholder elections, (i) all of the remaining outstanding AAC-insured GO and PBA bonds will be satisfied and eliminated via commutation or acceleration, and (ii) about 39% and 19% of the par of AAC's outstanding AAC-insured PRIFA and CCDA bonds, respectively, will be reduced via commutation, with the remainder of those bonds (belonging to bondholders who elected not to commute their AAC Insurance Policies) being deposited into trusts together with such policies and the bondholders' respective shares of distributed Eighth Amended POA, PRIFA QM, or CCDA QM consideration. Those bondholders participating in the trusts are expected to receive scheduled payments from the applicable trust, unless Ambac elects, in its sole discretion, to pay all or a portion of the outstanding par amounts of the AAC-insured bonds in such trust.
AAC-insured bonds of PRHTA are subject to the PRHTA POA, a separate plan of adjustment that is expected to be filed prior to March 31, 2022, with a confirmation hearing to follow later in 2022.
Refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Financial Guarantees in Force, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the different issuing entities that encompass Ambac's exposures to Puerto Rico.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic had, and to a lesser degree, continues to have, an impact on general economic conditions; including, but not limited to, higher unemployment; volatility in the capital markets; closure or severe curtailment of the operations and, hence, revenues, of many businesses and public and private enterprises to which we are directly or indirectly exposed.
COVID-19 and the public health responses by the US federal and state governments at the onset of the pandemic resulted in a shut down for several months of significant portions of the US economy, including areas that Ambac's insured obligors rely upon to generate the revenues and cash flows necessary to service debts we insure. In the U.S. and Europe, where most of Ambac's financial guaranty exposure is located, significant fiscal stimulus measures, monetary policy actions and other relief measures helped to moderate the negative economic impacts of COVID-19 and supported the economic recovery which began in the second half of 2020 and continues into 2022. As of December 31, 2021, there have been no defaults of Ambac-insured obligations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
| Ambac Financial Group, Inc. 30 2021 FORM 10-K |
Despite the significant overall benefit of the above relief measures, which were designed to help mitigate the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic generally, certain of these measures may still adversely affect Ambac's insured portfolio. In particular, this includes the U.S. government's temporary relief measures that required mortgage loan servicers to offer relief to borrowers who suffer hardship as a result of COVID-19. These relief measures included moratoriums on foreclosures and evictions as well as the expansion of forbearance and subsequent repayment options. While these relief measures have largely since expired, the resulting delays in starting mortgage foreclosure processes and the impact of potential post-forbearance related mortgage loan modifications may have an adverse impact on our insured RMBS transactions. Consequently, we have anticipated that we will experience an increase in claim payments for certain of our insured RMBS obligations following the resumption of foreclosure activity and the implementation of post-forbearance mortgage loan modifications. However, since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, much of the potential increase in claim experience has been offset by the benefit to excess spread within the securitization structures as a result of the reduction in interest rates, which is expected to result in higher excess spread recoveries to Ambac.
The impact from the COVID-19 pandemic on Ambac also includes the ability of our counterparties to pay their obligations when due, most notably AAC's reinsurers for their portion of future financial guaranty claim payments. Ambac has reinsured approximately 17.9% of its gross par outstanding to five reinsurance counterparties. Each of these reinsurance counterparties (i) is experienced in the business of reinsuring and/or writing financial guaranty insurance and (ii) have current ratings of A+ (by S&P) or better and have collateralization or replacement triggers upon downgrade within Ambac's reinsurance agreements. Ambac actively monitors each of these reinsurance entities and currently believes they have the ability to perform under their respective reinsurance policies, but this is subject to change.
Given the economic uncertainties associated with the duration and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is impossible to fully predict all of its consequences and, as a result, it is possible that our future operating results and financial condition may be materially adversely affected. Refer to "Financial Guarantees In Force," "Results of Operations" and "Balance Sheet Commentary" for further financial details on the current impact from COVID-19.
With regard to Ambac's new business strategic objective, we continue to evaluate opportunities in a disciplined manner. Our evaluation process incorporates the perceived impact of COVID-19 on historical and prospective business results.
Financial Statement Impact of Foreign Currency
The impact of foreign currency as reported in Ambac's Consolidated Statement of Total Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 included the following:
(1) A portion of Ambac UK's, and to a lesser extent AAC's, assets and liabilities are denominated in currencies other than its functional currency and accordingly, we recognized net foreign currency transaction gains/(losses) as a result of changes to foreign currency rates through our Consolidated Statement of Total Comprehensive Income (Loss). Refer to Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report in Form 10-K for further details on transaction gains and losses.
Future changes to currency rates, may adversely affect our financial results. Refer to Part II,