Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “AMCI Acquisition Corp. II,” “AMCI,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to AMCI Acquisition Corp. II. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Some of the statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may constitute “forward-looking statements” for purposes of the federal securities laws. Our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our or our management team’s expectations, hopes, beliefs, intentions or strategies regarding the future. In addition, any statements that refer to projections, forecasts or other characterizations of future events or circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “would” and similar expressions may identify forward-looking statements, but the absence of these words does not mean that a statement is not forward-looking.
The forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on our current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on us. There can be no assurance that future developments affecting us will be those that we have anticipated. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond our control) or other assumptions that may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the following risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond our control) or other factors:
● we have no operating history and no revenues, and you have no basis on which to evaluate our ability to achieve our business objective;
● our ability to select an appropriate target business or businesses;
● our ability to complete a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses;
● our expectations around the performance of a prospective target business or businesses;
● our success in retaining or recruiting, or changes required in, our officers, key employees or directors following our initial business combination;
● our officers and directors allocating their time to other businesses and potentially having conflicts of interest with our business or in approving our initial business combination;
● our potential ability to obtain additional financing to complete our initial business combination;
● our pool of prospective target businesses;
● our ability to consummate an initial business combination due to the uncertainty resulting from the recent COVID-19 pandemic;
● the ability of our officers and directors to generate a number of potential business combination opportunities;
● our public securities’ potential liquidity and trading;
● the use of proceeds not held in the trust account or available to us from interest income on the trust account balance;
● the trust account not being subject to claims of third parties;
● our financial performance following our initial public offering (the “initial public offering”); and
● the other risks and uncertainties discussed herein, in our filings with the SEC and in our final prospectus relating to our initial public offering, filed with the SEC on August 4, 2021.
Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should any of our assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary in material respects from those projected in these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required under applicable securities laws.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on January 28, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “business combination”).
Our sponsor is AMCI Sponsor II LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”).
The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on August 3, 2021 (the “effective date”). On August 6, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 15,000,000 units (the “units”). Each unit consists of one Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Class A common stock”), and one-half of one redeemable warrant (the “warrant”), each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one Class A common stock for $11.50 per share. The units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds for us of $150,000,000.
The underwriters had a 45-day option from the date of the underwriting agreement (August 3, 2021) to purchase up to an additional 2,250,000 units to cover over-allotments, if any. On September 17, 2021, the over-allotment option expired unexercised, resulting in the forfeiture of 562,500 shares of Class B common stock.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 3,500,000 warrants (the “private placement warrants”) to the Sponsor at a purchase price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds for us of $3,500,000. The private placement warrants are identical to the warrants sold in the initial public offering, except that the private placement warrants, so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees, (i) are not redeemable by us, (ii) may not (including the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of such private placement warrants), subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferred, assigned or sold by such holders until 30 days after the completion of our initial business combination, (iii) may be exercised by the holders on a cashless basis and (iv) will be entitled to registration rights. No underwriting discounts or commissions were paid with respect to such sales.
Recent Developments
On March 8, 2022, we entered into an agreement and plan of merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with AMCI Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and our wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”), and LanzaTech NZ, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“LanzaTech”). The transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement are referred to herein as the “Proposed Business Combination.” The time of the closing of the Proposed Business Combination is referred to herein as the “Closing.” The date of the Closing of the Proposed Business Combination is referred to herein as the “Closing Date.”
Proposed Business Combination
If the Proposed Business Combination is approved by our stockholders and LanzaTech’s stockholders, and the closing conditions in the Merger Agreement are satisfied or waived, then, among other things, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger Agreement and in accordance with Delaware General Corporation Law, Merger Sub will merge with and into LanzaTech, with LanzaTech surviving the merger as our wholly owned subsidiary (the “Merger”). In connection with the consummation of the Merger,
we will be renamed “LanzaTech Global, Inc.” and is referred to herein as “New LanzaTech” as of the time following such change of name.
Under the Merger Agreement, we have agreed to acquire all of the outstanding equity interests of LanzaTech for consideration consisting of equity interests of New LanzaTech valued at $1,817,000,000 in the aggregate. The consideration to be paid to holders of shares of LanzaTech capital stock will be shares of common stock of New LanzaTech (“New LanzaTech Common Stock”), valued at $10.00 per share, to be paid at the closing of the Merger. The number of shares of New LanzaTech Common Stock payable in the Merger in respect of each share of LanzaTech capital stock (each, a “LanzaTech Share”) will be determined based on the exchange ratio (the “Exchange Ratio”), and certain corresponding adjustments, in each case as set forth in the Merger Agreement.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, at Closing: (i) each warrant to purchase LanzaTech Shares (each, a “LanzaTech Warrant”) that is outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to Closing and would automatically be exercised or exchanged in full in accordance with its terms by virtue of the occurrence of the Merger, will be so automatically exercised or exchanged in full for the applicable LanzaTech Shares, and each such LanzaTech Share will be treated as being issued and outstanding immediately prior to Closing and will be canceled and converted into the right to receive the applicable shares of New LanzaTech Common Stock; and (ii) each LanzaTech Warrant that is outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Closing and is not automatically exercised in full as described in clause (i) will be converted into a warrant to purchase shares of New LanzaTech Common Stock, in which case (a) the number of shares underlying such New LanzaTech warrant (each, a “New LanzaTech Warrant”) will be determined by multiplying the number of LanzaTech Shares subject to such warrant immediately prior to Closing, by the Exchange Ratio and (b) the per share exercise price of such New LanzaTech Warrant will be determined by dividing the per share exercise price of such LanzaTech Warrant immediately prior to the Effective Time by the Exchange Ratio, except that in the case of certain warrants specified in the Merger Agreement, such exercise price will be $10.00.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, at Closing, each option to purchase LanzaTech Shares (each, a “LanzaTech Option”) will be converted into an option to purchase a number of shares of New LanzaTech Common Stock (rounded down to the nearest whole share) equal to the product of (i) the number of LanzaTech Shares subject to such LanzaTech Option multiplied by (ii) the Exchange Ratio. The exercise price of such New LanzaTech option will be equal to the quotient of (a) the exercise price per share of such LanzaTech Option in effect immediately prior to the Effective Time divided by (b) the Exchange Ratio (and as so determined, this exercise price will be rounded up to the nearest full cent).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, at Closing, each award of restricted shares of LanzaTech common stock (each, a “LanzaTech RSA”) that is outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will be converted into an award of restricted shares of New LanzaTech Common Stock (each, a “New LanzaTech RSA”) on the same terms and conditions as were applicable to such LanzaTech RSA immediately prior to the Effective Time, except that such New LanzaTech RSA will relate to a number of shares of New LanzaTech Common Stock equal to the number of LanzaTech Shares subject to such LanzaTech RSA, multiplied by the Exchange Ratio.
The closing of the Merger is subject to certain customary conditions, including, among others, (i) adoption by AMCI’s stockholders and LanzaTech’s stockholders of the Merger Agreement and their approval of certain other actions related to the Proposed Business Combination, (ii) the expiration or termination of the waiting period (or any extension thereof) applicable to the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement and any ancillary agreements, in each case under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, (iii) the effectiveness of a registration statement on Form S-4 (the “Registration Statement”) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) with respect to the shares of New LanzaTech Common Stock to be paid as consideration in the Merger, (iv) there being no government order or law enjoining, prohibiting or making illegal the consummation of the Merger or the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, (v) AMCI having at least $5,000,001 of net tangible assets (as determined in accordance with Rule 3a51-1(g)(1) under the Exchange Act) after giving effect to any payments required to be made in connection with the redemption of AMCI’s public shares and the proceeds from the Subscription Agreements described below, (vi) AMCI having at least $250,000,000 of cash at the closing of the Merger, consisting of cash held in AMCI’s trust account after taking into account any redemption of AMCI’s public shares, and the proceeds from the Subscription Agreements described below, net of transaction expenses of AMCI and LanzaTech, and (vii) the listing on Nasdaq of the shares of New LanzaTech Common Stock issued in connection with the Proposed Business Combination.
For additional information regarding the Merger Agreement, see the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed by us on March 8, 2022.
This Form 10-K does not assume the closing of the Proposed Business Combination.
Subscription Agreements
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain accredited and institutional buyers (the “PIPE Investors”), including certain current stockholders and partners of LanzaTech and an affiliate of our Sponsor pursuant to which, among other things, we agreed to issue and sell, in a private placement to close immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, an aggregate of 12,500,000 shares of Class A common stock at a purchase price of $10.00 per share (the “PIPE Investment”). The PIPE Investment includes 3,000,000 shares of Class A common stock to be issued to a certain PIPE Investor that has a SAFE Note with LanzaTech, pursuant to a Subscription Agreement to be entered into prior to Closing.
LanzaTech Support Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we entered into a support agreement with certain LanzaTech stockholders (the “LanzaTech Support Agreement”), pursuant to which each such LanzaTech stockholder irrevocably and unconditionally agreed, among other things, to (i) validly execute and deliver to LanzaTech, in respect of all such stockholders’ LanzaTech Shares, written consents to the adoption of the Merger Agreement and approval of other matters required to obtain the requisite stockholder approval for the Merger and other related matters from the LanzaTech stockholders (the “LanzaTech Requisite Approval”), in each case, within 10 business days after the Registration Statement has been declared effective by the SEC; (ii) vote (whether pursuant to a meeting of LanzaTech’s stockholders or by written consent) in favor of the adoption of the Merger Agreement and approval of other matters required to obtain the LanzaTech Requisite Approval; and (iii) vote (whether pursuant to a meeting of LanzaTech’s stockholders or by written consent) against (a) any competing proposal for the acquisition of LanzaTech and (b) any other action that would reasonably be expected to (x) materially impede, interfere with, delay, postpone or adversely affect the Merger or any of the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, (y) to the knowledge of such LanzaTech stockholder, result in a material breach of any covenant, representation or warranty or other obligation or agreement of LanzaTech under the Merger Agreement or (z) result in a material breach of any covenant, representation or warranty or other obligation or agreement of the relevant stockholder contained in the LanzaTech Support Agreement.
The LanzaTech stockholders that entered into the LanzaTech Support Agreement include those stockholders who (i) are directors or officers of LanzaTech and currently hold LanzaTech Shares or (ii) hold 5% or more of the LanzaTech Shares. The LanzaTech Shares that are owned by the stockholders party to the LanzaTech Support Agreement represent approximately 69.56% of the outstanding voting LanzaTech Shares.
Sponsor Support Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Sponsor and the holders of all of the Founder Shares, including all of our directors and officers (all of the foregoing, the “AMCI Insiders”), entered into a support agreement (the “Sponsor Support Agreement”) with the Company and LanzaTech pursuant to which each AMCI Insider agreed, among other things, to: (i) vote all the shares of capital stock held by such AMCI Insider (a) in favor of each of the proposals to be submitted to the special meeting of our stockholders in connection with the Merger and (b) against a business combination not relating to the Merger and any other action that would reasonably be expected to (x) materially impede, interfere with, delay, postpone or adversely affect the Merger or any of the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, (y) to the knowledge of such AMCI Insider, result in a material breach of any covenant, representation or warranty or other obligation or agreement of AMCI under the Merger Agreement or (z) result in a material breach of any covenant, representation or warranty or other obligation or agreement contained in the Sponsor Support Agreement; (ii) irrevocably waive any anti-dilution right or other protection with respect to the shares of Founder Shares that would result in the Founder Shares converting into Class A common stock at a ratio greater than one-for-one; and (iii) not to elect to redeem their respective shares of our common stock in connection with the Merger.
In addition, under the Sponsor Support Agreement, the AMCI Insiders agreed to forfeit, on a pro rata basis, a number of shares of Founder Shares equal to 1,250,000 shares of Founder Shares (which is one-third of the total number of shares of founder Shares outstanding) multiplied by a percentage equal to the percentage by which the level of redemptions of holders of Class A common stock, if any, exceeds 50% of the total issued and outstanding shares Class A common stock multiplied by two.
The foregoing description of the Proposed Business Combination, the Subscription and Agreements, the LanzaTech Support Agreement and the Sponsor Support Agreement does not purport to be complete. For further information on the Subscription Agreements, the LanzaTech Support Agreement and the Sponsor Support Agreement refer to the full agreements filed with the SEC on March 8, 2022 on a Current Report on Form 8-K on March 8, 2022.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the initial public offering. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination.
For the period from January 28, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $47,000, which consisted of approximately a $1.9 million gain from changes in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $6,000 of income from investments held in the trust account, offset by approximately $951,000 in general and administrative expenses, $50,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party, approximately $198,000 in capital base tax expenses, approximately $188,000 in franchise tax expenses, and approximately $476,000 in offering costs allocated to derivative warrant liabilities.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.3 million in operating cash and a working capital deficit of approximately $0.1 million.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover certain offering costs in exchange for the issuance of founder shares, and a loan and advances from the Sponsor pursuant to the Note. Subsequent to the initial public offering, net proceeds from the private placement of $0.9 million were placed in the operating account for working capital purposes. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us with Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” our management has determined that we would not be able to meet our obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are available to be issued. As such, our management has determined that the liquidity condition raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. As of December 31, 2021, no adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the (i) founder shares, which were issued in a private placement prior to the closing of the initial public offering, (ii) private placement warrants, which were issued in a private placement simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering and the shares of Class A common stock underlying such private placement warrants and (iii) private placement warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, will have registration rights to require us to register a sale of any of its securities held by them prior to the consummation of the initial business combination pursuant to a registration rights agreement which was signed on the effective date of the initial public offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of our initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the underwriting agreement to purchase up to an additional 2,250,000 units to cover over-allotments, if any. On September 17, 2021, the over-allotment option expired unexercised, resulting in the forfeiture of 562,500 shares of Class B common stock.
The underwriters were paid an underwriting discount of one percent (1%) of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $1,500,000. Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds, or $5,250,000, of the initial public offering upon the completion of our initial business combination.
Administrative Service Fee
Subsequent to the closing of the initial public offering, we have agreed to pay our Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space and secretarial and administrative services provided to members of the management team. Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. For the period from January 28 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we incurred $50,000 of such fees, which are included as general and administrative fees - related party on the accompanying statement of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of the initial public offering, 15,000,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of the initial public offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of its financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification
of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The public warrants and the private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, We recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The initial fair value of the public warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering was estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation model. The fair value of the public warrants as of December 31, 2021 is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. The fair value of the private placement warrants as of December 31, 2021 is determined using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and, accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the units sold in the initial public offering and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 11,000,000 warrants in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the period from January 28, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on August 2, 2021 using the modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal control
over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the executive compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.