ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis provides information we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition for 2021, 2020 and 2019. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and Part I, Item 1, “Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following analysis contains forward-looking statements about our future revenues, operating results and expectations. See “Special Caution Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the risks, assumptions and uncertainties affecting these statements as well as Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
For a discussion of a comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, please refer to "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 25, 2021.
Overview
We are a provider of high-quality in-home healthcare and related services to the chronic, co-morbid, aging American population, with approximately 75%, 75% and 74% of our revenue derived from Medicare for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our operations involve servicing patients through our four reportable business segments: home health, hospice, personal care and high acuity care. Our home health segment delivers a wide range of services in the homes of individuals who may be recovering from an illness, injury or surgery. Our hospice segment provides care that is designed to provide comfort and support for those who are facing a terminal illness. Our personal care segment provides patients assistance with the essential activities of daily living. Our high acuity care segment, which was established with the acquisition of Contessa Health ("Contessa") on August 1, 2021, delivers the essential elements of inpatient hospital and skilled nursing facility ("SNF") care to patients in their homes. As of December 31, 2021, we owned and operated 331 Medicare-certified home health care centers, 175 Medicare-certified hospice care centers, 14 personal-care care centers and 8 high acuity care joint ventures in 38 states within the United States and the District of Columbia.
Care Centers Summary (Includes Unconsolidated Joint Ventures)
2021 Developments
•Maintained the highest Quality of Patient Care star score in the home health industry of 4.33 stars with 95% of our care centers at 4+ Stars.
•Outperformed the industry on all Hospice Item Set ("HIS") measures while preparing for the Hospice Care Index measures.
•Launched a formal Environmental, Social and Governance ("ESG") program with oversight from the Board of Directors.
•Performed 11.5 million visits.
•Expanded our usage and relationship with Medalogix, a predictive data and analytics company, helping to further optimize our current business and positioning us to work more closely with Medicare Advantage payors.
•Meaningfully differentiated our service offering via the acquisition of Contessa, a tech enabled, risk taking, high acuity in-home care asset.
•Acquired/opened 11 home health care centers and 1 hospice care center.
•Innovated on how we engage and recruit clinicians via our investment in ConnectRN.
•Increased operating income 15%.
2022 Strategy
•Further advance our industry leading Quality of Patient Care star scores in home health.
•Drive best-in-class hospice quality as measured by the Hospice Care Index.
•Continue to better the communities and patients we serve by further incorporating Environmental, Social and Governance practices into our business operations.
•Advance our culture and sense of belonging through diversity and inclusion initiatives.
•Build a learning culture through world class leadership development.
•Reduce turnover in all roles, especially focused on critical clinician positions.
•Engage our clinical staff and drive additional productivity with new opportunities and ways to work via our ConnectRN investment and other workforce optimization initiatives.
•Further expand our analytics capabilities internally and through our Medalogix investment.
•Consistently grow all lines of business.
•Pursue consolidations in the home health and hospice industries via a regional-based acquisition strategy.
•Execute new hospital at home joint venture agreements and expand Contessa's service offering into new lines of business such as palliative care at home and primary care at home.
Financial Performance
Results for the year ended December 31, 2021 were impacted by acquisitions, COVID-19 and a full year of the suspension of sequestration (as compared to eight months in 2020). On a consolidated basis, we increased operating income $33 million on a $143 million increase in net service revenue. Our Contessa acquisition reduced operating income by $10 million.
Our home health care centers experienced growth in volumes and improvement in utilization and clinician mix which, combined with rate increases and a full year of sequestration relief, led to the segment delivering a $47 million increase in operating income.
Our hospice segment experienced a 4% decline in our same store average daily census, which is the main driver of hospice revenue, primarily due to a decline in our length of stay due to a delay in the timing of patients coming onto service and an increase in the discharge rate of our patients.
Our personal care segment continued to be impacted by COVID-19 and staffing shortages during 2021.
Our high acuity care segment expanded its joint venture footprint and made significant investments to build the clinical, operational and technological infrastructure necessary to support the development and future growth of home recovery care programs on a national scale.
Economic and Industry Factors
Our home health, hospice, and personal care segments operate in a highly fragmented and highly competitive industry. The degree of competitiveness varies based upon whether our care centers operate in states that require a certificate of need ("CON") or permit of approval ("POA"). In such states, expansion by existing providers or entry into the market by new providers is permitted only where determination is made by state health authorities that a given amount of unmet healthcare need exists. Currently, 74% and 29% of our home health and hospice care centers, respectively, operate in CON/POA states.
As the Federal government continues to debate a reduction in expenditures and a reform of the Medicare system, our industry continues to face reimbursement pressures. These reform efforts could result in major changes in the health care delivery and reimbursement system on a national and state level, including changes directly impacting the reimbursement systems for our home health and hospice care centers.
Wages and other expenses increase during periods of inflation and when labor shortages occur in the marketplace. The impact of inflation on the Company is primarily in the area of labor costs. The healthcare industry is labor intensive. We have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, increases in wage costs. In addition, increases in healthcare costs are typically higher than inflation and impact our costs under our employee benefit plans.
CMS Payment Updates
Hospice
On July 29, 2021, CMS issued the final rule to update hospice payment rates and the wage index for fiscal year 2022, effective for services provided beginning October 1, 2021. CMS estimates hospices serving Medicare beneficiaries will see a 2.0% increase in payments. This increase is the result of a 2.7% market basket adjustment as required under PPACA less a 0.7% productivity adjustment. Additionally, CMS increased the aggregate cap amount by 2.0% to $31,298. The final rule also rebases the labor shares for all four levels of care, includes updates to the hospice conditions of participation ("COPs"), which make permanent certain flexibilities allowed during the COVID-19 public health emergency, and finalizes changes to the Hospice Quality Reporting Program. Based on our analysis of the final rule, we expect our impact to be in line with the 2.0% increase.
Home Health
On November 2, 2021, CMS issued the Home Health Final Rule for Medicare home health providers for calendar year 2022. CMS estimates that the final rule will result in a 3.2% increase in payments to home health providers. This increase is the result of a 2.6% payment update (3.1% market basket adjustment less a 0.5% productivity adjustment) plus a 0.7% fixed-dollar loss ratio adjustment, reduced by 0.1% for the rural add-on. Based on our analysis of the final rule, we expect our impact to be in line with the 3.2% increase.
The final rule also provides for the expansion of the Home Health Value-Based Purchasing ("HHVBP") model to all 50 states beginning January 1, 2023 with calendar year 2023 being the first performance year and calendar year 2025 being the first payment year with a proposed maximum payment adjustment, up or down, of 5%.
The following payment adjustments are effective for each of the years indicated based on CMS’s final rules:
(1)Effective for services provided from October 1, 2021 to September 30, 2022.
(2)Our company-specific impact of the home health final rule could differ depending on differences in the wage index, our patient case mix and other factors, such as LUPAs or outliers, which are described in more detail under Critical Accounting Estimates below. Our company-specific impact of the hospice final rule could differ based on our mix of patients and differences in the wage index.
Sequestration
In March 2020, the bipartisan Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") provided for the suspension of the automatic 2% reduction of Medicare claim reimbursements ("sequestration") for the period May 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020. The impact was an increase to our 2020 net service revenue of approximately $23 million. In December 2020, Congress passed additional COVID-19 relief legislation as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021. This legislation extended the suspension of sequestration through March 31, 2021. In April 2021, Congress passed H.R. 1868, which among other items, provided for an additional extension of the temporary suspension of sequestration through December 31, 2021. The impact was an increase to our 2021 net service revenue of approximately $36 million. In December 2021, Congress
passed the Protecting Medicare and American Farmers from Sequester Cuts Act. This legislation extended the 2% suspension of sequestration through March 31, 2022; sequestration will be reinstated as a 1% reduction to Medicare claim reimbursements for the period April 1, 2022 through June 30, 2022 and 2% thereafter.
Novel Coronavirus Pandemic ("COVID-19")
Our operations and financial performance continue to be impacted by COVID-19. The financial impacts of COVID-19 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are discussed in further detail under "Results of Operations" below. While we currently believe that we have a reasonable view of operations, the uncertainty created by COVID-19 could alter our outlook of the pandemic's impact on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. The following factors could potentially impact our performance: the increase or decrease in the number of COVID-19 cases nationwide, the severity and impacts of new variants of the virus, uncertainty regarding vaccine utilization rates and efficacy, staffing shortages due to clinician quarantines as well as federal, state and local vaccine mandates, the return of patient confidence to enter a hospital or a doctor's office, the utilization of elective procedures, the ability to have access to our patients in their homes and in facilities, supply chain disruption and our ability to find suitable alternative products at reasonable prices, cost normalization around personal protective equipment ("PPE") and any future or prolonged shelter-in-place orders and other federal, state and local requirements. Potential impacts of COVID-19 on our results include lower revenue; higher salary and wage expense related to quarantine pay, contract clinicians, wage inflation and training; and increased supply costs related to supply chain constraints, PPE and COVID-19 testing. The impacts to net service revenue may consist of the following:
•lower volumes due to interruption of the operations of our referral sources, patients' unwillingness to accept services and restrictions on access to facilities for hospice services;
•lower reimbursement due to missed visits resulting in an increase in low utilization payment adjustments ("LUPAs") and lost billing periods; and
•lower hospice average daily census due to a decline in average length of stay.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into legislation. The CARES Act provided for the following:
•$175 billion to healthcare providers, including hospitals on the front lines of the COVID-19 pandemic. Of this total allocated amount, $30 billion was distributed immediately to providers based on their proportionate share of Medicare fee-for-service reimbursements in 2019. Healthcare providers were required to sign an attestation confirming receipt of the Provider Relief Fund ("PRF") funds and agree to the terms and conditions of payment. Our home health and hospice segments received approximately $100 million from the first $30 billion of funds distributed to healthcare providers in April 2020, which is inclusive of $2 million related to our joint venture care centers (equity method investments). We also acquired approximately $6 million of PRF funds in connection with the acquisition of AseraCare. Under the terms and conditions for receipt of the payment, we were allowed to use the funds to cover lost revenues and health care costs related to COVID-19 through June 30, 2021, and we were required to properly and fully document the use of these funds in reports to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ("HHS"). All required reporting was completed during the three-month period ended September 30, 2021.
For our wholly-owned subsidiaries, we only utilized PRF funds to the extent we had qualifying COVID-19 expenses; we did not use PRF funds to cover lost revenues resulting from COVID-19. The grant income associated with the COVID-19 expenses incurred is reflected in other operating income within our consolidated statements of operations.
•The temporary suspension of the automatic 2% reduction of Medicare claim reimbursements ("sequestration") for the period May 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020. See CMS Payment Updates above for details on extensions beyond December 31, 2020.
•The deferral of the employer share of social security tax (6.2%), effective for payments due after the enactment date through December 31, 2020. During 2020, we deferred approximately $55 million of social security tax. Approximately $27 million was paid during December 2021; the remaining balance is due on December 31, 2022 and is reflected in payroll and employee benefits within our consolidated balance sheet.
•The temporary suspension of Medicare patient coverage criteria and documentation and care requirements and the expansion of providing home health and hospice care to patients via telehealth.
•The ability for non-physician practitioners to certify for home health, order home health services, establish and review plans of care and certify and recertify eligibility.
Our personal care segment did not receive funds under the CARES Act; however, it did receive funds totaling $1 million from the Mass Home Care ASAP COVID-19 Provider Sustainability Program, which were used during 2020 to cover costs related to
COVID-19. The grant income associated with the COVID-19 expenses incurred is reflected in other operating income within our consolidated statements of operations.
The well-being of our employees has been one of our top priorities during this pandemic. We have taken the following steps to support our employees: implemented paid leave during required quarantine periods; awarded bonuses to our clinicians and caregivers who have seen patients during the pandemic; completed an early cash pay-out of employee paid-time-off; instituted work-from-home arrangements for our corporate and administrative support employees; allowed employees to temporarily suspend any 401(k) plan loan deductions and offered employees the option of making a withdrawal from their 401(k) plan for coronavirus-related distributions without incurring the additional 10% early withdrawal penalty; expanded access to telehealth services to all employees; provided access to COVID-19 self-test kits to all employees and created a COVID-19 Resource Center, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week for employees to access educational materials, safety documents, policies, clinical protocols and operational metrics.
The safety of our clinicians and patients has also been a focus, and as a result, we have made the following business changes: developed clinical protocols for COVID-19 testing, proper usage of PPE, caring for COVID-positive patients and maintaining safety measures in our care centers; researched each state's vaccination plan to develop a state by state protocol to work with local health departments and other health systems to obtain vaccine appointments for our clinical staff; implemented software enabling us to track staff that have been vaccinated; procured PPE and created a centralized distribution center for all critical PPE, allowing us to flex our supplies on a care center by care center basis, based on need and demand.
Network Developments
In August 2020, we signed a Care Coordination Agreement with BrightStar Care to add its agencies to the Amedisys personal care network, which helps facilitate the coordination of care between our home health and hospice care centers and a network of personal care partners.
In July 2019, we signed an agreement with ClearCare, Inc. ("ClearCare"), the provider of the personal care industry’s leading software platform, representing 4,000 personal care agencies in every zip code in the United States. Our agreement with ClearCare creates an opportunity to establish a network partnership between Amedisys and personal care agencies using ClearCare in order to better coordinate patient care.
Long term, we believe these agreements will allow us to build a nation-wide network of personal care agencies and further our efforts to provide patients with a true care continuum in the home. These relationships will also help us as we continue to have innovative payment conversations with Medicare Advantage plans who have begun to recognize the value that combined home health, hospice, personal care and high acuity care services bring to their members and care delivery infrastructure.
Governmental Inquiries and Investigations and Other Litigation
See Item 8, Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of and updates regarding legal proceedings and investigations we are involved in. No assurances can be given as to the timing or outcome of these items.
Results of Operations
Consolidated
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations (amounts in millions):
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
On a consolidated basis, our operating income increased approximately $33 million on a net service revenue increase of $143 million. These results were impacted by the acquisition of Contessa on August 1, 2021, which contributed $4 million in revenue and an operating loss of $10 million, which is inclusive of $1 million of amortization associated with our technology intangible asset. The year-over-year increases in operating income and net service revenue are primarily related to the impact of COVID-19 on prior year’s results, the acquisition of AseraCare on June 1, 2020, rate increases, the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020, improvements in clinician utilization and discipline mix, higher severance incurred in prior year related to reductions in staffing primarily within our home health segment and the closure of our hospice U.S. Department of Justice ("DOJ") matters (see Item 8, Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information). Partially offsetting these items, we experienced a decline in our same store hospice average daily census, which is the main driver of hospice revenue, a decrease in other operating income due to the expiration of the CARES Act PRF funds, an increase in our cost of service resulting from increases in both our home health cost per visit and hospice cost of service per day and an increase in our other operating expenses.
Our AseraCare acquisition, which closed on June 1, 2020, includes a full year of acquired operations in the current year compared to seven months in the prior year. For the year ended December 31, 2021, AseraCare contributed $103 million in revenue and operating income of $2 million, which is inclusive of $1 million in acquisition and integration costs and $8 million in intangibles amortization. For the year ended December 31, 2020, AseraCare contributed $64 million in revenue and an operating loss of $8 million, which is inclusive of $8 million in acquisition and integration costs and $6 million in intangibles amortization.
As noted above, we received CARES Act PRF funds and Mass Home Care ASAP COVID-19 Provider Sustainability Program funds, which were used to cover COVID-19 expenses. We recorded income related to both of these programs, totaling $13 million and $34 million, to other operating income within our consolidated statements of operations during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Due to the expiration of the CARES Act PRF funds on June 30, 2021, we were not able to recognize any operating income during the six-month period ended December 31, 2021 to offset the $8 million of COVID-19 costs incurred during this period.
Our operating results reflect an increase in our other operating expenses compared to prior year. Our 2021 other operating expenses include five months of the acquired operations of Contessa and a full year of the acquired operations of AseraCare compared to seven months in the prior year, both of which have resulted in a year over year increase totaling $15 million.
Excluding the Contessa and AseraCare acquisitions, our other operating expenses increased 4% due to the addition of resources to support growth, planned wage increases, higher health insurance costs, investments related to PDGM, higher recruiting costs, increased costs associated with insurance and legal settlements, increased information technology fees, higher travel and training spend and higher acquisition and integration costs partially offset by lower incentive compensation costs, lower employer payroll taxes associated with employee stock option exercises, lower costs directly attributable to COVID-19 and higher gains on the sale of fleet vehicles.
Total other income (expense), net includes the following items (amounts in millions):
Interest expense decreased $2 million year over year as a result of a decrease in outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility under our Second Amended Credit Agreement (see Item 8, Note 8 - Long-Term Obligations to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our Second Amended Credit Agreement). Gain (loss) on equity method investments includes a $31 million gain in 2021 related to our investment in Medalogix and a $3 million loss in 2020 from the sale of our investment in the Heritage Healthcare Innovation Fund, LP (see Item 8, Note 1 - Nature of Operations, Consolidation and Presentation of Financial Statements to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
Our 2020 effective income tax rate was impacted by a $24.0 million income tax benefit recorded in connection with a stock option exercise by Paul B. Kusserow, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Amedisys (see Item 8, Note 9 - Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
Home Health Segment
The following table summarizes our home health segment results of operations:
(1)Same store information represents the percent change in our Medicare, Non-Medicare and Total revenue, admissions or volume for the period as a percent of the Medicare, Non-Medicare and Total revenue, admissions or volume of the prior period. Effective July 1, 2019, same store is defined as care centers that we have operated for at least the last twelve months and startups that are an expansion of a same store care center.
(2)Total volume includes all admissions and recertifications.
(3)Total includes acquisitions, start-ups and denovos.
(4)Average Medicare revenue per completed episode is the average Medicare revenue earned for each Medicare completed episode of care. Average Medicare revenue per completed episode for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 reflects the transition to PDGM effective January 1, 2020 and the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020.
(5)Medicare visits per completed episode are the home health Medicare visits on completed episodes divided by the home health Medicare episodes completed during the period.
(6)Prior year amounts have been recast to conform to the current year calculation.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Results
Overall, our operating income increased $47 million on a $105 million increase in net service revenue. The year over year increases are primarily related to total volume growth, an increase in our Medicare revenue per episode, higher severance incurred in prior year related to reductions in staffing and significant improvement in our operating performance driven by improvements in our clinician utilization and discipline mix, both of which have contributed to year over year gross margin expansion. These items were partially offset by an increase in our total cost per visit, a decrease in other operating income due to the expiration of the CARES Act PRF funds and an increase in our other operating expenses.
Net Service Revenue
Our net service revenue increased $105 million (8%) on a 5% increase in total volume and a 4% increase in Medicare revenue per episode. The volume growth was driven by a 6% increase in same store admissions and a 3% increase in recertification volume. Our admissions were significantly impacted by COVID-19 in the second quarter of the prior year. The increase in Medicare revenue per episode is the result of a 1.9% increase in reimbursement, a full year of the 2.0% benefit related to the suspension of sequestration (effective May 1, 2020), an increase in the functional impairment of our patients and a change in the source/timing and geographic dispersion of our patients.
Other Operating Income
Other operating income consists of the recognition of funds received from the CARES Act PRF, which were available for use through June 30, 2021. For our wholly-owned subsidiaries, we utilized the funds to cover COVID-19 related costs only and recognized income related to these costs totaling $7 million and $20 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We incurred COVID-19 related costs totaling $6 million during the six-month period ended December 31, 2021; however, we were not able to recognize any income to offset these costs due to the expiration of the CARES Act PRF funds on June 30, 2021. The COVID-19 costs were associated with the purchase of PPE, bonuses paid to our clinicians, premiums paid to contract clinicians in COVID-19 high demand areas, clinician training, quarantine pay and COVID-19 testing. The COVID-19 costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaling $13 million have been recorded to cost of service within our consolidated statements of operations. Of the $20 million of COVID-19 costs incurred in the prior year, $19 million was recorded to cost of service and $1 million was recorded to other operating expenses within our consolidated statements of operations.
Cost of Service, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Our cost of service consists of costs associated with direct clinician care in the homes of our patients as well as the cost of clinical managers who monitor the overall delivery of care. Our total cost of service increased 4% primarily due to a 4% increase in our total cost per visit. Our total visits declined year over year despite a 5% increase in total volume primarily due to improvements in clinician utilization, as evidenced by a decline of 1.0 visits per completed episode year over year. The 4% increase in our total cost per visit is due to planned wage increases, higher costs associated with the utilization of contractors to supplement our staffing levels, increases in new hire pay, wage inflation, inclement weather pay and higher health insurance costs partially offset by a decrease in COVID-19 costs and higher severance incurred in prior year in connection with a reduction in staffing.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses increased approximately $21 million primarily due to planned wage increases, the addition of resources to support volume growth, higher health insurance costs, higher recruiting fees, investments related to PDGM and increased costs associated with insurance and legal settlements. These increases were partially offset by lower incentive compensation costs and lower costs directly attributable to COVID-19 in the current year.
Hospice Segment
The following table summarizes our hospice segment results of operations:
(1)Same store information represents the percent change in our Medicare revenue, Hospice admissions or average daily census for the period as a percent of the Medicare revenue, Hospice admissions or average daily census of the prior period. Effective July 1, 2019, same store is defined as care centers that we have operated for at least the last twelve months and startups that are an expansion of a same store care center.
(2)Total includes acquisitions and denovos.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Results
Our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the acquisition of AseraCare on June 1, 2020 (44 hospice care centers). Acquisitions are included in our consolidated financial statements from their respective acquisition dates. As a result, our hospice segment operating results for 2021 and 2020 are not fully comparable.
Overall, our operating income decreased $13 million on a $42 million increase in net service revenue. The year over year decrease in operating income is primarily due to a decline in our same store average daily census, an increase in our cost of service per day, a decrease in other operating income due to the expiration of the CARES Act PRF funds and an increase in our other operating expenses. These items were partially offset by changes in reimbursement, the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020, the acquisition of AseraCare which resulted in increases to net service revenue and operating income totaling $38 million and $5 million, respectively, and the reversal of a $7 million accrual previously recorded in connection with settlement discussions with the DOJ; we received notice during the second quarter of 2021 that the DOJ has closed its investigation (see Item 8, Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
Net Service Revenue
Our net service revenue increased $42 million. Our results include a full year of the acquired operations of AseraCare in the current year compared to seven months in the prior year which resulted in an increase to net service revenue of $38 million. Additionally, revenue was positively impacted by the 2.4% increase in reimbursement effective October 1, 2020 ($12 million), the 2.0% increase in reimbursement effective October 1, 2021 ($3 million), the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020 ($4 million year over year increase) and the reversal of a $7 million accrual as mentioned above. These items were partially offset by a 4% decline in our same store average daily census, which is the main driver of hospice revenue. Our same store average daily census was down year over year primarily due to a decline in our length of stay resulting from a delay in the timing of patients coming onto service and an increase in the discharge rate of our patients.
Other Operating Income
Other operating income consists of the recognition of funds received from the CARES Act PRF which were available for use through June 30, 2021. For our wholly-owned subsidiaries, we utilized the funds to cover COVID-19 related costs only and recognized income related to these costs totaling $6 million and $13 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We incurred COVID-19 related costs totaling $2 million during the six-month period ended December 31, 2021; however, we were not able to recognize any income to offset these costs due to the expiration of the CARES Act PRF funds on June 30, 2021. The COVID-19 costs were associated with the purchase of PPE, bonuses paid to our clinicians, clinician training, quarantine pay and COVID-19 testing. The COVID-19 costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaling $8 million have been recorded to cost of service within our consolidated statements of operations. Of the $13 million of COVID-19 costs incurred in the prior year, $12 million was recorded to cost of service and $1 million was recorded to other operating expenses within our consolidated statement of operations.
Cost of Service, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Our hospice cost of service increased 6%. Excluding our AseraCare acquisition, our cost of service increased 1% due to planned wage increases, higher costs associated with the utilization of contractors to supplement our staffing levels, increased costs to hire and retain employees, higher health insurance costs and an increase in visits performed by our hourly hospice aides and licensed practical nurses due to COVID-19 access restrictions being eased partially offset by a 4% decline in our same store average daily census and lower COVID-19 costs.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses increased $23 million, approximately $12 million of which is related to our AseraCare acquisition. The remaining increase is due to the addition of resources to support growth, planned wage increases, higher health insurance costs, increased costs associated with insurance and legal settlements, higher travel and training spend and higher recruiting fees partially offset by lower incentive compensation costs.
Personal Care Segment
The following table summarizes our personal care segment results of operations:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating income related to our personal care segment decreased $1 million on a $7 million decrease in net service revenue. The decrease in net service revenue is due to the impact of COVID-19 and staffing shortages partially offset by rate increases. The impact of COVID-19 has been partially mitigated by a reduction in cost of service as most of our personal care employees are paid on an hourly basis and a reduction in our other operating expenses.
High Acuity Care Segment
The following table summarizes our high acuity care segment results of operations:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Results
Overall, our high acuity care segment generated revenue totaling $4 million and an operating loss of $10 million. Although we expect our high acuity care segment to continue to generate operating losses over the next year, we also expect improvement in our operating income as we leverage our operating structure through growth in current and future joint ventures and expansion into new lines of business such as palliative care at home and primary care at home.
Net Service Revenue
Our high acuity care segment provides home recovery care services for high acuity patients on either a full risk or limited risk basis, each with different reimbursement arrangements. Full risk admissions are admissions for which we assume the risk for all related healthcare services during a 30-day or 60-day episodic period in exchange for a contracted bundled rate based upon the assigned diagnosis related group ("DRG"). Limited risk admissions are admissions for which we assume the risk for certain healthcare services during a shorter acute phase period (equivalent to an inpatient hospital stay) in exchange for a contracted per diem payment.
Since August 1, 2021, we generated net service revenue of $4 million resulting from 107 full risk admissions and 413 limited risk admissions across our joint ventures with health system partners. Revenue per episode was comprised of $10,457 for full risk episodes and $5,693 for limited risk episodes. The significant utilization of limited risk episodes was primarily due to the impact of heavy COVID-19 surges across certain of our joint venture markets and the resulting patient acuity which necessitated that a portion of our patients' inpatient stays occur within the inpatient hospital facilities rather than in the home.
Cost of Service, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Our cost of service consists primarily of medical costs associated with direct clinician care provided to our patients during the applicable episode period, whether such care was provided on the day of program admission, in the patients’ homes or via telehealth. Our cost of service was favorably impacted by the significant utilization of limited risk episodes, which exclude certain high-cost components of full risk episode spend such as emergency room costs and inpatient hospitalization costs.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses primarily consist of salaries and benefits. We have made significant investments to build the clinical, operational and technological infrastructure necessary to support the development and future growth of home recovery care programs on a national scale. We have employees at both the local market level and at our corporate offices, including a virtual care unit that enables us to provide monitoring services and virtual patient rounding visits via telehealth.
Corporate
The following table summarizes our corporate results of operations:
Corporate expenses consist of costs related to our executive management and corporate and administrative support functions, primarily information services, accounting, finance, billing and collections, legal, compliance, risk management, procurement, marketing, clinical administration, training, human resources and administration.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Corporate other operating expenses decreased approximately $10 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Other operating expenses associated with our AseraCare acquisition declined $7 million year over year primarily due to higher acquisition and integration costs incurred in the prior year. Excluding the AseraCare acquisition, corporate other operating expenses decreased $3 million year over year due to lower incentive compensation costs, lower employer payroll taxes associated with employee stock option exercises and higher gains on the sale of fleet vehicles; these items were partially offset by planned wage increases, additional functional support, higher health insurance costs, increased information technology fees and higher acquisition and integration costs related to 2021 mergers and acquisition activity.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (amounts in millions):
Cash provided by operating activities for 2021, 2020 and 2019 have provided sufficient liquidity to finance our capital expenditures, both routine and non-routine, and acquisitions. Changes in our cash provided by operating activities during the past three years were primarily the result of fluctuations in our net income, the collections of our accounts receivable and the timing of payments of accrued expenses. Cash provided by operating activities decreased $100.1 million during 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the deferral of payroll taxes and the receipts of CARES Act PRF funds in the prior year and an increase in days revenue outstanding in the current year partially offset by an increase in operating income.
Our cash used in investing activities primarily consists of the purchase of property and equipment, investments and acquisitions. Our 2020 cash flows from investing activities included proceeds from the sale of our investment in the Heritage Healthcare Innovation Fund, LP (see Item 8, Note 1 - Nature of Operations, Consolidation and Presentation of Financial
Statements to our consolidated financial statements for additional information). Excluding these proceeds, cash used in investing activities decreased $23.4 million during 2021 primarily due to reductions in acquisition spend.
Our financing activities primarily consist of borrowings under our term loan and/or revolving credit facility, repayments of borrowings, the remittance of taxes associated with shares withheld on non-cash compensation, proceeds related to the exercise of stock options and the purchase of stock under our employee stock purchase plan and the purchase of company stock under our stock repurchase programs. Additionally, during 2020, our financing activities included the receipt of PRF funds, which we did not expect to retain, totaling $60 million. We repaid all unutilized PRF funds during 2021 (see Item 8, Note 3 - Novel Coronavirus Pandemic ("COVID-19") to our consolidated financial statements for additional information). Cash provided by financing activities totaled $55.1 million during 2021 primarily due to net borrowings under our Second Amended Credit Agreement to fund acquisitions partially offset by the repurchase of company stock and the repayment of unutilized PRF funds. Cash used in financing activities totaled $15.0 million during 2020 primarily due to net repayments of borrowings and the remittance of tax withholding obligations related to non-cash compensation and stock option exercises (see Item 8, Note 10 - Capital Stock and Share-Based Compensation to our consolidated financial statements for additional information), partially offset by the receipt of PRF funds.
Liquidity
Typically, our principal source of liquidity is the collection of our patient accounts receivable, primarily through the Medicare program. In addition to our collection of patient accounts receivable, from time to time, we can and do obtain additional sources of liquidity by the incurrence of additional indebtedness.
During 2021, we spent $6.3 million in capital expenditures compared to $5.3 million and $7.9 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our capital expenditures for 2022 are expected to be approximately $7.0 million to $9.0 million, excluding the impact of any future acquisitions.
Additionally, during 2021, pursuant to our authorized stock repurchase program, we repurchased 446,832 shares of our common stock at a weighted average price of $223.49 per share and a total cost of approximately $100 million. The repurchased shares are classified as treasury shares.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $42.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and $522.5 million in availability under our $550.0 million Revolving Credit Facility.
Based on our operating forecasts and our debt service requirements, we believe we will have sufficient liquidity to fund our operations, capital requirements and debt service requirements for the next twelve months and beyond.
Outstanding Patient Accounts Receivable
Our patient accounts receivable increased $19.8 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily due to the elimination of requests for anticipated payment ("RAPs") effective January 1, 2021. Our cash collection as a percentage of revenue was 104% and 106% for the twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our days revenue outstanding, net at December 31, 2021 was 43.2 days which is an increase of 3.0 days from December 31, 2020.
Our patient accounts receivable includes unbilled receivables and are aged based upon the initial service date. We monitor unbilled receivables on a care center by care center basis to ensure that all efforts are made to bill claims within timely filing deadlines. Our unbilled patient accounts receivable can be impacted by acquisition activity, probe edits or regulatory changes which result in additional information or procedures needed prior to billing. The timely filing deadline for Medicare is one year from the date the episode was completed, varies by state for Medicaid-reimbursable services and varies among insurance companies and other private payors.
The following schedules detail our patient accounts receivable, by payor class, aged based upon initial date of service (amounts in millions, except days revenue outstanding):
(1)Our calculation of days revenue outstanding is derived by dividing our ending patient accounts receivable at December 31, 2021 and 2020 by our average daily net service revenue for the three-month periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Indebtedness
Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement
On July 30, 2021, we entered into the Second Amendment to our Credit Agreement (as amended by the Second Amendment, the "Second Amended Credit Agreement"). The Second Amended Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured credit facility in an initial aggregate principal amount of up to $1.0 billion, which includes a $550.0 million Revolving Credit Facility and a term loan facility with a principal amount of up to $450.0 million (the "Amended Term Loan Facility" and collectively with the Revolving Credit Facility, the "Amended Credit Facility").
Net proceeds from the $450.0 million Amended Term Loan Facility were used to fund the Contessa acquisition.
Our weighted average interest rate for borrowings under our $450.0 million Amended Term Loan Facility was 1.6% for the period ended December 31, 2021 and 2.2% for the period ended December 31, 2020. Our weighted average interest rate for borrowings under our $550.0 million Revolving Credit Facility was 1.9% for the period ended December 31, 2021 and 2.2% for the period ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, our consolidated leverage ratio was 1.4, our consolidated interest coverage ratio was 27.8 and we are in compliance with our covenants under the Second Amended Credit Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, our availability under our $550.0 million Revolving Credit Facility was $522.5 million as we have no outstanding borrowings and $27.5 million outstanding in letters of credit.
See Item 8, Note 8 - Long Term Obligations to our consolidated financial statements for additional details on our outstanding long-term obligations.
Stock Repurchase Program
2021 Stock Repurchase Program
On December 23, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program, under which we could repurchase up to $100 million of our outstanding common stock through December 31, 2021 (the "2021 Share Repurchase Program").
Under the terms of the 2021 Share Repurchase program, we were allowed to repurchase shares from time to time through open market purchases, unsolicited or solicited privately negotiated transactions, an accelerated stock repurchase program and/or a trading plan in compliance with Exchange Act Rule 10b5-1. The timing and the amount of the repurchases was determined by management based on a number of factors, including but not limited to share price, trading volume and general market conditions, as well as on working capital requirements, general business conditions and other factors.
Pursuant to this program, we repurchased 446,832 shares of our common stock at a weighted average price of $223.49 per share and a total cost of approximately $100 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not repurchase any shares pursuant to this stock repurchase program during the year ended December 31, 2020. The repurchased shares are classified as treasury shares.
On August 2, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program, under which we may repurchase up to $100 million of our outstanding common stock through December 31, 2022 to commence upon the completion of the Company's 2021 Share Repurchase Program (the "New Share Repurchase Program").
Under the terms of the New Share Repurchase Program, we are allowed to repurchase shares from time to time through open market purchases, unsolicited or solicited privately negotiated transactions, an accelerated stock repurchase program and/or a trading plan in compliance with Exchange Act Rule 10b5-1. The timing and the amount of the repurchases will be determined by management based on a number of factors, including but not limited to share price, trading volume and general market conditions, as well as on working capital requirements, general business conditions and other factors. We have not repurchased any shares under the New Share Repurchase Program as of December 31, 2021.
2019 Stock Repurchase Program
On February 25, 2019, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program, under which we could have repurchased up to $100 million of our outstanding common stock through March 1, 2020. We did not repurchase any shares pursuant to this stock purchase program during 2019 or 2020. This stock repurchase plan expired on March 1, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
Our future contractual obligations at December 31, 2021 were as follows (amounts in millions):
(1)Interest on debt with variable rates was calculated using the current rate for that particular debt instrument at December 31, 2021.
(2)Purchase obligations are primarily related to information technology contracts and software licenses.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, collectability of accounts receivable, reserves related to insurance and litigation, business combinations, goodwill, intangible assets, income taxes and contingencies. We base these estimates on our historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results experienced may vary materially and adversely from our estimates. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future results of operations may be affected.
We believe the following critical accounting policies represent our most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue from contracts with customers in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and as such, we recognize revenue in the period in which we satisfy our performance obligations under our contracts by transferring our promised services to our customers in amounts that reflect the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for providing patient care, which are the transaction prices allocated to the distinct services. Our cost of obtaining contracts is not material.
Revenues are recognized as performance obligations are satisfied, which varies based on the nature of the services provided. Our performance obligation is the delivery of patient care services in accordance with the nature and frequency of services outlined in physicians' orders, which are determined by a physician based on a patient's specific goals.
Our performance obligations relate to contracts with a duration of less than one year; therefore, we have elected to apply the optional exemption provided by ASC 606 and are not required to disclose the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to performance obligations that are unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied as of the end of the reporting period. The unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied performance obligations are generally completed when the patients are discharged, which generally occurs within days or weeks of the end of the reporting period.
We determine the transaction price based on gross charges for services provided, reduced by estimates for contractual and non-contractual revenue adjustments. Contractual revenue adjustments are recorded for the difference between our standard rates and the contracted rates to be realized from patients, third-party payors and others for services provided. Non-contractual revenue adjustments include discounts provided to self-pay, uninsured patients or other payors, adjustments resulting from payment reviews and adjustments arising from our inability to obtain appropriate billing documentation, authorizations or face-to-face documentation. Subsequent changes to the estimate of the transaction price are recorded as adjustments to net service revenue in the period of change.
Non-contractual revenue adjustments are recorded for self-pay, uninsured patients and other payors by major payor class based on our historical collection experience, aged accounts receivable by payor and current economic conditions. The non-contractual revenue adjustments represent the difference between amounts billed and amounts we expect to collect based on our collection history with similar payors. We assess our ability to collect for the healthcare services provided at the time of patient admission based on our verification of the patient's insurance coverage under Medicare, Medicaid, and other commercial or managed care insurance programs. Medicare represents approximately 75% of our consolidated net service revenue.
Amounts due from third-party payors, primarily commercial health insurers and government programs (Medicare and Medicaid), include variable consideration for retroactive revenue adjustments due to settlements of audits and payment reviews. We determine our estimates for non-contractual revenue adjustments related to audits and payment reviews based on our historical experience and success rates in the claim appeals and adjudication process.
We determine our estimates for non-contractual revenue adjustments related to our inability to obtain appropriate billing documentation, authorizations or face-to-face documentation based on our historical experience which primarily includes a historical collection rate of over 99% on Medicare claims. Revenue is recorded at amounts we estimate to be realizable for services provided.
Home Health Revenue Recognition
Medicare Revenue
Effective January 1, 2020, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ("CMS") implemented a revised case-mix adjustment methodology, the Patient-Driven Groupings Model ("PDGM"), to better align payment with patient care needs and to ensure that clinically complex and ill beneficiaries have adequate access to home health care. PDGM uses 30-day periods of care rather than 60-day episodes of care as the unit of payment, eliminates the use of the number of therapy visits provided in determining payment and relies more heavily on clinical characteristics and other patient information.
All Medicare contracts are required to have a signed plan of care which represents a single performance obligation, comprised of the delivery of a series of distinct services that are substantially similar and have a similar pattern of transfer to the customer. Accordingly, we account for the series of services ("episode") as a single performance obligation satisfied over time, as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the goods and services provided. An episode starts the first day a billable visit is performed and ends 60 days later or upon discharge, if earlier, with multiple continuous episodes allowed. Under PDGM, each 60-day episode includes two 30-day payment periods.
Net service revenue is recorded based on the established Federal Medicare home health payment rate for a 30-day period of care. ASC 606 notes that if an entity has a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value of the entity’s performance completed to date, the entity may recognize revenue in the amount to which the entity has a right to invoice. We have elected to apply the "right to invoice" practical expedient and therefore, our revenue recognition is based on the reimbursement we are entitled to for each 30-day payment period. We utilize our historical average length of stay for each 30-day period of care as the measure of progress towards the satisfaction of our performance obligation.
PDGM uses timing, admission source, functional impairment levels and principal and other diagnoses to case-mix adjust payments. The case-mix adjusted payment for a 30-day period of care is subject to additional adjustments based on certain variables, including, but not limited to (a) an outlier payment if our patient's care was unusually costly (capped at 10% of total reimbursement per provider number); (b) a low utilization payment adjustment (“LUPA”) if the number of visits provided was less than the established threshold, which ranges from two to six visits and varies for every case-mix group under PDGM; (c) a partial payment if a patient transferred to another provider or from another provider before completing the 30-day period of care; and (d) the applicable geographic wage index. Payments for routine and non-routine supplies are included in the 30-day payment rate.
Medicare can also make various adjustments to payments received if we are unable to produce appropriate billing documentation or acceptable authorizations. We estimate the impact of such adjustments based on our historical experience, which primarily includes a historical collection rate of over 99% on Medicare claims, and record this estimate during the period in which services are rendered to revenue with a corresponding reduction to patient accounts receivable. A 0.1% change in our Medicare collection rate would impact our annual Medicare revenue by approximately $0.9 million.
Amounts due from Medicare include variable consideration for retroactive revenue adjustments due to settlements of audits and payment reviews. We determine our estimates for non-contractual revenue adjustments related to audits and payment reviews based on our historical experience and success rates in the claim appeals and adjudication process.
The Medicare home health benefit requires that beneficiaries be homebound (meaning that the beneficiary is unable to leave his/her home without a considerable and taxing effort), require intermittent skilled nursing, physical therapy or speech therapy services and receive treatment under a plan of care established and periodically reviewed by a physician. In order to provide greater flexibility during the novel coronavirus pandemic ("COVID-19"), CMS relaxed the definition of homebound status through the duration of the public health emergency. During the pandemic, a beneficiary is considered homebound if they have been instructed by a physician not to leave their home because of a confirmed or suspected COVID-19 diagnosis or if the patient has a condition that makes them more susceptible to contracting COVID-19. Therefore, if a beneficiary is homebound due to COVID-19 and requires skilled services, the services will be covered under the Medicare home health benefit.
During 2020, 20% of the reimbursement from each Medicare 30-day payment rate was billed near the start of each 30-day period of care, referred to as a request for anticipated payment ("RAP"), and cash was typically received before all services were rendered. Any cash received from Medicare for a RAP for a 30-day period of care that exceeded the associated revenue earned was recorded to accrued expenses within our consolidated balance sheets. CMS fully eliminated all upfront payments associated with RAPs effective January 1, 2021.
Non-Medicare Revenue
Episodic-based Revenue. We recognize revenue in a similar manner as we recognize Medicare revenue for amounts that are paid by other insurance carriers, including Medicare Advantage programs; however, these amounts can vary based upon the negotiated terms which generally range from 95% to 100% of Medicare rates.
Non-episodic based Revenue. Gross revenue is recorded on an accrual basis based upon the date of service at amounts equal to our established or estimated per-visit rates. Contractual revenue adjustments are recorded for the difference between our standard rates and the contracted rates to be realized from patients, third parties and others for services provided and are deducted from gross revenue to determine net service revenue. We also make non-contractual revenue adjustments to non-episodic revenue based on our historical experience to reflect the estimated transaction price. We receive a minimal amount of our net service revenue from patients who are either self-insured or are obligated for an insurance co-payment.
Hospice Revenue Recognition
Hospice Medicare Revenue
Gross revenue is recorded on an accrual basis based upon the date of service at amounts equal to the estimated payment rates. The estimated payment rates are predetermined daily or hourly rates for each of the four levels of care we deliver. The four levels of care are routine care, general inpatient care, continuous home care and respite care. Routine care accounted for 97% of our total Medicare hospice service revenue for each of 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. There are two separate payment rates for routine care: payments for the first 60 days of care and care beyond 60 days. In addition to the two routine rates, we may also receive a service intensity add-on (“SIA”). The SIA is based on visits made in the last seven days of life by a registered nurse or medical social worker for patients in a routine level of care.
The performance obligation is the delivery of hospice services to the patient, as determined by a physician, each day the patient is on hospice care.
We make adjustments to Medicare revenue for non-contractual revenue adjustments, which include our inability to obtain appropriate billing documentation or acceptable authorizations and other reasons unrelated to credit risk. We estimate the impact of these non-contractual revenue adjustments based on our historical experience, which primarily includes a historical collection rate of over 99% on Medicare claims, and record it during the period services are rendered. A 0.1% change in our Medicare collection rate would impact our annual Medicare revenue by approximately $0.8 million.
Additionally, our hospice service revenue is subject to certain limitations on payments from Medicare which are considered variable consideration. We are subject to an inpatient cap limit and an overall Medicare payment cap for each provider number. We monitor these caps on a provider-by-provider basis and estimate amounts due back to Medicare if we estimate a cap has been exceeded. We record these adjustments as a reduction to revenue and an increase in accrued expenses within our consolidated balance sheets. Providers are required to self-report and pay their estimated cap liability by February 28th of the following year. As of December 31, 2021, we have settled our Medicare hospice reimbursements for all fiscal years through October 31, 2015. As of December 31, 2021, we have recorded $4.5 million for estimated amounts due back to Medicare in accrued expenses for the Federal cap years ended October 31, 2016 through September 30, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we had recorded $9.3 million for estimated amounts due back to Medicare in accrued expenses for the Federal cap years ended October 31, 2014 through September 30, 2021.
Hospice Non-Medicare Revenue
Gross revenue is recorded on an accrual basis based upon the date of service at amounts equal to our established rates or estimated per day rates, as applicable. Contractual revenue adjustments are recorded for the difference between our standard rates and the contractual rates to be realized from patients, third-party payors and others for services provided and are deducted from gross revenue to determine our net service revenue. We also make non-contractual adjustments to non-Medicare revenue based on our historical experience to reflect the estimated transaction price.
Personal Care Revenue Recognition
Personal Care Revenue
We generate net service revenue by providing our services directly to patients based on authorized hours, visits or units determined by the relevant agency, at a rate that is either contractual or fixed by legislation. Net service revenue is recognized at the time services are rendered based on gross charges for the services provided, reduced by estimates for contractual and non-contractual revenue adjustments. We receive payment for providing such services from payors, including state and local governmental agencies, managed care organizations, commercial insurers and private consumers. Payors include the following elder service agencies: Aging Services Access Points ("ASAPs"), Senior Care Options ("SCOs"), Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly ("PACE") and the Veterans Administration ("VA").
High Acuity Care Revenue Recognition
High Acuity Care Revenue
Our revenues are derived from contracts with (1) health insurance plans for the coordination and provision of home recovery care services to patients who are enrolled members in those insurance plans and (2) health system partners for the coordination and provision of home recovery care services to patients who are discharged early from a health system facility to complete their inpatient stay at home.
Under our health insurance plan contracts, we provide home recovery care services for high acuity care patients on a full risk basis whereby we assume the risk for the coordination and payment of all required medical services necessary to treat the medical condition for which the patient was diagnosed in a home-based setting for a 30-day or 60-day episode of care in exchange for a fixed contracted bundled rate based upon the assigned diagnosis related group ("DRG"). Our performance obligation is the coordination and provision of patient care in accordance with physicians’ orders over either a 30-day or 60-day episode of care. The majority of our care coordination services and direct patient care is provided in the first five to seven days of the episode period (the "acute phase"). Monitoring services and follow-up direct patient care, as deemed necessary by the treating physician, is provided throughout the remainder of the episode. Since the majority of our services are provided during the acute phase, we recognize net service revenues over the acute phase based on gross charges for the services provided per the applicable managed care contract rates, reduced by estimates for revenue adjustments.
Under our contracts with health system partners, we provide home recovery care services for high acuity patients on a limited risk basis whereby we assume the risk for certain healthcare services during the remainder of an inpatient acute stay serviced at the patient's home in exchange for a contracted per diem rate. The performance obligation is the coordination and provision of required medical services, as determined by the treating physician, for each day the patient receives inpatient-equivalent care at home. As such, revenues are recognized as services are administered and as our performance obligations are satisfied on a per diem basis, reduced by estimates for revenue adjustments.
We recognize adjustments to revenue during the period in which changes to estimates of assigned patient diagnoses or episode terminations become known, in accordance with the applicable managed care contracts. For certain health insurance plans, revenue is reduced by amounts owed by enrollees to healthcare providers under deductible, coinsurance or copay provisions of health insurance plan policies, since those amounts are repaid to the health insurance plans by us as part of a retrospective reconciliation process.
Business Combinations
We account for acquisitions using the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. Acquisitions are accounted for as purchases and are included in our consolidated financial statements from their respective acquisition dates. Assets acquired, liabilities assumed and noncontrolling interests, if any, are measured at fair value on the acquisition date using the appropriate valuation method. Goodwill generated from acquisitions is recognized for the excess of the purchase price over tangible and identifiable intangible assets. In determining the fair value of identifiable intangible assets and any noncontrolling interests, we use various valuation techniques including the income approach, the cost approach and the market approach. These valuation methods require us to make estimates and assumptions surrounding projected revenues and costs, growth rates and discount rates.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
As of December 31, 2021, we had a goodwill balance of $1,196.1 million. Goodwill represents the amount of the purchase price in excess of the fair values assigned to the underlying identifiable net assets of acquired businesses. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to an annual impairment test. Tests are performed more frequently if events occur or circumstances
change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying amount. These events or circumstances include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in the business environment, regulatory environment or legal factors, or a substantial decline in the market capitalization of our stock.
U.S. GAAP allows for impairment testing to be done on either a quantitative or qualitative basis. During 2021, we performed a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units are less than their carrying values by evaluating relevant events and circumstances including financial performance, market conditions and share price. Based on this assessment, we concluded that the goodwill associated with our home health, hospice and high acuity care reporting units was not considered at risk of impairment as of October 31, 2021. In addition to the qualitative assessment, we also performed a quantitative analysis for our personal care reporting unit due to the decline in revenues resulting from the impact of COVID-19 and staffing shortages using an income and market approach. Based on this analysis, we concluded that the goodwill associated with our personal care reporting unit was not considered at risk of impairment as of October 31, 2021. Since the date of our last goodwill impairment test, there have been no material developments, events, changes in operating performance or other circumstances that would cause management to believe it is more likely than not that the fair value of any of our reporting units would be less than their carrying amounts.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an other intangible assets balance of $111.2 million. Intangible assets consist of certificates of need, licenses, acquired names, non-compete agreements and technology. We amortize non-compete agreements and acquired names that we do not intend to use indefinitely on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, which are generally two to three years for non-compete agreements and up to three years for acquired names. We amortize technology over its estimated useful service life, which is generally up to seven years. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the intangible asset below its carrying amount. We performed a qualitative assessment of our indefinite-lived intangible assets during 2021 and determined that there have been no material developments, events, changes in operating performance or other circumstances that would cause management to believe it is more likely than not that the fair value of any of our indefinite-lived intangible assets would be less than their carrying amounts. During 2020, we also performed a qualitative assessment of our indefinite-lived intangible assets; as a result of this analysis, we wrote off approximately $4.2 million of acquired names that were no longer in use.