ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our results of operations and financial condition together with our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 including the notes thereto, included in this Report. The discussion below contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors”. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made. We undertake no obligation to update or revise such statements to reflect new circumstances or unanticipated events as they occur, and you are urged to review and consider disclosures that we make in this and other reports that discuss factors germane to our business.
Overview
We operate and franchise a system-wide total of 42 fast casual restaurants, of which 29 are company-owned (an additional location opened January 4, 2022) and included in our consolidated and combined financial statements and 13 are owned and operated by franchisees under franchise agreements.
Our business strategy includes expansion through internal growth by acquiring complementary businesses.
American Burger Company (“ABC”) is a fast-casual dining chain consisting of 2 company-owned locations in North Carolina and New York, known for its diverse menu featuring fresh salads, customized burgers, milk shakes, sandwiches, and beer and wine.
BGR: The Burger Joint (“BGR”) was acquired in March 2015 and consists of 7 company-owned locations and 7 franchisee-operated locations in the United States. The former locations in the Middle East are closed.
Little Big Burger (“LBB”) was acquired in September 2015 and currently consists of 16 company-owned locations in the Portland, Oregon, Seattle, Washington, and Charlotte, North Carolina areas. One location was temporarily closed at December 31, 2021 due to lack of available employees. The newest location at the University of Oregon was leased in August 2021 and became operational in December 2021. Of the company-owned restaurants, 8 of those locations are operated under partnership agreements with investors where we control the management and operations of the stores and the partner supplies the capital to open the store in exchange for a non-controlling interest.
Pie Squared Holdings (“PIE”) was acquired on August 30, 2021. PIE, directly and through its 4 wholly-owned subsidiaries, owns, operates and franchises pizza restaurants operating under the tradename PizzaRev. The PizzaRev stores consist of 3 company-owned locations, one of which opened on January 4, 2022, and nine franchised locations. Three of these franchised locations were not open at the time of purchase and are not included in our total store count. One additional franchise location is planned to open in 2022.
The Jantzen Beach, Oregon gaming location was a former Hooters of America location and is only open for online gaming sales, drinks and a limited food menu.
Hooters of America redeemed a portion of the Company’s ownership interest in the entity and paid $0.3 million to the Company in October 2021. After the redemption, the Company’s effective economic interest in Hooters of America was less than 1%. We do not intend to open any new Hooters franchises in the near future.
Recent Developments
Recent Business Trends
Throughout 2021 we faced varying degrees of COVID-19 pandemic related pressures. In spite of this, our sales have continued to increase from the second through the fourth quarters of 2021 when compared to the corresponding quarters in 2020. Our revenue in the fourth quarters of 2021 and 2020 was $4.8 million and $4.5 million, respectively, and our revenue for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 was $20.7 million and $18.8 million, respectively. This represents a fourth quarter increase in revenue of 6.7% and an annual increase in revenue of 10.6%.
Looking forward to 2022, we anticipate continued inflationary pressures on our restaurant cost of sales and restaurant operating expenses. We also face a tight and competitive labor market throughout all locations. Our management team has and will continue to innovatively approach these challenges.
Future Plans
In August 2021, we acquired Pie Squared Holdings, which came with three company-owned stores and nine franchised stores. These stores operate under the tradename PizzaRev. We anticipate acquiring additional existing restaurant concepts during 2022.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
In early March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic was declared to be a National Public Health Emergency, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, as well as state and local legislative bodies and health departments, began issuing orders related to social distancing requirements, reduced restaurant seating capacity and other restrictions which resulted in a significant reduction in traffic at our restaurants. As of mid-March 2020, the ordinances tightened, and dine-in capacity was eliminated or severely restricted. By April 2020, at the request of most state and local legislative bodies, we closed all of our dining rooms and began to operate in a take-out and delivery only capacity. In early May 2020, states began allowing the re-opening of dining rooms in a limited capacity and by the end of June 2020, we had re-opened dining rooms in approximately 95% of our restaurants, while adhering to social distancing restrictions, which limited the number of guests we could serve in our restaurants at one time. During November 2020, rising case rates resulted in certain jurisdictions implementing restrictions that again reduced dining room capacity or mandated the re-closure of dining rooms. As a result, we began fiscal 2021 with significant limitations on our operations, which over the course of the fiscal year varied widely from time to time, state to state and city to city; however, nonetheless negatively impacted our sales. Once COVID-19 vaccines were approved and moved into wider distribution in the United States in early to mid-2021, public health conditions improved and almost all of the COVID-19 restrictions on businesses eased.
While cases continue to decline, and staffing continues to improve, overall consumer and business activity remains muted in certain markets as consumer behaviors have changed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and some businesses have yet to bring employees back into their offices. Our restaurant operations have been and could again in the future be disrupted by team member staffing issues because of illness, exclusion, fear of contracting COVID-19 or caring for family members due to COVID-19, legal requirements for employee vaccinations or COVID testing, lack of labor supply, competitive labor pressures, or for other reasons. Furthermore, inflation has been and is elevated across our business, including food costs, due in part to the supply chain impacts of the pandemic. We remain in regular contact with our major suppliers and while, to date, we have not experienced significant disruptions in our supply chain due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we could see significant future disruptions should the impacts of the pandemic continue. Currently, national, state and local jurisdictions have removed their capacity restrictions on businesses and, therefore, our restaurants are serving customers in our dining rooms without social distancing requirements. However, it is possible additional outbreaks could lead to restrictive measures that could impact our guest demand and dining room capacity.
PPP Loan
On March 27, 2020, Congress passed The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which included the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) for small businesses. On April 27, 2020, Amergent received a PPP loan of $2.1 million. Due to the Spin-Off and Merger, Amergent was not publicly traded at the time of the loan application or funding. The note bears interest at 1% per year, matures in April 2022, and requires monthly interest and principal payments of approximately $0.1 million beginning in November 2020 and through maturity. The currently issued guidelines of the program allow for the loan proceeds to be forgiven if certain requirements are met. Any loan proceeds not forgiven will be repaid in full. The Company had applied for loan forgiveness in the full amount of the loan, but the request was initially denied. The Company discussed the forgiveness request with the government agency that granted the loan and in March 2022, the U.S. SBA reversed its initial decision and will once again review the Company’s application for loan forgiveness. No assurance can be given as to the amount, if any, of forgiveness. The application for forgiveness allowed the Company to defer the timing of repayment until the forgiveness assessment is completed.
On February 25, 2021, the Company received a second PPP loan in the amount of $2.0 million. The note bears interest at 1% per year, matures on February 25, 2026, and requires monthly principal and interest payments of approximately $45,000 beginning June 25, 2022 through maturity. The loan may be forgiven if certain criteria are met. No assurance can be given as to the amount, if any, of forgiveness. The Company will apply for complete forgiveness of this loan in 2022.
Employee Retention Credit
The Employee Retention Credit (“ERC”) under the CARES Act is a refundable tax credit which encourages businesses to keep employees on the payroll during the COVID-19 pandemic. Eligible employers can qualify for up to $7,000 of credit for each employee based on qualified wages paid after December 31, 2020 and before January 1, 2022. Qualified wages are any wages paid to an employee (for employers that averaged fewer than 100 full-time employees in 2019) or the wages paid to an employee for the time that the employee is providing and not providing services (for employers that averaged more than 500 full-time employees in 2019) due to an economic hardship, specifically, either (1) a full or partial suspension of operations by order of a governmental authority due to COVID-19, or (2) a significant decline in gross receipts. The Company recognized $2.5 million of ERC as a contra-expense in the consolidated and combined statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. The program ended on January 1, 2022.
Acquisition
On August 30, 2021, the Company purchased all of the outstanding membership interests in Pie Squared Holdings LLC (“Pie Squared Holdings”) pursuant to a Unit Purchase Agreement (“Purchase Agreement”). Pie Squared Holdings, directly and through its four wholly-owned subsidiaries, owns, operates and franchises pizza restaurants operating under the tradename PizzaRev. The PizzaRev stores consist of three company owned stores and six franchised locations. The purchase price is an 8% secured, convertible promissory note (“Note”) with a face value of $1.0 million and a fair value of $1.2 million at the acquisition date. Transaction costs of $0.2 million were incurred in connection with the acquisition and charged to general and administrative expenses in the consolidated and combined statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Restaurant Revitalization Fund
The American Rescue Plan Act established the Restaurant Revitalization Fund (“RRF”) to provide funding to help restaurants and other eligible businesses keep their doors open. This program will provide restaurants with funding equal to their pandemic-related revenue loss up to $10.0 million per business and no more than $5.0 million per physical location. Prior to the acquisition, Pie Squared Holdings had obtained $10.0 million of funding under the RRF, of which $2.0 million was unspent as of the acquisition date. The Company used $0.5 million of this amount and recorded it as a contra-expense in the consolidated and combined statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
Our results of operations are summarized below:
* Restaurant cost of sales, operating expenses and pre-opening and closing expenses percentages are based on restaurant sales, net. Other percentages are based on total revenue.
Revenue
Total revenue increased to $20.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● Revenue from restaurant sales increased 9.2% to $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary reasons for the increase were due to increased occupancy and declining hesitancy from the public to dine in public locations as a result of the rebound from the COVID-19 pandemic.
● Gaming income increased 38.0% to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary reason for this increase was due to the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic recovery.
● Franchise income increased 32.6% to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary reason for this increase was due to our franchise stores recovering from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic beginning during the second quarter of 2021 and continuing through year end based on declining hesitancy from the public to dine in public locations.
Restaurant cost of sales
Restaurant cost of sales increased to $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The restaurant cost of sales as a percentage of restaurant sales decreased to 31.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 31.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The overall increase in cost of sales was due to the 9.2% increase in restaurant revenue to $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Restaurant operating expenses
Restaurant operating expenses increased to $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $13.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The restaurant operating expenses as a percentage of restaurant operating expenses decreased to 67.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 72.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was driven by the overall increase in restaurant revenue and the corresponding adjustment of labor at the store level and tighter controls of store level operating expenses.
Restaurant pre-opening and closing expenses
There was $8,000 in restaurant pre-opening and closing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to limited restaurant openings and closings in the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had three PizzaRev stores and the LBB University of Oregon that opened but did not incur any pre-opening expenses.
General and administrative expense (“G&A”)
G&A expenses increased to $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, audit, legal and other professional services increased by $0.3 million due to transaction costs of $0.2 million incurred in connection with the acquisition of Pie Squared Holdings, as well as $0.1 million of costs incurred due to negotiating lease terminations, extensions and relief from COVID-19 closures and the related accounting fees. There was also an increase of $0.2 million in advertising, insurance and other expenses and an increase of $0.1 million in salary and benefits after these amounts had been reduced in 2020 due to less need during the COVID-19 pandemic. These increases were offset by a $0.1 million decrease in shareholder services and fees incurred in connection with the spin-off from Chanticleer in 2020. Significant components of G&A expenses are summarized as follows:
Asset impairment charges
Asset impairment charges decreased to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an impairment on trademark/tradenames of approximately $0.3 million, property and equipment of approximately $0.4 million and right-of-use asset of approximately $0.7 million primarily due to ongoing cash flow implications resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an impairment on trademark/tradenames of approximately $0.3 million, property and equipment of approximately $0.8 million and right-of-use asset of approximately $0.5 million primarily due to the lower level of cash flow at the store level along with the permanent closures related to the impact of COVID-19 on operations.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We have curtailed opening new stores and making acquisitions of property and equipment in the past several years due to our financial condition. Recent impairments of property and equipment and intangible assets have also caused a decrease in the gross value of the underlying assets, thereby resulting in a decrease in depreciation and amortization expense.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $0.7 million was comparable to the comparative period in 2020 of $0.7 million. This is consistent with the low interest rate on new borrowings in 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the change in fair value of derivative liabilities was a gain of $0.1 million related to the True-Up Payment derivative. Derivative liabilities are marked to market on a quarterly basis and fluctuations in value are reflective of the fair market value at the point in time at which the instruments are measured. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the change in fair value of derivative liabilities and warrants was a gain of $0.6 million. The income in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in our stock price, thus driving a decrease in the value of the derivative instruments. The True-Up Payment was settled in July 2021 with a payment of $66,136.
In connection with the Merger, the Company obtained warrants to purchase 186,101 shares of Sonnet at $0.001 per share. The warrants were exercised in 2020 and common stock is now held. The share price of Sonnet has decreased since the Merger and a loss on investment of $0.2 million was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, shares of Sonnet were sold in 2021 and we received proceeds of $0.1 million. We recognized a loss on investment of $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This common stock will continue to be recorded at fair value until the securities are sold. At December 31, 2021, we held 122,064 shares with a fair value of approximately $50,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued an 8% secured, convertible promissory note as consideration for the acquisition of Pie Squared Holdings. We have elected to measure the convertible promissory note at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized in operations. We recognized a gain on fair value of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. There were no similar transactions during the year ended December 31, 2020.
On April 1, 2020, we exchanged the then existing 8% non-convertible notes for 10% convertible notes. Warrants to purchase common stock were also issued in connection with the issuance of the new notes. We recorded an $11.8 million loss on the extinguishment of the 8% notes based on the difference in the carrying value of the old notes and the fair value of the new notes and warrants issued.
On October 8, 2021, we sold West End Wings LTD, our Hooters restaurant located in Nottingham, England, to Hard Four Consultancy Limited (UK) for the final purchase price of £0.4 million (approximately $0.6 million). We recognized a gain on sale of subsidiary of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. There were no similar transactions during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a gain on extinguished lease liabilities of $0.4 million, compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the derecognition of operating lease liabilities resulting from our negotiation of the cancellation of our obligations under certain lease agreements. The cancellations resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic.
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
Cash used in operating activities was approximately $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This use of cash was primarily driven by the net loss incurred of $3.5 million offset by non-cash charges to operations of $3.2 million. The non-cash charges in 2021 consist primarily of asset impairment charges of $1.5 million, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, intangible assets and right-of-use assets totaling $2.0 million and amortization of debt discount of $0.2 million, offset by gain on extinguished lease liabilities of $0.4 million and gain on sale of subsidiary of $0.1 million. The balance of the change in cash flows from operating activities was related to net movements in asset and liability accounts.
Cash used in operating activities was approximately $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This use of cash was primarily driven by the net loss incurred of $20.6 million offset by non-cash charges to operations of $16.2 million. The non-cash charges in 2020 consist primarily of loss on debt extinguishment of $11.8 million, loss on investments of $1.2 million, asset impairment charges of $1.6 million and depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, intangible assets and right-of-use assets totaling $2.6 million, offset by gain in fair value of derivative liabilities of $0.6 million and gain on extinguished lease liabilities of $0.5 million. The balance of the change in cash flows from operating activities was related to net movements in asset and liability accounts.
Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to $2.0 million cash and restricted cash acquired in connection with the acquisition of Pie Squared Holdings, $0.6 million net proceeds from the sale of the UK subsidiary and $0.5 million proceeds from the sale of investments. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.1 million for the purchase of property and equipment.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $1.9 million compared to cash provided by financing activities of approximately $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash provided by financing activities during 2021 was primarily related to proceeds of $2.0 million from a PPP loan. The primary drivers of the cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 were proceeds from the bridge preferred equity investment, the exercise of warrants, and the $5.4 million of Merger Consideration received.
LIQUIDITY, CAPITAL RESOURCES AND GOING CONCERN
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, our cash balance was $2.3 million, of which $1.7 million was restricted cash, our working capital deficiency was $12.5 million and we had significant near-term commitments and contractual obligations. The level of additional cash needed to fund operations and our ability to conduct business for the next 12 months will be influenced primarily by the following factors:
● our ability to access the capital and debt markets to satisfy current obligations and operate the business;
● our ability to qualify for and access financial stimulus programs available through federal and state government programs;
● our ability to refinance or otherwise extend maturities of current debt obligations;
● our ability to manage our operating expenses and maintain gross margins;
● popularity of and demand for our fast-casual dining concepts; and
● general economic conditions and changes in consumer discretionary income.
We have typically funded our operating costs, acquisition activities, working capital requirements and capital expenditures with proceeds from the issuances of our common stock and other financing arrangements, including convertible debt, lines of credit, notes payable, capital leases, and other forms of external financing.
On March 10, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the novel COVID-19 virus as a global pandemic. The COVID-19 outbreak in the United States has resulted in a significant impact throughout the hospitality industry. The Company has been impacted due to restrictions placed on them by state and local governments that caused temporary restaurant closures or significantly reduced the Company’s ability to operate, temporarily restricting the Company’s restaurants to take-out only. It is difficult to estimate the length or severity of this outbreak; however, the Company has made operational changes, as needed, to reduce the impact. However, there can be no certainty regarding the length and severity of the outbreak and such its ultimate financial impact on the restaurant operations.
As Amergent executes its business plan over the next 12 months, it intends to carefully monitor the impact of its working capital needs and cash balances relative to the availability of cost-effective debt and equity financing. In the event that capital is not available, Amergent may then have to scale back or freeze its operations plans, sell assets on less than favorable terms, reduce expenses, and/or curtail future acquisition plans to manage its liquidity and capital resources.
The Company’s current operating losses, combined with its working capital deficit and uncertainties regarding the impact of COVID-19, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
In addition, our business is subject to additional risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors”.
The consolidated and combined financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our reported results of operations and financial position are dependent upon the application of certain accounting policies and estimates that require subjective or complex judgments. Such estimates are inherently uncertain and changes in such estimates could have a significant impact on reported results and balances for the periods presented as well as future periods. The following is a description of what we consider to be our most critical accounting policies.
Leases
We determine if a contract contains a lease at inception. Our material operating leases consist of restaurant locations and office space. Our leases generally have remaining terms of 1-20 years and most include options to extend the leases for additional 5-year periods. Generally, the lease term is the minimum of the noncancelable period of the lease or the lease term inclusive of reasonably certain renewal periods up to a term of 20 years. If the estimate of our reasonably certain lease term was changed, our depreciation and rent expense could differ materially.
Operating lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date. Operating lease liabilities represent the present value of lease payments not yet paid. Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset and are based upon the operating lease liabilities adjusted for prepayments or accrued lease payments, initial direct costs, lease incentives, and impairment of operating lease assets. To determine the present value of lease payments not yet paid, we estimate incremental borrowing rates corresponding to the reasonably certain lease term. As we have no committed credit facilities, secured or otherwise, we estimate this rate based on prevailing financial market conditions, comparable company and credit analysis, and management judgment. If the estimate of our incremental borrowing rate was changed, our operating lease assets and liabilities could differ materially.
Estimated Lease Termination and Other Closing Costs
Once we have determined that a restaurant location is to be closed, we estimate the expected proceeds to be received from such disposal and impair the carrying value of the net assets of such locations to this estimate and report these net assets as assets held for sale. Our estimate of disposal proceeds is dependent upon multiple assumptions including our ability to identify a buyer as well as the general market for commercial real estate at the expected time of disposal. Actual results could significantly differ from these estimates, which could result in a significant impact to reported operations in future periods. Assets that have been impaired to their estimated disposal proceeds are maintained at the lower of this new carrying value or the most recently developed estimate of eventual proceeds.
Intangible Assets
Trademark/Tradenames
Certain of the Company’s trademark/tradenames have been classified as indefinite-lived intangible assets and are not amortized, but instead are reviewed for impairment at least annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. Definite lived intangible assets are assessed for impairment using methods discussed below in the long-lived assets section. The Company’s indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually by estimating their fair value and comparing it to the asset’s carrying value. The Company estimates the fair value of indefinite-lived tradenames using the relief-from-royalty method, which requires assumptions related to projected sales from its annual long-range plan; assumed royalty rates that could be payable if the Company did not own the trademarks; and a discount rate.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, operating lease assets, and purchased intangible assets subject to depreciation and amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Some of the events or changes in circumstances that would trigger an impairment test include, but are not limited to:
● significant under-performance relative to expected and/or historical results (negative comparable sales growth or operating cash flows for two consecutive years);
● significant negative industry or economic trends;
● knowledge of transactions involving the sale of similar property at amounts below the Company’s carrying value; or
● the Company’s expectation to dispose of long-lived assets before the end of their estimated useful lives, even though the assets do not meet the criteria to be classified as “Held for Sale.”
If circumstances require a long-lived asset or asset group be tested for possible impairment, the Company first compares undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group to its carrying value. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset or asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying value exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques, including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary.
Due to the continued impact of this pandemic on the Company’s business, management performed an impairment analysis of its long-lived assets at each quarter end in 2021 and 2020, including December 31, 2021 and 2020, and determined that the carrying value of the Company’s trademark/tradenames intangible asset, property and equipment and operating lease assets were impaired for an aggregate amount of $1.5 million and $1.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The determination was based on the best judgment of management for the future of the assets and on information known at the time of the assessment.
Goodwill
Goodwill is not subject to amortization but is tested at least annually or when impairment indicators are present. When evaluating goodwill for impairment, the Company may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit is impaired. If the Company does not perform a qualitative assessment, or determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, a quantitative assessment is performed to calculate the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the estimated fair value, an impairment charge is recorded to reduce the carrying value to the estimated fair value. The Company’s decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment is influenced by a number of factors, including the significance of the excess of the reporting unit’s estimated fair value over carrying value at the last quantitative assessment date, the amount of time in between quantitative fair value assessments, and the price of our common stock. Impairment is measured as the excess of carrying value of the goodwill to its estimated fair value. Due to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, management performed an impairment analysis of goodwill as of each quarter end in 2021 and 2020, including December 31, 2021 and 2020. No goodwill impairment was required in 2021 and 2020.
Derivative Liabilities
Accounting for the derivative liabilities relating to the Company’s true-up payment, warrants and debt conversion feature requires Amergent’s management to exercise judgment and make estimates and assumptions regarding fair value. Each derivative liability was initially recorded at fair value upon the date of issuance and is subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with changes recognized in the consolidated and combined statement of operations until the liability expires or qualifies for equity classification. See Note 12 to the consolidated and combined financial statements for a discussion of these liabilities. In July 2021, the true-up payment was made and there was no derivative liability as of December 31, 2021.
Business Combination Accounting
Accounting for assets acquired, liabilities assumed and consideration transferred in a business combination requires Amergent’s management to exercise judgment and make estimates and assumptions regarding fair value. The Company acquired Pie Squared Holdings during the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting in the Company recording the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at fair value on the acquisition date, as well as fair valuing the convertible promissory note issued as consideration for the business combination. The Company elected the fair value option to account for the convertible promissory note. The convertible promissory note was initially recorded at fair value at the acquisition date and will be subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with changes recognized in the consolidated and combined statement of operations until the liability is repaid or converted into common stock.
In addition, the Company assumed all the rights and obligations of Pie Squared Holdings that arose from transactions of Pie Squared Holdings prior to the business combination, both stated rights and obligations as well as those that are contingent. Pie Squared Holdings applied for and received an approximately $10.0 million grant from the U.S. SBA under the RRF and used approximately $8.0 million to repay existing debt of Pie Squared Holdings and to fund some of its operating expenses. Under the RRF there is a requirement that the grant monies be for “eligible uses.” The Company, through the structure of the acquisition, is now responsible that the grant proceeds were, in fact, properly obtained and disbursed for “eligible uses.” If it is determined that Pie Squared Holdings obtained the grant improperly or the disbursement of such grant monies were not “eligible uses,” then the Company would be responsible for the ramifications of such actions, including repayment of the approximately $10.0 million of grant monies, among other items. Management completed its analysis of this contingency and concluded that, at this time, a liability does not need to be recorded for this contingency. In connection with the acquisition, the Company obtained an indemnification from the sellers which is inclusive of any matters related to the RRF.
Modification of Debt
When we change the terms of existing notes payable, we evaluate the amendments under ASC 470-50, Debt Modification and Extinguishment to determine whether the change should be treated as a modification or as a debt extinguishment. This evaluation includes analyzing whether there are significant and consequential changes to the economic substance of the note. If the change is deemed insignificant then the change is considered a debt modification, whereas if the change is substantial the change is reflected as a debt extinguishment.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to the consolidated and combined financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.