ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements contained in this report that are not statements of historical fact, including without limitation, statements containing the words “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates” and similar words, constitute forward-looking statements that are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. From time to time we may make other forward-looking statements. Investors are cautioned that such forward-looking statements are subject to an inherent risk that actual results may materially differ as a result of many factors, including the risks discussed from time to time in this report, including the risks described under “Risk Factors” in any filings we have made with the SEC.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an on-going basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to useful lives of real estate assets, cost reimbursement income, bad debts, impairment, net lease intangibles, contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates.
Background
American Cannabis Company, Inc. and subsidiary is a publicly listed company quoted on the OTC Markets OTCQB Trading Tier under the symbol “AMMJ”. We are based in Denver, Colorado and operate within the regulated cannabis industry with four operation divisions: (i) consulting and professional services; (ii) the sale of products and equipment commonly utilized in the cultivation, processing, transportation or retail sale of cannabis; (iii) a new business consulting division called “American Hemp Services,” which offers hemp producers with consulting and professional services including business plan creation, greenhouse and farm design, license acquisition, seed sales, hemp processing, operational deployment, and crop improvement; and, (iv) our licensed owner operator medical marijuana dispensaries and cultivation facilities located in Colorado Springs, Colorado under the trade name “Naturaleaf.” Our operations are limited to only those state jurisdictions where medical and/or recreational cannabis business has been legalized. American Cannabis Company, Inc. is a publicly listed company quoted on the OTCQB Tier under the symbol “AMMJ”.
NATURALEAF ACQUISITION
On April 30, 2021, the Company closed its acquisition of the assets of Medihemp, LLC, and its wholly owned subsidiary SLAM Enterprises, LLC, and Medical Cannabis Caregivers, Inc., each an entity organized and operating under the laws of the State of Colorado, and all doing business as “Naturaleaf” in the medicinal cannabis industry in Colorado.
Medihemp and SLAM, respectively own fixed assets and operate two retail Medical Marijuana Centers located in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Medical Cannabis owns fixed assets and operates a retail Medical Marijuana Center located in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Medical Cannabis also owns and operates a Medical Marijuana Optional Premises Cultivation license, and a Medical Marijuana-Infused Product Manufacturer license.
Naturaleaf agreed to sell or assign to the Company the following assets:
1. Three Medical Marijuana (MMC) Store Licenses;
2. One Marijuana Infused Product Licenses (MIPS); and,
3. One Option Premises Cultivation License (OPC); and,
4. Related real property assets, goodwill, and related business assets.
As a result, the Company has expanded its business model to include the cultivation and retail sale of cannabis in the medicinal cannabis industry.
The aggregate consideration paid for the Assets was $2,890,000, which consisted of (i) a cash payment of $1,100,000, (ii) the issuance of a promissory note to the owner of Naturaleaf in the principal amount of $1,100,000 (the “Seller Note”), and (iii) the issuance of 3,000,000 shares of the Company’s restricted common stock valued at $0.23 per share or $690,000.
The asset acquisition was accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations. As the acquirer for accounting purposes, the Company has estimated the fair value of Medihemp LLC and Medical Cannabis Caregivers, Inc.’s (hereafter “Naturaleaf’s”) assets acquired and conformed the accounting policies of Naturaleaf to its own accounting policies.
As part of the acquisition, the owners of Naturaleaf retained the outstanding cash balance on the date of the acquisition and had agreed to the payment of all outstanding accounts payables and related party advances.
The Company has performed a preliminary valuation analysis of the fair market value of Naturaleaf’s assets. The following table summarizes the allocation of the purchase price as of the acquisition date:
Goodwill from the acquisition primarily relates to the future economic benefits arising from the assets acquired and is consistent with the Company's stated intentions and strategy. Other assets include inventory and fixed assets.
The fair value of Naturaleaf’s identifiable intangible assets was $800,000 at April 30, 2021, consisting of $500,000 in licenses and $300,000 in brand names.
The estimated fair values assigned to identifiable assets acquired assumed are provisional and are based on the information that was available as of the acquisition date to estimate the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The Company believes that information provides a reasonable basis for estimating the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, but the Company is waiting for additional information necessary to finalize those fair values. Therefore, the provisional measurements of fair value reflected are subject to change and such changes could be significant. The Company expects to finalize the valuation and complete the purchase price allocation as soon as practicable, but no later than one year from the acquisition date.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
The following table presents our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020:
AMERICAN CANNABIS COMPANY, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues
Total revenues were $2,404,603 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $1,569,794 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increases in total revenue of $834,809 for the year ended December 31, 2021, represents a decrease of $124,269 in consulting revenue combined with a $47,070 decrease in product and equipment revenue offset by the new revenue stream from the sale of cannabis products of $1,006,148.
Costs of Revenues
Costs of revenues primarily consists of labor, travel, cost of equipment and soil sold, and other costs directly attributable to providing services or soil products. Costs of revenues related to our cannabis products include cultivation costs, including labor, utilities, supplies and cultivation facility rent. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our total costs of revenues were $1,348,455 compared to $849,115 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Decreases in costs of consulting services and products and equipment during year ended December 31, 2021 were associated with decreases in revenue and were offset by $573,937 in costs associated with the Company’s new sale of cannabis products.
Consulting Services
Consulting service revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 were $381,094 versus $503,363 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Decreases in consulting services is a combination of seeing not only COVID-19 restrictions effect clients plans for expansion or implementation of projects combined with delays in legalization in certain states where voters have approved legalization for either medicinal or recreational use in late 2020, but there have been delays in implementing the laws and programs. During the 4th Quarter of 2021, the Company did start to see an uptick in requests for services as more states implemented their laws.
Costs of Services were $36,179 compared to $108,706 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Costs associated with consulting services decreased $72,527, as the Company has focused on the use of internal staff, rather than consultants for a majority of this work.
Soil Product and Equipment Revenues
Our product and equipment revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,017,361 versus $1,064,431 for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of changes in warehousing and production practices, combined with an increase in prices and the discontinuance of certain products, soil sales have seen a decrease.
Costs of Products and Equipment were $758,940 and $740,409, during the year ended December 31, 2021. Costs associated with products and equipment increased, as a result of increased equipment sales during the 4th quarter.
Cannabis Product Revenues
Cannabis product revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,006,148. The Company acquired the assets of Naturaleaf on April 30, 2021 and only began recognizing revenues from these operations on May 1, 2021.
Costs associated with cannabis products consists of those costs incurred in the cultivation of the plants and the retail sale of the products. During the year ended December 31, 2021, such costs were $553,336.
Gross Profit
Total gross profit was $1,056,148 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compromised of consulting services gross profit of $344,915, products and equipment gross profit of $258,421 and a gross profit of $452,812 for cannabis products. This compares to total gross profit of $720,679 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compromised of consulting services gross profit of $396,657 and products and equipment gross profit of $324,002. The relative decreases in the gross profits of consulting services and products and equipment are a result of the actions described below.
The decrease in our consulting services gross profits during the year ended December 31, 2021, reflects the effects of COVID-19 which has been compounded by delays in finalization of rules for implementation in states that in 2020 legalized cannabis for either medicinal or recreational purposes The decrease in gross profits for products and equipment was due to the Company expanding its product line in large quantity container (“Tote”) selling at lower margins as a promotion to clients during the period.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses were $2,696,881, for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $1,344,719 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in operating expenses of $1,352,162 is attributed to the recognition of the $350,000 settlement expense in the Turoff litigation and are combined with increases in bad debt expense, legal, accounting and other third-party consultant costs associated with the closing of the Naturaleaf asset acquisition. The Company has seen additional increases in depreciation and amortization expenses, sales and marketing expenses and web site design during the period.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $201,484 as compared with $91,627 for the nine months ended December 31, 2020. The increase is a direct result of the forgiveness of the Company’s then outstanding PPP loan by the Small Business Administration offset by increases in interest expenses resulting from the $1,100,000 promissory note issued in connection with the asset acquisition from Naturaleaf.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was ($1,439,249) as compared to a net loss of ($532,413) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in losses are a direct result of increases in cost of goods and operational expenses caused by the acquisition of the Naturaleaf acquisition combined with the litigation settlement expense.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2021, our primary internal sources of liquidity were our working capital, which included cash and cash equivalents of $670,423 and accounts receivable of $11,316. Additionally, considering that our fixed overhead costs are low, we have the ability to issue stock to compensate employees and management. In prospective, due to the delay in additional states enacting legalization for cannabis products management has initiated raising additional capital as needed to offset general and administrative expenses for at least the next 12 months. Management believes this strategy will adequately provide the necessary liquidity and capital resources to fund our operational and general and administrative expenses for at least the next 12 months.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued 8,050,000 registered shares of common stock in exchange for net proceeds of $1,241,043 pursuant to the Common Stock Purchase Agreement entered into on October 11, 2019 with White Lion Capital LLC. The Company has registered 34,000,000 million shares of its common stock to sell to White Lion Capital, LLC on an as needed basis for funds to support operational activities.
Operating Activities
Net cash used by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a use of ($957,978), compared to net cash used by operating activities of ($525,794), for the year ended December 31, 2020. Increases in cash used were a result of the increases in inventory, prepaid expenses and an increase in net loss. All a result of the addition of cannabis operations.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, investing activities were a use of cash of ($1,465,960) and $267 respectively. The increases were result of the cash payment in the acquisition of the assets of Naturaleaf of $1,100,000 and expenditures of equipment and leasehold improvements for the cultivation and dispensary facilities of $357,801.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 proceeds received from financing activities was $1,371,229 and $1,303,478 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Funds received during the year ended December 31, 2021 were from the sale of shares of the Company’s registered common stock and a receipt of funds from the Company’s second SBA PPP Loan.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
A reconciliation of net income(loss) to Adjusted EBITDA is provided below:
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect amounts reported in those statements. We have made our best estimates of certain amounts contained in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. However, application of our accounting policies involves the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties, and, as a result, actual results could differ materially from these estimates. Management believes that the estimates, assumptions, and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
We cannot predict what future laws and regulations might be passed that could have a material effect on our results of operations. We assess the impact of significant changes in laws and regulations on a regular basis and update the assumptions and estimates used to prepare our financial statements when we deem it necessary.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We consider all highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents are held in operating accounts at a major financial institution.
Inventory
Inventory is primarily comprised of products and equipment to be sold to end-customers. Inventory is valued at cost, based on the specific identification method, unless and until the market value for the inventory is lower than cost, in which case an allowance is established to reduce the valuation to market value. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, market values of all of our inventory were greater than cost, and accordingly, no such valuation allowances was recognized.
Deposits
Deposits is comprised of advance payments made to third parties, primarily for inventory for which we have not yet taken title. When we take title to inventory for which deposits are made, the related amount is classified as inventory, then recognized as a cost of revenues upon sale (see “Costs of Revenues” below).
Prepaid Expenses and Other Current Assets
Prepaid expenses and other current assets are primarily comprised of advance payments made to third parties for independent contractors’ services or other general expenses. Prepaid services and general expenses are amortized over the applicable periods which approximate the life of the contract or service period.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are recorded at the net value of face amount less any allowance for doubtful accounts. On a periodic basis, we evaluate our accounts receivable and, based on a method of specific identification of any accounts receivable for which we deem the net realizable value to be less than the gross amount of accounts receivable recorded, we establish an allowance for doubtful accounts for those balances. In determining our need for an allowance for doubtful accounts, we consider historical experience, analysis of past due amounts, client creditworthiness and any other relevant available information. However, our actual experience may vary from our estimates. If the financial condition of our clients were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability or unwillingness to pay our fees, we may need to record additional allowances or write-offs in future periods. This risk is mitigated to the extent that we collect retainers from our clients prior to performing significant services.
The allowance for doubtful accounts, if any, is recorded as a reduction in revenue to the extent the provision relates to fee adjustments and other discretionary pricing adjustments. To the extent the provision relates to a client's inability to make required payments on accounts receivables, the provision is recorded in operating expenses. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020 our allowance for doubtful accounts was $ 82,540 and $14,980, respectively. For December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we recorded bad debt expense of $54,435 and $4,910, respectively.
Operating Lease
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). This ASU requires lessees to recognize a lease liability, on a discounted basis, and a right-of-use asset for substantially all leases, as well as additional disclosures regarding leasing arrangements. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842), which provides an optional transition method of applying the new lease standard. Topic 842 can be applied using either a modified retrospective approach at the beginning of the earliest period presented, or as permitted by ASU 2018-11, at the beginning of the period in which it is adopted.
We adopted this standard using a modified retrospective approach on January 1, 2019. The modified retrospective approach includes a number of optional practical expedients relating to the identification and classification of leases that commenced before the adoption date; initial direct costs for leases that commenced before the adoption date; and, the ability to use hindsight in evaluating lessee options to extend or terminate a lease or to purchase the underlying asset.
The Company elected the package of practical expedients permitted under ASC 842 allowing it to account for its existing operating lease that commenced before the adoption date as an operating lease under the new guidance without reassessing (i) whether the contract contains a lease; (ii) the classification of the lease; or, (iii) the accounting for indirect costs as defined in ASC 842.
In considering its qualitative disclosure obligations under ASC 842-20-50-3, the Company examined its one lease for office space that has a fixed monthly rent with no variable lease payments and no options to extend. The lease is for an office space. The lease does not provide for terms and conditions granting residual value guarantees by the Company, or any restrictions or covenants imposed by the lease for dividends or incurring additional financial obligations by the Company. The Company also elected a short-term lease exception policy and an accounting policy to not separate non-lease components from lease components for our facility lease, as we determined our right of use asset to be zero.
Consistent with ASC 842-20-50-4, the Company calculated its total lease cost based solely on its monthly rent obligation. The Company had no cash flows arising from its lease, no finance lease cost, short term lease cost, or variable lease costs. Our office lease does not produce any sublease income, or any net gain or loss recognized from sale and leaseback transactions. As a result, the Company did not need to segregate amounts between finance and operating leases for cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities, segregated between operating and financing cash flows; supplemental non-cash information on lease liabilities arising from obtaining right-of-use assets; weighted-average calculations for the remaining lease term; or the weighted average discount rate.
The adoption of this guidance resulted in no significant impact to our results of operations or cash flows.
Property and Equipment, net
Property and Equipment is stated at net book value, cost less depreciation. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Depreciation of owned equipment is provided using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, ranging from two to seven years. Depreciation of capitalized construction in progress costs, a component of property and equipment, net, begins once the underlying asset is placed into service and is recognized over the estimated useful life. Property and equipment are reviewed for impairment as discussed below under “Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets.” We did not capitalize any interest as of December 31, 2021 and as of December 31, 2020.
Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Upon such an occurrence, recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to forecasted undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. For long-lived assets held for sale, assets are written down to fair value, less cost to sell. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows, appraised values or management's estimates, depending upon the nature of the assets. We have not recorded any impairment charges related to long-lived assets during the year ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
Revenue Recognition
We have adopted the following accounting principles related to revenue recognition: (a) FASB ASU 2016-12 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Due to the nature of our contracts with customers, adopting the new accounting principles did not have a significant impact on our prior period results of operations, cash flows or financial position.
Our service and product revenues arise from contracts with customers. Service revenue includes Operations Divisions consulting revenue. Product revenue includes (a) Operations Division product sales (So-Hum Living Soils), (b) Equipment sales division, (c) Cannabis sales division. The majority of our revenue is derived from distinct performance obligations, such as time spent delivering a service or the delivery of a specific product.
We may also enter into contracts with customers that identify a single, or few, distinct performance obligations, but that also have non-distinct, underlying performance obligations. These contracts are typically fulfilled within one to six months. Only an insignificant portion of our revenue would be assessed for allocation between distinct (contractual) performance obligations and non-distinct deliverables between reporting periods and, accordingly, we do not record a contract asset for completed, non-distinct performance obligations prior to invoicing the customer.
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606 using the following 5 steps to identify revenues:
(1) Identify the contract with the Customer. Our customary practice is to obtain written evidence, typically in the form of a contract or purchase order.
(2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract. We have rights to payment when services are completed in accordance with the underlying contract, or for the sale of goods when custody is transferred to our customers either upon delivery to our customers’ locations, with no right of return or further obligations.
(3) Determination of the transaction price. Prices are typically fixed, and no price protections or variables are offered.
(4) Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract. Transaction prices are typically allocated to the performance obligations outlined in the contract.
(5) Recognize Revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We typically require a retainer for all or a portion of the goods or services to be delivered. We recognize revenue as the performance obligations detailed in the contract are met.
Advances from Clients deposits are contract liabilities with customers that represent our obligation to either transfer goods or services in the future, or refund the amount received. Where possible, we obtain retainers to lessen our risk of non-payment by our customers. Advances from Clients deposits are recognized as revenue as we meet specified performance obligations as detailed in the contract.
Product and Equipment Sales
Revenue from product and equipment sales, including delivery fees, is recognized when an order has been obtained from the customer, the price is fixed and determinable when the order is placed, the product is delivered, title has transferred, and collectability is reasonably assured. Generally, our suppliers’ drop-ship orders to our clients with destination terms. The Company realizes revenue upon delivery to the customer. Given the facts that (1) our customers exercise discretion in determining the timing of when they place their product order; and, (2) the price negotiated in our product sales contracts is fixed and determinable at the time the customer places the order, we are not of the opinion that our product sales indicate or involve any significant financing that would materially change the amount of revenue recognized under the contract, or would otherwise contain a significant financing component for us or the customer under FASB ASC Topic 606. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, sales returns were $0.
Consulting Services
We also generate revenues from professional services consulting agreements. These arrangements are generally entered into: (1) on an hourly basis for a fixed fee; or (2) on a contingent fee basis. Generally, we require a complete
For hourly based fixed fee service contracts, we utilize and rely upon the proportional performance method, which recognizes revenue as services are completed. Under this method, in order to determine the amount of revenue to be recognized, we calculate the amount of completed work in comparison to the total services to be provided under the arrangement or deliverable. We segregate upon entry into a contract any advances or retainers received from clients for fixed fee hourly services into a separate “Advances from Clients” account, and only recognize revenues as we incur and charge billable hours, and then deposit the funds earned into our operating account. Because our hourly fees for services are fixed and determinable and are only earned and recognized as revenue upon actual performance, we are of the opinion that such arrangements are not an indicator of a vendor or customer based significant financing, that would materially change the amount of revenue we recognize under the contract or would otherwise contain a significant financing component under FASB ASC Topic 606.
Occasionally, our fixed-fee hourly engagements are recognized under the completed performance method. Some fixed fee arrangements are for completion of a final deliverable or act which is significant to the arrangement. These engagements do not generally exceed a one-year term. If the performance is for a final deliverable or act, we recognize revenue under the completed performance method, in which revenue is recognized once the final act or deliverable is performed or delivered for a fixed fee. Revenue recognition is affected by a number of factors that change the estimated amount of work required to complete the deliverable, such as changes in scope, timing, awaiting notification of license award from local government, and the level of client involvement. Losses, if any, on fixed-fee engagements are recognized in the period in which the loss first becomes probable and reasonably estimable. FASB ASC Topic 606 provides a practical expedient to disregard the effects of a financing component if the period between payment and performance is one year or less. As our fixed fee hourly engagements do not exceed one year, no significant customer-based financing is implicated under FASB ASC Topic 606. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred no losses from fixed fee engagements that terminate prior to completion. We believe if an engagement terminates prior to completion, we can recover the costs incurred related to the services provided.
We primarily enter into arrangements for which fixed and determinable revenues are contingent and agreed upon achieving a pre-determined deliverable or future outcome. Any contingent revenue for these arrangements is not recognized until the contingency is resolved and collectability is reasonably assured.
Our arrangements with clients may include terms to deliver multiple services or deliverables. These contracts specifically identify the services to be provided with the corresponding deliverable. The value for each deliverable is determined based on the prices charged when each element is sold separately or by other vendor-specific objective evidence (“VSOE”) or estimates of stand-alone selling prices. Revenues are recognized in accordance with our accounting policies for the elements as described above (see Product Sales). The elements qualify for separation when the deliverables have value on a stand-alone basis and the value of the separate elements can be established by VSOE or an estimated selling price.
While assigning values and identifying separate elements requires judgment, selling prices of the separate elements are generally readily identifiable as fixed and determinable as we also sell those elements individually outside of a multiple services engagement. Contracts with multiple elements typically incorporate a fixed-fee or hourly pricing structure. Arrangements are typically terminable by either party upon sufficient notice or do not include provisions for refunds relating to services provided.
Reimbursable expenses, including those relating to travel, other out-of-pocket expenses and any third-party costs, are included as a component of revenues. Typically, an equivalent amount of reimbursable expenses is included in total direct client service costs. Reimbursable expenses related to time and materials and fixed-fee engagements are recognized as revenue in the period in which the expense is incurred and collectability is reasonably assured. Taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are recognized as liabilities and paid to the appropriate government entities.
Cannabis Sales
Revenues consist of the retail sale of cannabis and related products. Revenue is recognized at the point of sale for retail customers. Payment is typically due upon transferring the goods to the customer or within a specified time period permitted under the Company’s credit policy. Sales discounts were not material during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Costs of Revenues
Our policy is to recognize costs of revenue in the same manner in conjunction with revenue recognition. Cost of revenues include the costs directly attributable to revenue recognition and includes compensation and fees for services, travel and other expenses for services and costs of products and equipment. Selling, general and administrative expenses are charged to expense as incurred.
Advertising and Promotion Costs
Advertising and promotion costs are included as a component of selling and marketing expense and are expensed as incurred. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, these costs were $116,122 and $9,934, respectively.
Shipping and Handling Costs
For product and equipment sales, shipping and handling costs are included as a component of cost of revenues.
Stock-Based Compensation
Restricted shares are awarded to employees and entitle the grantee to receive shares of restricted common stock at the end of the established vesting period. The fair value of the grant is based on the stock price on the date of grant. We recognize related compensation costs on a straight-line basis over the requisite vesting period of the award, which to date has been one year from the grant date. . During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, stock-based compensation expense for restricted shares for Company employees was $42,207 and $29,970, respectively. Compensation expense for warrants are based on the fair value of the instruments on the grant date, which is determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model and are expensed over the expected term of the awards. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, no warrants were issued as stock compensation.
Income Taxes
Our corporate status changed from an S-Corporation, which it had been since inception, to a C-Corporation during the year ended December 31, 2014. As provided in Section 1361 of the Internal Revenue Code, for income tax purposes, S-Corporations are not subject to corporate income taxes; instead, the owners are taxed on their proportionate share of the S-Corporation’s taxable income. Accordingly, we were only subject to income taxes for a portion of 2014. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns in accordance with applicable accounting guidance for accounting for income taxes, using currently enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. We record a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, due to cumulative losses since our corporate status changed, we recorded a valuation allowance against our deferred tax asset that reduced our income tax benefit for the period to zero. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had no liabilities related to federal or state income taxes and the carrying value of our deferred tax asset was zero. The years 2010 to 2021 remain subject to examination by the Company’s major tax jurisdictions.
Due to its cannabis operations, the Company is subject to the limitations of Internal Revenue Code (“IRC”) Section 280E under which the Company is only allowed to deduct expenses directly related to sales of product. This results in permanent differences between ordinary and necessary business expenses deemed non-allowable under IRC Section 280E.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We report net loss per common share in accordance with FASB ASC 260, “Earnings per Share”. This statement requires dual presentation of basic and diluted earnings with a reconciliation of the numerator and denominator of the earnings per share computations. Basic net loss per share is computed by dividing net income attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period and excludes the effects of any potentially dilutive securities. Diluted net income (loss) per share gives effect to any dilutive potential common stock outstanding during the period. The computation does not assume conversion, exercise or contingent exercise of securities that would have an anti-dilutive effect on earnings.
Related Party Transactions
We follow FASB ASC subtopic 850-10, “Related Party Transactions”, for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions.
Pursuant to ASC 850-10-20, related parties include: a) affiliates of the Company; b) entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the fair value option under the Fair Value Option Subsection of Section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity; c) trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and profit sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management; d) principal owners of the Company; e) management of the Company; f) other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and g) other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
Material related party transactions are required to be disclosed in the consolidated financial statements, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of consolidated or combined financial statements is not required in those statements. The disclosures shall include: a) the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b) a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which statements of operation are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c) the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which statements of operations are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d) amounts due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.