Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the “Forward-Looking Statements,” our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes that follow and the “Consolidated Five-Year Summary of Selected Financial Data” and the “Risk Factors” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K. References to “Ameriprise Financial,” “Ameriprise,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer to Ameriprise Financial, Inc. exclusively, to our entire family of companies, or to one or more of our subsidiaries.
Overview
Ameriprise is a diversified financial services company with a more than 125-year history of providing financial solutions. We are a long-standing leader in financial planning and advice with $1.4 trillion in assets under management and administration as of December 31, 2021. We offer a broad range of products and services designed to achieve individual and institutional clients’ financial objectives. For additional discussion of our businesses, see Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented ongoing significant economic and societal disruption and market unpredictability, which has affected our business and operating environment driven by a low interest rate environment and volatility and changes in the equity markets and the potential associated implications to client behavior. COVID-19 continues its ongoing impact and has been occurring in multiple waves, so there are still no reliable estimates of how long the implications from the pandemic will last, the effects current and other new variants will ultimately have, how many people are likely to be affected by it, or its impact on the overall economy. There is still significant uncertainty around the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business, results of operations, and financial condition, which depends on current and future developments, including the ultimate scope, duration and severity of the pandemic, success of worldwide vaccination efforts, multiple mutations of COVID-19 or similar diseases, the effectiveness of our office reopenings, the additional measures that may be taken by various governmental authorities in response to the outbreak, the actions of third parties in response to the pandemic, and the possible further impacts on the global economy. Given the ongoing impact of the pandemic, financial results may not be comparable to previous years and the results presented in this report may not necessarily be indicative of future operating results. For further information regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any potentially material effects, see Part 1 - Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this report.
The products and services we provide retail clients and, to a lesser extent, institutional clients, are the primary source of our revenues and net income. Revenues and net income are significantly affected by investment performance and the total value and composition of assets we manage and administer for our retail and institutional clients as well as the distribution fees we receive from other companies. These factors, in turn, are largely determined by overall investment market performance and the depth and breadth of our individual client relationships.
Financial markets and macroeconomic conditions have had and will continue to have a significant impact on our operating and performance results. In addition, the business, political and regulatory environments in which we operate are subject to elevated uncertainty and substantial, frequent change. Accordingly, we expect to continue focusing on our key strategic objectives and obtaining operational and strategic leverage from our core capabilities. The success of these and other strategies may be affected by the factors discussed in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K - “Risk Factors” - and other factors as discussed herein.
Equity price, credit market and interest rate fluctuations can have a significant impact on our results of operations, primarily due to the effects they have on the asset management and other asset-based fees we earn, the value of DAC and deferred sales inducement costs (“DSIC”) assets, the values of liabilities for guaranteed benefits associated with our variable annuities and the values of derivatives held to hedge these benefits and the “spread” income generated on our fixed deferred annuities, fixed insurance, fixed portion of variable annuities and variable insurance contracts and deposit products.
Earnings, as well as adjusted operating earnings, will be negatively impacted by the ongoing low interest rate environment should it continue. In addition to continuing spread compression in our interest sensitive product lines, a sustained low interest rate environment may result in increases to our reserves and changes in various rate assumptions we use to amortize DAC and DSIC, which may negatively impact our adjusted operating earnings. For additional discussion on our interest rate risk, see