Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financings, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We are a pre-revenue stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the research, development and advancement of immunomodulatory therapies for the treatment of pain from osteoarthritis. We have not generated operating revenue to date, and our operations have been substantially funded through equity raises, which have occurred from time to time since inception.
The biopharmaceutical market, both domestic and globally, is a highly competitive industry with strict regulations that are unpredictable in nature, time intensive and costly. We are focused on offering a compelling therapeutic option for patients most in need of new treatments for inflammatory conditions, including, but not limited to, OAK and the treatment of respiratory complications arising from COVID-19.
Moving forward, we will continue to place a disciplined focus on maintaining our business operations in a manner that is streamlined and efficient while continuing to allocate a requisite level of our liquidity, human capital and other operational resources towards the advancement of key immunology-based therapies with the ultimate goal of achieving
marketing approval from the FDA and/or comparable foreign regulatory authorities and the subsequent commercialization of Ampion for these conditions.
Discussion regarding our business is contained in Part I, Item 1. Business.
Recent Financing Activities
Information regarding our Recent Financing Activities is contained in Note 10 to the Financial Statements.
Known Trends or Future Events; Outlook
We are a pre-revenue stage biopharmaceutical company that has incurred an accumulated deficit of $217.6 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect to generate continued operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the ongoing development and advancement of Ampion with the ultimate goal of achieving marketing approval from the FDA and/or comparable foreign regulatory authorities and the subsequent commercialization of Ampion for the indications previously discussed. In addition, while working in parallel with the continued advancement of immunology-based indications for Ampion, we continue to actively explore licensing and other partnering opportunities with both domestic and globally-based organizations in order to further leverage and maximize the value of Ampion to our stockholders.
While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, a continued widespread pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital in a timely and effective manner with minimal dilution to our existing and future shareholders. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could have a material adverse impact on our ability to raise requisite financing to support our ongoing business operations, which would adversely impact the value of our common stock.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $33.9 million of cash and cash equivalents. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 25.0 million shares of common stock and warrants to purchase up to 15.0 million shares of our common stock, at an exercise price of $1.10 per share, in connection with a registered direct offering, which yielded gross proceeds of $22.5 million; offset by offering-related costs of $1.8 million. The warrants have a term of five years and are immediately exercisable. In addition, we sold approximately 6.2 million shares of common stock pursuant to the ATM equity offering program, which yielded gross proceeds of approximately $10.5 million; offset by offering-related costs of $0.5 million. Based on our current cash position and projection of operating expenses, capital expenditures and the settlement of firm commitments, we believe we will have sufficient liquidity to fund operations into the second half of 2023. This projection is based on many assumptions that may prove to be incorrect. As such, it is possible that we could exhaust our available cash and cash equivalents earlier than presently anticipated.
Our shelf registration statement, which was declared effective by the SEC in May 2020, provides us with the ability to sell up to an aggregate amount of $100.0 million of shares of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units, or any combination thereof, less any sales from the ATM equity offering program that occurred prior to May 6, 2020, which was the effective date of the shelf registration statement. The shelf registration statement is effective until May 2023. We had $44.3 million remaining under the shelf registration statement as of December 31, 2021. However, we cannot be certain that we will be able to secure additional financing or that any funding, or securities offered pursuant to the shelf registration statement or otherwise, will be adequate to execute our business strategy. Even if we are able to
obtain additional financing, such additional financing may be costly and may require us to agree to covenants or other provisions that favor new investors over existing stockholders.
Even though we had approximately 42.4 million shares of common stock authorized and available for future issuance as of December 31, 2021, our ability to raise additional funds by issuing securities pursuant to the current shelf registration statement is limited to the $44.3 million remaining, of which $13.3 million is currently reserved for the ATM equity offering program. Based on the table above, the average stock price could represent a range of our ability to draw down on the residual shelf capacity. In connection with the registered direct offering that we completed in December 2021, we are prohibited from issuing shares of common stock or any other securities convertible into, or exercisable, or exchangeable for, shares of common stock until March 16, 2022, and we are prohibited from utilizing our ATM equity offering program until May 15, 2022.
In addition, we, at our discretion, may file a new shelf registration statement to register the issuance and sale of any remaining shares of common stock that are authorized for issuance and/or any other equity or debt securities that may be issued by us.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and Judgments
Our financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses incurred during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The methods, estimates, and judgments used by us in applying these critical accounting policies have a significant impact on the results we report in our financial statements. Though the impact of COVID-19 to our business and operating results presents additional uncertainty, we continue to use the best information available to address our critical accounting estimates. Additional information regarding our critical accounting policies and estimates is contained in Notes 2, 7 and 11 to the Financial Statements. We consider the following accounting policies to be those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and that require a higher degree of judgment.
Clinical trial accrual
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with various vendors, which primarily include clinical research organizations, consultants and clinical site/investigatory agreements in connection with our active and ongoing clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract, and may result in payments that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate trial expenses in the financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services are performed and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trials as measured by subject enrollment and progression/timing of various aspects of the trials. We determine accrual estimates by taking into account discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of the trials, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust the clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our clinical trial accruals are dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of contract research organizations and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in the reporting of amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Share-based compensation
We account for share-based payments by recognizing compensation expense based upon the estimated fair value of the share-based payments on the date of grant. We determine the estimated fair value of the share-based payments granted using the fair market value of the stock in the case of restricted stock awards or Black-Scholes option pricing model in the case of stock options and recognize compensation costs ratably over the requisite service period which approximates the vesting period using the graded method. To calculate the fair value of the options, certain assumptions are made regarding components of the model, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, risk-free interest rate, volatility, expected dividend yield and expected option life. Changes to the assumptions could cause significant adjustments to the valuation. We calculate our volatility assumptions using the actual changes in the market value of our stock. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur. Our historical option exercises do not provide a reasonable basis to estimate an expected term due to the lack of sufficient data. Therefore, we estimate the expected term by using the simplified method. The simplified method calculates the expected term as the average of the vesting term plus the contractual life of the options. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of the grant for treasury securities of similar maturity. The assumptions used in determining the fair value of share-based awards represent our best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our share-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recently issued and relevant accounting standards (adopted and not adopted as of December 31, 2021) is contained in Note 2 to the Financial Statements.
Results of Operations-Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
We recognized a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 (the “2021 period”) of $17.1 million compared to the net loss recognized of $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (the “2020 period”). The net loss during fiscal 2021 was attributable to operating expenses of $20.6 million; partially offset by the non-cash derivative gain of $3.5 million. The net loss during fiscal 2020 was attributable to operating expenses of $15.8 million and the non-cash derivative loss of $0.5 million, partially offset by the receipt of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) proceeds of $0.5 million. Operating expenses increased $4.7 million from the 2020 period to the 2021 period primarily due to a $2.7 million increase in research and development costs and $2.0 million increase in general and administrative costs, both of which are further explained below.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are summarized as follows and exclude an allocation of general and administrative expenses:
2021 Period Compared to 2020 Period
Research and development costs increased by approximately $2.7 million, or 30%, for the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period. Research and development costs with variances above $175,000 and 10% compared with the previous period are further explained below.
Clinical trial and sponsored research expenses
The clinical trial and sponsored research expenses increased by approximately $2.1 million, or 55%, primarily due to the incremental costs associated with the COVID-19 Phase 1 and 2 studies totaling $3.0 million, which were initiated late in the 2020 period and during the 2021 period. In addition, we incurred incremental costs associated with the AP-013 study contract, which totaled $1.8 million and considered moderately less than the clinical trial costs of $2.7 million incurred during the 2020 period prior to the pause of the study.
Operations/manufacturing
Operations/manufacturing expenses increased $369,000, or 83%, for the 2021 period compared with the 2020 period as a result of securing inventory of raw materials and components for the current period production of clinical trial products to be utilized in the current ongoing COVID-19 clinical studies.
Laboratory
Laboratory expenses increased $423,000, or 119%, for the 2021 period compared with the 2020 period as a result of incremental spend associated pre-clinical research and discovery with a primary focus on additional novel applications to further leverage the Ampion platform technology.
Share-based compensation
Share-based compensation decreased $355,000, or 89%, for the 2021 period compared with the 2020 period primarily due to previously awarded stock options becoming fully vested during 2021, resulting in lower share-based compensation in the 2021 period. In addition, the number of options awarded to the research and development department during the 2021 period was considerably less than the 2020 period.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses are summarized as follows:
2021 Period Compared to 2020 Period
General and administrative costs increased $2.0 million, or 30%, for the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period. General and administrative costs with variances above $175,000 and 10% are further explained below.
Share-based Compensation
Share-based compensation expense increased $1.8 million, or 188%, for the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period due to the issuance of stock options and restricted stock awards to executives and Board of Director members during the 2021 period. The increase was partially offset by previously awarded stock options becoming fully vested during the 2021 period.
Professional fees
Professional fees increased $257,000, or 11%, for the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period due primarily to an increase in legal costs associated with the transition at the executive level. In addition, we engaged an investor relations firm, along with a strategic advisory firm during the 2021 period.
Cash Flows
Cash flows for the respective periods are as follows:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the 2021 period, our operating activities used approximately $14.1 million in cash and cash equivalents, which was less than our reported net loss of $17.1 million. The difference is primarily a result of periodic non-cash charges related to depreciation and amortization and share-based compensation totaling $3.9 million and an increase in working capital of $2.6 million; partially off-set by the non-cash adjustment for the warrant derivative gain totaling $3.5 million.
During the 2020 period, our operating activities used approximately $14.7 million in cash, which was less than our net loss of $15.9 million primarily as a result of the non-cash charges related to depreciation and amortization, stock-based
compensation, warrant derivative and issuance of common stock for services totaling $3.1 million; partially offset by an increase in working capital totaling $2.0 million, resulting primarily from the decrease in accounts payable/accrued liabilities attributable to the pause of the AP-013 study in April 2020.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the 2021 period, $97,000 in cash and cash equivalents was used to acquire manufacturing machinery and equipment.
During the 2020 period, $63,000 in cash and cash equivalents was used to acquire manufacturing machinery and equipment.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
During the 2021 period, we received gross proceeds of $22.5 million in connection with a registered direct offering, which was partially offset by offering-related costs of $1.8 million. We also received approximately $10.5 million from the sale of approximately 6.2 million shares of common stock pursuant to the ATM equity offering program, which was partially offset by offering-related costs of $0.5 million. In addition, we received proceeds of $0.2 million from investor warrant exercises and stock option exercises; which was offset by the shares held back in the settlement of tax obligations related to the restricted stock awards totaling $0.2 million.
During the 2020 period, we received gross proceeds of $26.2 million from the sale of 32.1 million shares of common stock pursuant to the ATM equity offering program, which was partially offset by offering related costs of $1.4 million. In addition, we also received proceeds of $785,000 from investor warrant exercises representing 1,962,500 shares of common stock.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations primarily consist of clinical research trial obligations, employment agreements and leases entered into in the ordinary course of business. As of December 31, 2021, the amount of our outstanding future contractual commitments related to clinical trials was $4.4 million. We lease our manufacturing facility under a non-cancellable operating lease arrangement. As of December 31, 2021, the value of our obligations under the operating lease was $925,000. In February 2022, we entered into two related-party agreements totaling $650,000. For a more detailed description of our contractual obligations see Note 7 and 16 to the Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have not generated operating revenue or profits. Over this period, we have continued to be focused on research and clinical development activities for the advancement of Ampion towards multiple BLA submissions; all of which has required raising a substantial amount of capital. In December 2021, we sold 25.0 million shares of common stock and warrants to purchase up to 15.0 million shares of our common stock, at an exercise price of $1.10 per share, in a registered direct offering that generated gross proceeds of $22.5 million, offset by offering-related costs of $1.8 million (see Note 10), which contributed to a cash and cash equivalent balance of $33.9 million as of December 31, 2021. The warrants have a term of five years and are immediately exercisable.
Furthermore, in February 2020, we entered into the Sales Agreement to implement an ATM equity offering program under which we, at our sole discretion, may issue and sell from time-to-time shares of its authorized common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold approximately 6.2 million shares of common stock pursuant to the ATM equity offering program, which yielded gross proceeds of $10.5 million, offset by costs of $0.5 million (see Note 10).
We have prepared an updated liquidity projection, which reflects cash requirements for fixed, recurring base level business expenses such as payroll, legal and accounting, patents and overhead, and incremental costs supporting the current and projected clinical development programs. We continue to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the continued COVID-19 cases in the United States and the impact that it may have on current and projected future studies. Based on our current cash position and projection of operating expenses, capital expenditures and the settlement of firm commitments, we believe we will have sufficient liquidity to fund operations into the second half of
2023. This projection is based on many assumptions that may prove to be incorrect. As such, it is possible that we could exhaust our available cash and cash equivalents earlier than presently anticipated.
In May 2020, the shelf registration statement was declared effective by the SEC and, as of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $44.3 million available for issuance under the shelf registration statement with approximately 42.4 million authorized shares of common stock remaining available for issuance. In connection with the registered direct offering that we completed in December 2021, we are prohibited from issuing shares of common stock or any other securities convertible into, or exercisable, or exchangeable for, shares of common stock until March 16, 2022, and we are prohibited from utilizing our ATM equity offering program until May 15, 2022.
In the event that we are unable to obtain funding through capital raises and/or partnering/licensing transactions in the future when deemed appropriate, we will likely be required to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate our development, manufacturing and/or regulatory programs for Ampion and/or suspend operations for a period of time until we are able to secure additional funding. If we are not successful in raising sufficient funds to pay for further development and licensing of Ampion, we may choose to license or otherwise relinquish greater, or all, rights to Ampion at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. This could lead to impairment or other charges, which could materially affect our balance sheet and operating results.
Impact of Inflation
To the extent feasible, we have consistently followed the practice of reviewing salaries and fringe benefits for employees and the cost of purchased materials/services. In general, we believe that our operating expenses can be negatively impacted by increases in the cost of clinical trials due to inflation and rising health care costs. Inflation and changing prices did not have a material adverse impact on our business operations during the 2021 period or the 2020 period.