ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Forward-Looking Statements
In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Forward-Looking Statements.” Our results and the timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors.
Non- GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that presenting non-GAAP financial measures provides management and investors useful measures to evaluate performance and trends of the total company and its businesses. This includes adjustments in recent periods to GAAP financial measures to increase period-to-period comparability following actions to strengthen our overall financial position and how we manage our business.
Business Overview
AmpliTech Group Inc. (“AMPG,” “AmpliTech” or the “Company”), incorporated in 2010 in the state of Nevada, is the parent company of AmpliTech, Inc., and the Company’s divisions Specialty Microwave, Spectrum Semiconductor Materials, and AmpliTech Group MMIC Design Center (“AGMDC”).
AmpliTech Inc. designs, engineers and assembles micro-wave component-based amplifiers that meet individual customer specifications. Our products consist of RF amplifiers and related subsystems, operating at multiple frequencies from 50kHz to 44GHz, including low noise amplifiers (“LNA”), medium power amplifiers, cryogenic amplifiers, and custom assembly designs for the global satellite communications, telecom (5G & IoT), space, defense, and quantum computing markets. We also offer non-recurring engineering services on a project-by-project basis, for a predetermined fixed contractual amount, or on a time plus material basis. We have both domestic and international customers in such industries as aerospace, governmental, defense and commercial satellite.
Specialty Microwave designs and manufactures state-of- the-art precision SATCOM microwave components, RF subsystems and specialized electronic assemblies for the military and commercial markets, flexible and rugged waveguides, wave guide adapters and more.
AGMDC designs, develops and manufactures state-of-the-art signal processing components for satellite and 5G communications networks, defense, space and other commercial applications, allowing the Company to market its products to wider base of customers requiring high technology in smaller packages.
On November 19, 2021, AMPG entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Spectrum Semiconductor Materials Inc. (“SSM”), a globally authorized distributor of integrated circuit (IC) packaging and lids for semiconductor device assembly, prototyping, testing, and production requirements founded in 1990 and headquarter in San Jose, CA, pursuant to which AMPG acquired substantially all of the assets of the Company (the Acquisition). The Acquisition was completed on December 15, 2021.
In 2021, the Company opened a monolithic microwave integrated circuits (“MMIC”) chip design center in Texas and has started to implement several of its proprietary amplifier designs into MMIC components. MMICs are semiconductor chips used in high-frequency communications applications. MMICs are widely desired for power amplification solutions to service emerging technologies, such as phased array antennas and quantum computing. MMICs carry a smaller footprint enabling them to be incorporated into a broader array of systems while reducing costs.
The global health crisis caused by the novel coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic and its resurgences has and may continue to negatively impact global economic activity, which, despite progress in vaccination efforts, remains uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. In addition, variants of COVID-19, including Delta and Omicron, continue to emerge, the impact of which cannot be predicted at this time, and could depend on numerous factors, including vaccination rates among the population, the effectiveness of the COVID-19 vaccines against COVID-19 variants along with the response by governmental bodies and regulators. Given the ongoing and dynamic nature of the circumstances, it is difficult to predict the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Many countries around the world have continued to impose quarantines and restrictions on travel and mass gatherings to slow the spread of the virus. Accordingly, our ability to continue to operate our business may also be limited. Such events may result in a period of business, supply and manufacturing disruptions, and in reduced operations, any of which could materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. A continuation or worsening of the levels of market disruption and volatility seen in the recent past could have an adverse effect on our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could materially affect our business and the value of our common stock. We continue to monitor the impacts of COVID-19 on the global economy and on our business operations. Although we expect the vaccinations for COVID-19 will continue to improve conditions, the ultimate impact from COVID-19 on our business operations and financial results will depend on, among other things, the ultimate severity and scope of the pandemic, including the new variants of the virus, the pace at which governmental and private travel restrictions and public concerns about public gatherings will ease, the rate at which historically large increases in unemployment rates will decrease, if at all, and whether, and the speed with which, the economy recovers. We are not able to fully quantify the impact that these factors will have on our business, but developments related to COVID-19 may impact our ability to meet customer demand and thus materially affect financial condition and results of operations in future periods.
On April 20, 2020, the Company entered into a Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note (“PPP Note”) in the principal amount of $232,200 (“PPP Loan”) from BNB Bank (“PPP Loan Lender”). The PPP Loan was obtained pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) administered by the U.S Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The PPP Loan was disbursed by the PPP Loan Lender on April 20, 2020 (the “Disbursement Date). On April 20, 2021, SBA approved the PPP loan forgiveness of $232,200.
On February 17, 2021, AmpliTech Group Inc., common stock and warrants under the symbols “AMPG” and “AMPGW”, respectively, commenced trading on NASDAQ. A reverse split of the outstanding common stock at a 1-for-20 ratio became effective February 17, 2021 as of 12:01 a.m., Eastern Time. All per share amounts and number of shares in the consolidated financial statements and related notes have been retroactively restated to reflect the reverse stock split. In connection with the public offering, 1,371,428 units at an offering price of $7.00 per unit were sold. Each unit issued in the offering consisted of one share of common stock and one warrant. Maxim Group LLC acted as sole book-running manager for the offering and partially exercised its overallotment option to purchase 205,714 warrants at the public offering price. The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $9.6 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
As of December 31, 2021, 210,700 warrants were exercised at an exercise price of $7.00 and 210,700 shares of common stock were issued. Gross proceeds received were $1,474,900.
On April 15, 2021, the Company entered into definitive agreements with certain institutional investors for the sale of 2,715,000 shares of common stock in a registered direct offering priced at-the-market under NASDAQ rules. Concurrently, the Company agreed to issue to the investors, in a private placement, warrants to purchase an aggregate of 1,900,500 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $8.48 per share with a five-year term. Maxim Group LLC acted as the exclusive placement agent for this offering. The shares of common stock as described were offered pursuant to a “shelf” registration statement filed with the SEC on April 1, 2021 and declared effective on April 14, 2021. The aggregate gross proceeds to the Company were approximately $23 million dollars before deducting placement agent’s fees and expenses. The offering closed on April 16, 2021. On April 30, 2021, the Company filed a registration statement providing for the resale of the shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the warrants issued in the private placement. The registration statement became effective on May 11, 2021.
On December 15, 2021, 188,442 unregistered shares of AmpliTech common stock were issued as part of the Spectrum Semiconductor Materials acquisition for $665,200.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a working capital of $20,467,429 and an Accumulated Deficit of $6,627,177. The Company recorded a net loss of $4,758,805 and $1,025,559 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
For Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Revenues
Sales increased from $3,458,081 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $5,275,434 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1,817,353 or approximately 52.55%. Custom amplifier and microwave component sales has remained relatively the same year to year, primarily due to the lower sales volume experienced in the first quarter of 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and worldwide freight issues causing disruption to the supply chain. In December of 2021, we acquired Spectrum Semiconductor Materials, resulting in an increase of sales of $1,885,543.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Cost of Goods Sold increased to $3,982,797 in 2021 from $2,203,844 in 2020, an increase of $1,778,953 or approximately 80.72%. This increase is directly related to approximately $1,199,365 of additional expenses included in cost of goods sold as part of the acquisition of SSM and the increase of direct labor and parts. We hired personnel to help oversee production and help meet company growth objectives. Costs of goods sold for SSM include cost of product sold, cost associated with packaging and assembly, shipping, cost of personnel, quality assurance and write downs of inventories. As a result, the gross profit was $1,292,637 for 2021 compared to $1,254,237 for 2020, an increase of $38,400 or 3.06%. Gross profit as a percentage of sales decreased to 24.50% from 36.27% as a result of higher overhead expenses, direct labor and component costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $4,564,658 in 2021 from $2,108,230 in 2020, an increase of $2,456,428, or approximately 116.52%. The Company experienced an increase in parent company expenses, such as officers’ salaries, consulting fees, accounting fees, legal fees, stock compensation, IR/PR, D&O insurance, key man life insurance and regulatory fees for up-listing to NASDAQ. Nonrecurring expenses related to the up-list and private placement was approximately $370,000. The Company also hired a director of business development to promote and expand existing and new product lines. With the acquisition of Spectrum, payroll, employee benefits, insurance and facility costs have increased as well as other general and administrative costs due to the integration of both companies. Nonrecurring expenses related to the Spectrum acquisition was approximately $350,000.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenditures are charged to operations as incurred. The major components of research and development costs include consultants, outside service, and supplies.
The Company has begun its research and development into the next generation of 5G/6G subsystems for cellular and satellite communications. The Company is in the process of designing and developing antennas and subsystems that will be an integral part of the GPS and 5G infrastructure. These subsystems will enable high-speed, high capacity 5G/6G networks that will be installed into infrastructure for retrofitting and improving connectivity for cellphones, satellites and many other everyday applications. This new product line is expected to be released to market during fiscal year 2022.
In 2021, the Company opened AGMDC, a MMIC chip design center in Texas and has started to implement several of its proprietary amplifier designs into MMIC components. MMICs, or monolithic microwave integrated circuits, are semiconductor chips used in high-frequency communications applications. MMIC’s are widely desired for power amplification solutions to service emerging technologies such as phased array antennas and quantum computing. MMIC’s carry a smaller footprint enabling them to be incorporated into a broader array of systems while reducing costs by eliminating connectors and skilled labor. AGMDC is expected to start contributing to revenue during 2022.
Research and development costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1,833,399 and $61,953, respectively.
Loss From Operations
As a result of the above, the Company has a loss from operations of $5,105,420 and $915,946 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other Income (Expenses)
Interest expense decreased from $109,613 to $42,806, or 60.95%, when comparing the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the repayment of debt.
On April 20, 2021, the SBA approved the forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan of $232,200.
The Company recorded $201,215 for the Employee Retention Credit as other income as well $53,868 of dividend income.
Realized loss on investments reflects realized loss of $181,063 netted against realized gains of $83,201.
Net Income
The Company reported a net loss of $4,758,805 and $1,025,559 in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Activities
The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,199,013 resulting primarily from net loss and the operating changes in accounts receivable and other receivable, prepaid expenses, security deposits and the operating lease liability.
The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $521,485 resulting primarily from net loss and the operating changes in prepaid expenses, accounts payable as well as customer deposits and the operating lease liability.
Investing Activities
The net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $10,608,806.
The Company paid cash for the acquisition of Spectrum Semiconductor Materials, invested $250,000 in SN2N, purchased equipment and sold marketable securities.
The net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $71,619 for the purchase of equipment.
Financing Activities
The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $30,627,157, a result of proceeds received from the private placement, public offering and exercise of warrants, offset by the repayment of the line of credit, finance lease and notes payable.
The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $217,928, a result of proceeds received from the PPP loan and line of credit, offset by the repayment of the line of credit and notes payable.
We have historically financed our operations by the issuance of debt from third party lenders, equity offerings, notes issued to various private individuals and personal funds advanced from time to time by our largest shareholder, who is also the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $18,018,874, a working capital of $20,467,429 and an accumulated deficit of $6,627,177.
We intend to continue to finance our internal growth with cash on hand and cash provided from operations. We believe that our cash provided from operations and cash on hand will provide enough working capital to fund our operations for the next twelve months.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and Assumptions
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and those that require significant judgments and estimates.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates including the allowance for doubtful accounts, the salability and recoverability of inventory, income taxes and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We cannot predict what future laws and regulations might be passed that could have a material effect on our results of operations. We assess the impact of significant changes in laws and regulations on a regular basis and update the assumptions and estimates used to prepare our financial statements when we deem it necessary.
Basis of Accounting
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared using the accrual basis of accounting.
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries. All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the periods presented. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior years’ financial statements to conform to the current year presentation. These reclassifications had no effect on previously reported results of operations.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers deposits that can be redeemed on demand and investments that have original maturities of less than three months, when purchased, to be cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents were deposited in four financial institutions.
Accounts Receivable
Trade accounts receivables are recorded at the net invoice value and are not interest bearing.
The Company provides an allowance for doubtful accounts equal to the estimated uncollectible amounts. The Company’s estimate is based on historical collection experience and a review of the current status of accounts receivable. It is reasonably possible that the Company’s estimate of the allowance for doubtful accounts will change in the future. An allowance of $39,380 and $125,400 has been recorded at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Employee Retention Credit
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) provided an employee retention credit which was a refundable tax credit against certain employment taxes. New legislation amended the employee retention credit to be equal to 70% of qualified wages paid to employees after December 31, 2020, and before January 1, 2022. During calendar year 2021, a maximum of $10,000 in qualified wages for each employee per qualifying calendar quarter may be counted in determining the 70% credit. Therefore, the maximum tax credit that can be claimed by an eligible employer is $7,000 per employee per qualifying calendar quarter of 2021. The Company qualifies for the employee retention credit for quarters that experience a significant decline in gross receipts, defined as quarterly gross receipts that are less than 80 percent of its gross receipts for the same calendar quarter in 2019. The Company qualified for the credit beginning on January 1, 2021 and received credits for qualified wages through June 30, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an employee retention credit totaling $201,215.
Marketable Securities
The Company’s investments in marketable securities are classified based on the nature of the securities and their availability for use in current operations. The Company’s marketable securities are stated at fair value with all realized and unrealized gains and losses on investments in marketable equity securities recognized in other income, net. The realized and unrealized gains and losses on marketable securities are determined using specific identification method.
Inventories
Inventories, which consists primarily of raw materials, work in progress and finished goods, are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out basis) or market (net realizable value).
Inventory quantities and related values are analyzed at the end of each fiscal quarter to determine those items that are slow moving and obsolete. An inventory reserve is recorded for those items determined to be slow moving with a corresponding charge to cost of goods sold. Inventory items that are determined obsolete are written off currently with a corresponding charge to cost of goods sold.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the reserve for inventory obsolescence was $1,031,986 and $70,000, respectively.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Depreciation is provided over the estimated useful lives of the related assets using the straight-line method for financial statement purposes. Amortization of leasehold improvements is computed using the straight-line method over the shorter of the remaining lease term or the estimated useful lives of the improvements.
Property and equipment are depreciated as follows:
Long-lived assets
Long lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to; significant decrease in the market price of the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors; current period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; and current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its estimated useful life.
Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount of fair value less costs to sell and would no longer be depreciated. The depreciable basis of assets that are impaired and continue in use is their respective fair values.
Investment Policy-Cost Method
Investments consist of non-controlling equity investments in privately held companies. The Company elected the measurement alternative for these investments without readily determinable fair values and for which the Company does not control or have the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and financial policies. These investments are accounted for under the cost method of accounting. Under the cost method of accounting, the non-marketable equity securities are carried at cost less any impairment, adjusted for observable price changes of similar investments of the same issuer. Fair value is not estimated for these investments if there are no identified events or changes in circumstances that may have an effect on the fair value of the investment. Under this method, the Company’s share of the earnings or losses of such investee companies is not included in the consolidated balance sheet or consolidated statements of operations. The Company held $250,000 of investments without readily determinable fair values at December 31, 2021 (see Note 8). These investments are included in other assets on the consolidated balance sheets. There were no indicators of impairment during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Intangible assets include goodwill, trademarks, intellectual property and customer base acquired through the asset purchase of Specialty Microwave. The Company accounts for Other Intangible Assets under the guidance of ASC 350, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other.” Under the guidance, other intangible assets with definite lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives Intangible assets with indefinite lives are tested annually for impairment. Goodwill is not amortized. We test goodwill balances for impairment annually at December 31 or whenever impairment indicators arise.
Leases
We lease property and equipment under finance and operating leases. For leases with terms greater than 12 months, we record the related asset and obligation at the present value of lease payments over the lease term. The Company has elected not to separate lease and non-lease components for all property leases for the purpose of calculating ROU assets and lease liabilities. Many of our leases include rental escalation clauses, renewal options and/or termination options that are factored into our determination of lease payments when appropriate. When available, we use the rate implicit in the lease to discount lease payments to present value; however, most of our leases do not provide a readily determinable implicit rate. Therefore, we must estimate our incremental borrowing rate to discount the lease payments based on information available at lease commencement. The incremental borrowing rate is the rate of interest that a lessee would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis considering such factors as lease term and economic environment risks.
Revenue Recognition
We sell our products through a combination of a direct sales force in the United States and independent sales representatives in international markets. Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods based on the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for these goods. This core principle is achieved through the following steps:
Identify the contract with the customer. A contract with a customer exists when (i) we enter into an enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the goods to be transferred and identifies the payment terms related to these goods, (ii) the contract has commercial substance and, (iii) we determine that collection of substantially all consideration for services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration. We do not have significant costs to obtain contracts with customers. For commissions on product sales, we have elected the practical expedient to expense the costs as incurred.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract. Generally, our contracts with customers do not include multiple performance obligations to be completed over a period. Our performance obligations generally relate to delivering single-use products to a customer, subject to the shipping terms of the contract. Limited warranties are provided, under which we typically accept returns and provide either replacement parts or refunds.
We do not have significant returns. We do not typically offer extended warranty or service plans.
Determine the transaction price. Payment by the customer is due under customary fixed payment terms, and we evaluate if collectability is reasonably assured. None of our contracts as of December 31, 2021 contained a significant financing component. Revenue is recorded at the net sales price, which includes estimates of variable consideration such as product returns, rebates, discounts, and other adjustments. The estimates of variable consideration are based on historical payment experience, historical and projected sales data, and current contract terms. Variable consideration is included in revenue only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Taxes collected from customers relating to product sales and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenues.
Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract. We typically do not have multiple performance obligations in our contracts with customers. As such, we generally recognize revenue upon transfer of the product to the customer’s control at contractually stated pricing.
Recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation. We generally satisfy performance obligations at a point in time upon either shipment or delivery of goods, in accordance with the terms of each contract with the customer. We do not have significant service revenue.
Research and Development
Research and development expenditures are charged to operations as incurred. The major components of research and development costs include consultants, outside service, and supplies.
The Company has begun its research and development into the next generation of 5G/6G subsystems for cellular and satellite communications. The Company is in the process of designing and developing antennas and subsystems that will be an integral part of the GPS and 5G infrastructure. These subsystems will enable high-speed, high capacity 5G/6G networks that will be installed into infrastructure for retrofitting and improving connectivity for cellphones, satellites and many other everyday applications. This new product line is expected to be released to market during fiscal year 2022.
In 2021, the Company opened AGMDC, a MMIC chip design center in Texas and has started to implement several of its proprietary amplifier designs into MMIC components. MMICs, or monolithic microwave integrated circuits, are semiconductor chips used in high-frequency communications applications. MMIC’s are widely desired for power amplification solutions to service emerging technologies such as phased array antennas and quantum computing. MMIC’s carry a smaller footprint enabling them to be incorporated into a broader array of systems while reducing costs by eliminating connectors and skilled labor. AGMDC is expected to start contributing to revenue during 2022.
Research and development costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1,833,399 and $61,953, respectively. For financial reporting purposes, research and development costs of $61,953 was reclassed from selling and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax bases of certain assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified according to the financial statement classification of the assets and liabilities generating the differences. Valuation allowances are established when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. The ASC prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The ASC provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had no material unrecognized tax benefits.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share (“EPS”) are determined by dividing the net earnings by the weighted-average number of shares of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted EPS is determined by dividing net earnings by the weighted average number of common shares used in the basic EPS calculation plus the number of common shares that would be issued assuming conversion of all potentially dilutive securities outstanding under the treasury stock method. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were 3,818,142 and 2,005,000, respectively, potentially dilutive shares that need to be considered as common share equivalents.
Fair Value Measurements
The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that could be received upon the sale of an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Financial assets are marked to bid prices and financial liabilities are marked to offer prices. Fair value measurements do not include transaction costs. A fair value hierarchy is used to prioritize the quality and reliability of the information used to determine fair values. Categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The fair value hierarchy is defined in the following three categories:
Level 1: Unadjusted quoted prices that are available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities at the measurement date.
Level 2: Significant other observable inputs available at the measurement date, other than quoted prices included in Level 1, either directly or indirectly.
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs that cannot be corroborated by observable market data and reflect the use of significant management judgment.
Cash and cash equivalents, receivables, inventory, prepaid expenses, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and customer deposits approximate fair value, due to their short-term nature. The carrying value of notes payable and short and long-term debt also approximates fair value since these instruments bear market rates of interest.
Assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis relate primarily to long-lived assets, intangible assets, and goodwill, which are remeasured when the derived fair value is below carrying value in the consolidated balance sheets.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. Equity instruments issued to employees and the cost of the services received as consideration are measured and recognized based on the fair value of the equity instruments issued and are recognized over the employees required service period, which is generally the vesting period.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the company to concentration of credit risk consist primarily of cash and accounts receivable.
Accounts at each institution are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) up to $250,000. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had $17,018,874 and $0 in excess of the FDIC insured limit, respectively.
The Company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers and maintains allowances for potential credit losses. Therefore, management does not believe significant credit risks exist at December 31, 2021. Sales to the Company’s two largest customers represented approximately 25.98% and 10.60% of total sales for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13 Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments which requires the measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held at amortized cost. ASU 2016-13 replaces the existing incurred loss impairment model with an expected loss methodology, which will result in more timely recognition of credit losses. ASU 2016-13 is effective for annual reporting periods, and interim periods within those years beginning after December 15, 2019. This pronouncement was amended under ASU 2019-10 to allow an extension on the adoption date for entities that qualify as a small reporting company. The Company has elected this extension and the effective date for the Company to adopt this standard will be for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company has not completed its assessment of the standard but does not expect the adoption to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. ASU 2018 modifies the disclosure requirements of Accounting Standards Codification ASC 820 with certain removals, modifications, and additions. Eliminated disclosures that may affect the Company include (1) transfers between level 1 and level 2 of the fair value hierarchy, and (2) policies related to valuation processes and the timing of transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy. Modified disclosures that may affect the Company include (1) a requirement to disclose the timing of liquidation of an investee’s assets and the date when restrictions from redemption might lapse if the entity has communicated the timing publicly for investments in certain entities that calculate net asset value, and (2) clarification that the measurement uncertainty disclosure is to communicate information about the uncertainty in measurement as of the reporting date. Additional disclosures that may affect the Company include (1) disclosure of changes in unrealized gains and losses for the period included in other comprehensive income for recurring level 3 fair value measurements held at the end of the reporting period, and (2) disclosure of the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop level 3 fair value measurements. The update is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. Early adoption is permitted for any removed or modified disclosures upon issuance of the ASU and delay adoption of the additional disclosures until the effective date. We adopted ASU 2018-03 as of January 1, 2021. Our adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. This ASU removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This ASU is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this standard became effective for us on January 1, 2021 and did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
On August 5, 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-06, which is expected to reduce complexity and improve comparability of financial reporting associated with accounting for convertible instruments and contracts in an entity’s own equity. The ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with an early adoption permitted. The adoption of this standard became effective for us on January 1, 2021 and did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In October 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers. This ASU amends ASC 805 to require acquiring entities to apply ASC 606 to recognize and measure contract assets and contract liabilities in business combinations. The ASU is effective for public entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company has not completed its assessment of the standard but does not expect the adoption to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
We do not expect the adoption of these or other recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a significant impact on our results of operation, financial position or cash flow.
Off Balance Sheet Transactions
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.