ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors”,” “Business” and the audited financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on November 12, 2020, whose business purpose is to effect a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. we cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from November 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering (defined below), and subsequent to the initial public offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $2,349,573, which consists of interest income on investments held in the trust account of $25,418, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $3,961,713 and interest income from the bank of $151, offset by operating costs of $1,637,709.
For the period from November 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $946, which consists of operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 4, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 28,750,000 units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,750,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $287.5 million (the “initial public offering”). Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 5,600,000 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant in a private placement to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8.4 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $712,614. Net income of $2,349,573 was impacted by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $25,418, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $3,961,713 and transaction costs incurred in connection with the initial public offering of $302,772. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $622,172 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from November 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $946 was impacted by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $946 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments of $287,525,418 held in the trust account. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $1,850,187. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. if we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have determined that the date for mandatory liquidation and dissolution raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through March 4, 2023, the scheduled liquidation date of the Company if it does not complete a Business Combination prior to such date. Management plans to complete a Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to consummate any Business Combination by March 4, 2023. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay $10,000 per month to Saddle Point for office space and administrative services provided to members of our management team in the event such space and/or services are utilized. We began incurring these fees in March 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the initial business combination and our liquidation. In addition, we will reimburse Saddle Point in the amount of $30,000 per month for additional administrative services (not covered by the $10,000 payment set forth above), subject to the closing of our initial business combination.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per share, or $9,362,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The public warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the public warrants from the units, the public warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date for the public warrants. The Private Placement Warrants are valued initially at the initial public offering and as of December 31, 2021 using a Black-Scholes-Merton Model.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value.
Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ (deficit) equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Common Share
Net loss per common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has two classes of common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, result of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.