Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our fiscal year ends December 31.
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this report to "Amplitude," the "Company," "we," "our," "us," or similar terms refer to Amplitude, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Overview
We have built the first unified system that empowers teams to understand how digital products drive their business, thereby unleashing the full potential of product-led growth for businesses of every size, industry, and stage in their digital maturity. Our Digital Optimization System brings an entirely new depth of customer understanding with the speed of action to optimize digital experiences in the moment. We power the teams behind many of the most-beloved digital products to make the right bets, drive innovation, and maximize business outcomes.
At the core of our Digital Optimization System is our Behavioral Graph, a proprietary, purpose-built behavioral database that is the largest of its kind. Our Behavioral Graph instantly finds patterns, makes recommendations, and connects customer actions along their journeys to outcomes that drive engagement, growth, and loyalty. We have architected our Behavioral Graph to power numerous products linking data to insight to action, beginning first with our product analytics solution. G2 ranked Amplitude as the #3 best software product overall and #5 best enterprise product in their 2022 Best Software Awards. The G2 Winter 2022 Report also ranked Amplitude as the #1 product analytics solution for the sixth quarter in a row, #1 in mobile analytics, and #3 in digital analytics. We have since expanded our Digital Optimization System to include products that enable cross-functional teams to personalize the digital product experiences of their customers, including our Recommend and Experiment offerings, which were both released in 2021.
We have experienced significant growth in recent years driven by the rapid adoption of our Digital Optimization System by our global, diversified base of 1,597 paying customers as of December 31, 2021. Our customers span across industries and sizes, from the leading digital innovators to those looking to transform and adapt their business in the new digital age. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our revenue was $167.3 million and $102.5 million, respectively, representing year-over-year growth of 63%. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net loss was $75.0 million and $24.6 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net cash used in operating activities was $31.7 million and $10.4 million, respectively, and our free cash flow was $(34.9) million and $(12.6) million, respectively.
Our Business Model
We generate revenue primarily through selling subscriptions to our platform. For the year ended December 31, 2021, subscription revenue comprised 97% of our total revenue. Our customers typically look to use our platform for an initial business use case they have identified, such as analytics on a digital product. As our customers experience the value of our platform in helping to drive business outcomes in that initial use case, they frequently expand that initial use case, expand into new use cases, and expand into additional products. Examples of ways customers expand the use of our platform include the following:
•Customers expand an initial use case by tracking additional events on a digital product to gain greater insight into customer journeys or add additional functionality (e.g. predictive analytics, behavioral reports) to meet the needs of teams across the organization;
•Customers expand into new use cases by using our platform for additional digital products in their digital product portfolio and empowering additional teams (e.g. product, marketing, engineering, analytics) responsible for those digital product; and
•Customers expand by layering on additional offerings, such as our Recommend and Experiment products, on our core Analytics offering to power new capabilities to drive business outcomes.
Our pricing model is based on both the platform functionality required by our customers as well as committed event volume. An event could be any action that a user takes in a digital product, such as ‘Create account’, ‘Add to cart’, or ‘Share photo’. Events can also be actions that occur in a product without user action, such as ‘Verification completed’. Customers have the flexibility to choose the events sent to our platform and can also attach custom properties to an event to enable greater insight on the digital product end user.
We have been effective in helping our customers to gauge the proper event volume to contract to ensure that they maximize their investment in our platform. In situations where customers exceed their committed event volume in a given period, they incur overage charges that we have the contractual right to bill at our discretion. Depending on the circumstances, we often use this as an opportunity to renegotiate a customer contract to ensure they have the right contracted event volume to meet their business objectives. Historically, overage charges have not made up a significant portion of our revenue. In many cases, customers will proactively expand their contract within the contract term, generally increasing event volume and platform capabilities to expand existing or address new use cases. Substantially all of our customer contracts have a subscription period of one year or longer. In 2021, we billed a majority of these contracts annually in advance with the remainder billed quarterly, semi-annually, or monthly.
We offer a variety of plans that are right-sized to match the depth and breadth of our customers’ needs and complexity. Our Starter plan is a free-tier, self-service option that allows prospects to easily sign up and begin to leverage the power of the platform in rapid fashion. This plan includes core product analytics with the ability to track up to 10 million events per month. Users of this plan get access to unlimited user seats and are encouraged to add additional team members across functions to proliferate the use of our platform within their organization.
If a prospect outgrows the usage limits in the Starter plan or requires additional features such as predictive analytics, behavioral reports, or additional event volume, we offer a Growth plan that requires conversion to a paid subscription contract. Growth plan users also get access to dedicated customer support to further maximize the value from the platform. Customers that require the complete analytics tool kit to handle more scale and larger, sophisticated use cases can purchase our Enterprise plan. The Enterprise plan includes everything in the Growth plan as well as additional robust features such as advanced data governance, custom user permissions and roles, automated insights, and more. At any point, a customer that needs additional capabilities can purchase add-on functionality or products, including Recommend and Experiment, which are natively integrated with Amplitude Analytics.
Our land-and-expand business model is powered by the ease of use, rapid time to value, and broad applicability of our platform to provide actionable insights in real time to numerous teams across an organization. This model has enabled us, in many cases, to significantly expand the reach of our platform within organizations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had 385 customers that each represented greater than $100,000 in ARR and 29 customers that each represented greater than $1 million in ARR, demonstrating the mission critical nature of our platform to help customers succeed in the new digital age. In comparison, we had 262 customers that each represented greater than $100,000 in ARR and 15 customers that each represented greater than $1 million in ARR for the years ended December 31, 2020. Customers that each represented greater than $100,000 in ARR accounted for approximately 73% and 72% of our total ARR as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We define ARR as the annual recurring revenue of subscription agreements at a point in time based on the terms of customers’ contracts. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, and does not represent our U.S. GAAP revenue on an annualized basis, as it is an operating metric that can be impacted by contract start and end dates and renewal rates. ARR is not intended to be a replacement for or forecast of revenue. No single customer accounted for more than 4% of our revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our ability to expand within our customer base is also demonstrated by our strong dollar-based net retention rate. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our dollar-based net retention rate across paying customers was 123% and 119%, respectively.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that the growth and future success of our business depends on many factors. While each of these factors presents significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth and improve our results of operations.
Customer Acquisition and Expansion
We believe that our Digital Optimization System can help businesses across industries, company size, and stages of digital maturity drive better business outcomes through optimizing the digital product experience of their customers. We are focused on continuing to acquire new customers and expanding our relationships with our existing installed base to support our long-term growth. We have invested, and expect to continue to invest, in our sales and marketing efforts to drive customer acquisition.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had 1,597 and 1,039 paying customers, respectively, representing an increase of 54% year-over-year. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, 26 and 25 of the Fortune 100 were paying customers, respectively, which demonstrates both our traction to date as well as our significant opportunity to continue to penetrate into the largest global organizations. Our relationship with some of the world’s most beloved product-led companies has resulted in increased brand credibility and access to many attractive growth opportunities.
We have been successful at efficiently growing our customer spend over time as evidenced by our dollar-based net retention rates. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our dollar-based net retention rate was 123% and 119%, respectively, for paying customers. We continue to increase the number of customers who have entered and grown into larger subscriptions with us. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had 385 and 262 customers, respectively, that each represented greater than $100,000 in ARR, representing a 47% increase year-over-year. Additionally, we had 29 and 15 customers, respectively, that each represented greater than $1 million in ARR, up 93% year-over-year. The number of customers representing greater than $100,000 and $1 million in ARR demonstrates the strategic importance of our platform and our ability to both initially land significant accounts and grow them over time.
Investments in Platform
We believe that our customers will demand additional features and capabilities beyond our current platform offerings to assist them in optimizing their digital products. We have a history of, and will continue to invest significantly in, developing and delivering innovative products, features, and functionality targeted at our core customer base. For example, in 2021, we announced the launch of our Recommend and Experiment products, and we are encouraged by the early adoption of these products by our customers. Furthermore, we may choose to add new products and offerings or enhance our platform capabilities through acquisitions. In 2020, we acquired ClearBrain to bolster our predictive analytics capabilities, and in 2021, we acquired Iteratively, a software company that bolsters our ability to empower developers to more quickly, easily, and accurately instrument data into our platform. Going forward, we may pursue both strategic partnerships and acquisitions that we believe will be complementary to our business, accelerate customer acquisition, increase usage of our platform, and/or expand our product offerings in our core markets.
Investing for Growth
Our investment for growth encompasses multiple critical areas, including product expansion, our sales force, sales support, partner ecosystem, and our international presence. We continue to evolve our technology to ensure that we are best serving our customers’ needs. We believe this will lead to continued increased retention and positive customer referrals that will continue to generate expansion opportunities within our existing installed base and from new customers. We plan to continue to invest in our research and development organization to maintain and strengthen our market leadership position, and we believe that attracting the best engineering talent will continue to be critical to our long-term success. As we continue to invest in our platform, we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount, and although we believe these expenses as a percentage of revenue will decrease over the longer term, we expect that these expenses as a percentage of revenue will increase in the short term as we invest in product innovation.
We will continue to invest in expanding our sales force and associated sales support to pursue attractive growth opportunities and ensure customer success, particularly with larger enterprises where we have experienced significant traction to date. We also plan to invest in our channel partners, such as independent software vendors, and resellers, to extend our reach faster than we could do on our own. As we continue to invest in our sales efforts, we expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount, and although we believe these expenses as a percentage of revenue will decrease over the longer term, we expect these expenses as a percentage of revenue will increase in the short term as we invest in sales growth.
Finally, we see opportunities to expand offices and headcount internationally to better service targeted international markets where we believe we have significant opportunity to accelerate existing traction and success. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, 36% of our revenue was generated outside the United States.
Key Business Metrics
We review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions. We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating these key metrics, which may hinder comparability with other companies who may calculate similarly-titled metrics in a different way.
Paying Customers
We believe our ability to grow the number of paying customers on our platform provides a key indicator of the demand for our platform, growth of our business, and our future business opportunities. Increasing awareness of our platform and its broad range of capabilities, coupled with the mainstream adoption of cloud-based technology, has expanded the diversity of our customer base to include organizations of different sizes across virtually all industries.
For purposes of customer count, a customer is defined as an entity that has a unique Dunn & Bradstreet Global Ultimate (“GULT”) Data Universal Numbering System (“DUNS”) number and an active subscription contract as of the measurement date. The DUNS number is a global standard for business identification and tracking. We make exceptions for holding companies, government entities, and other organizations for which the GULT, in our judgment, does not accurately represent our customer or the DUNS does not exist.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
We calculate our dollar-based net retention rate to measure our ability to retain and expand ARR from our customers and believe it is an indicator of the value our platform delivers to customers and our future business opportunities. Our dollar-based net retention rate compares our ARR from the same set of customers across comparable periods and reflects customer renewals, expansion, contraction, and attrition.
We calculate dollar-based net retention rate as of a period-end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of all customers as of 12 months prior to such period-end (the “Prior Period ARR”). We then calculate the ARR from these same customers as of the current period-end (the “Current Period ARR”). Current Period ARR includes any expansion and is net of contraction or attrition over the last 12 months, but excludes ARR from new customers as well as any overage charges in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ARR by the total Prior Period ARR to arrive at the point-in-time dollar-based net retention rate. We then calculate the weighted average of the trailing 12-month point-in-time dollar-based net retention rates, to arrive at the dollar-based net retention rate.
Response to COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has had an adverse effect on the global economy, including the businesses of many of our customers and prospective customers and did, in the early stages of the pandemic, result in increased attrition from our smaller customers and those customers in the most impacted industries such as travel and entertainment. Overall, however, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in favorable trends for our business and the businesses of those customers who have been able to leverage digital optimization of their products as sales increasingly shifted online.
Although we believe the COVID-19 pandemic has largely resulted in favorable trends for our business to date, we have experienced business disruptions, particularly at our San Francisco headquarters due to restrictions on gatherings and our ability to travel to customers. Moreover, our existing and prospective customers have experienced and may continue to experience slowdowns in their businesses, including due to ongoing worldwide supply chain disruptions, which in turn has and may result in reduced demand for our platform, lengthening of sales cycles, loss of customers, and difficulties in collections. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of global financial markets, which could limit our or our customers' ability to access capital on favorable terms or at all. The ongoing impact of the pandemic on our future business, financial condition, and results of operations depends on the pandemic’s duration and severity, which are difficult to assess or predict. See “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following table presents certain non-GAAP financial measures, along with the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for each period presented below. In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe these non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. See below for a description of the non-GAAP financial measures and their limitations as an analytical tool. A reconciliation is also provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The following Non-GAAP Financial Measures and related Non-GAAP reconciliations are for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, unless otherwise stated. Non-GAAP Financial Measures and related Non-GAAP reconciliations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 may be found in the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our final prospectus related to the direct listing of our Class A common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market, filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, on September 28, 2021.
Non-GAAP Gross Margin and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
We define non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin as U.S. GAAP gross profit and U.S. GAAP gross margin, respectively, excluding stock-based compensation expense and related employer payroll taxes, amortization of acquired intangible assets, and non-recurring costs, which currently consist exclusively of costs related to the listing of our Class A common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market (the "Direct Listing").
We define non-GAAP loss from operations and non-GAAP operating margin as U.S. GAAP loss from operations and U.S. GAAP operating margin, respectively, excluding stock-based compensation expense and related employer payroll taxes, amortization of acquired intangible assets, and non-recurring costs, such as Direct Listing costs.
We exclude stock-based compensation expense and related employer payroll taxes, which is a non-cash expense, from certain of our non-GAAP financial measures because we believe that excluding this item provides meaningful supplemental information regarding operational performance. We exclude amortization of intangible assets, which is a non-cash expense, related to business combinations from certain of our non-GAAP financial measures because such expenses are related to business combinations and have no direct correlation to the operation of our business. Although we exclude these expenses from certain non-GAAP financial measures, the revenue from acquired companies subsequent to the date of acquisition is reflected in these measures and the acquired intangible assets contribute to our revenue generation. We exclude non-recurring costs from certain of our non-GAAP financial measures because such expenses do not repeat period over period and are not reflective of the ongoing operation of our business.
We use non-GAAP gross margin and non-GAAP operating margin in conjunction with traditional U.S. GAAP measures to evaluate our financial performance. We believe that non-GAAP gross margin and non-GAAP operating margin provide our management and investors consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations.
Free Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow Margin
We define free cash flow as net cash used in operating activities, less cash used for purchases of property and equipment and capitalized internal-use software costs. Free cash flow margin is calculated as free cash flow divided by total revenue. We believe that free cash flow and free cash flow margin are useful indicators of liquidity that provide information to management and investors, even
if negative, about the amount of cash used in our operations other than that used for investments in property and equipment and capitalized internal-use software costs.
Limitations and Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only. Non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for financial information presented under U.S. GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of non-GAAP financial measures versus comparable financial measures determined under U.S. GAAP. For example, other companies in our industry may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance. In addition, free cash flow does not reflect our future contractual commitments and the total increase or decrease of our cash balance for a given period. All of these limitations could reduce the usefulness of these non-GAAP financial measures as analytical tools. Investors are encouraged to review the related U.S. GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures and to not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following tables reconcile the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure to each of these non-GAAP financial measures.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Gross Margin
(1)Stock-based compensation expense-related charges include employer payroll tax-related expenses on employee stock transactions.
Non-GAAP Loss From Operations and Loss From Operations Margin
(1)Stock-based compensation expense-related charges include employer payroll tax-related expenses on employee stock transactions.
Free Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow Margin
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from sales of subscription services for customers to access our platform. Revenue is driven primarily by the number of paying customers and the level of subscription plan. We generally recognize revenue ratably over the related contractual term beginning on the date that the platform is made available to a customer. Revenue from professional services have primarily been attributed to implementation and training services. We recognize professional services revenue as services are delivered.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of the cost of providing our platform to our customers and consists of third-party hosting fees, personnel-related expenses for our operations and support personnel, allocated overhead costs for overhead used in cost of revenue activities, and amortization of our capitalized internal-use software and acquired developed software. As we acquire new customers and existing customers increase their use of our platform, we expect that our cost of revenue will continue to increase in dollar amount.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit, or revenue less cost of revenue, and gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of revenue, has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the timing of our acquisition of new customers, renewals of, and follow-on sales to, existing customers, costs associated with operating our platform, and the extent to which we expand our operations and customer support organizations. In the long term, we expect our gross profit to increase in dollar amount and our gross margin to improve as we optimize our system performance and leverage ingested data for new products.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related expenses are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and, in the case of sales and marketing expenses, sales commissions. Operating expenses also include an allocation of overhead costs for facilities and shared IT-related expenses. As we continue to invest in our business, we expect our operating expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount, and although we believe our operating expenses as a percentage of revenue will decrease over the longer term, we expect operating expenses as a percentage of revenue will increase in the short term as we invest in product innovation and sales growth and incur additional professional services and compliance costs as we operate as a public company.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses. These expenses also include product design costs prior to the application development stage, third-party services and consulting expenses, software subscriptions, and allocated overhead costs for overhead used in research and development activities. A substantial portion of our research and development efforts are focused on enhancing our software, including researching ways to add new features and functionality to our platform. We anticipate continuing to invest in innovation and technology development, and as a result, we expect research and development expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount but to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the longer term, although the percentage may fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on the extent and timing of product development initiatives. In the short term, we expect research and development costs to increase as a percentage of revenue as we invest in product innovation. In addition, we incurred additional research and development expenses during fiscal 2021, when we completed our Direct Listing, as a result of the stock-based compensation expenses associated with our RSUs. We anticipate that we will incur additional stock-based compensation expense in future periods due to the increase in the fair value of our common stock in connection with our Direct Listing.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses and expenses for performance marketing and lead generation, and brand marketing. These expenses also include allocated overhead costs and travel-related expenses. Sales commissions earned by our sales force that are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a subscription with a customer are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit of five years.
We continue to make investments in our sales and marketing organization, and we expect sales and marketing expenses to remain our largest operating expense in dollar amount. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount but to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the longer term, although the percentage may fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on the extent and timing of our marketing initiatives. In the short term, we expect sales and marketing costs to increase as a percentage of revenue as we invest in product sales growth, including investments to increase our brand awareness and build out sales capacity. In addition, we incurred additional sales and marketing expenses during fiscal 2021, when we completed our Direct Listing, as a result of stock-based compensation expense associated with our RSUs. We anticipate that we will incur additional stock-based compensation expense in future periods due to the increase in the fair value of our common stock in connection with our Direct Listing.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses for our finance, human resources, information technology, and legal organizations. These expenses also include non-personnel costs, such as outside legal, accounting, and other professional fees, software subscriptions, as well as certain tax, license, and insurance-related expenses, and allocated overhead costs.
In connection with our Direct Listing, which we completed in fiscal 2021, we incurred significant fees related to financial advisory, audit, and legal services. Also, in connection with our Direct Listing, we incurred general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2021, as a result of stock-based compensation expense associated with our RSUs. We anticipate that we will incur additional stock-based compensation expense in future periods due to the increase in the fair value of our common stock following our Direct Listing. We have also incurred additional expenses in connection with operating as a public company, including professional fees and other expenses. We expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market LLC, and costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. In addition, as a public company, we incur additional costs associated with accounting, compliance, insurance, and investor relations. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount for the foreseeable future but to generally decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the longer term, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on the timing and amount of our general and administrative expenses, including in the short term as we expect to incur increased compliance and professional service costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income on our cash holdings offset by foreign currency transaction gains and losses.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. To date, we have not recorded any U.S. federal income tax expense, and our state and foreign income tax expenses have not been material. We have recorded deferred tax assets for U.S. federal income taxes for which we provide a full valuation allowance. These deferred tax assets primarily include net operating loss carryforwards of $415.8 million and tax credit carryforwards of $5.4 million, net of reserves as of December 31, 2021, which begin expiring in 2032 and 2033, respectively. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance in U.S. jurisdictions for the foreseeable future as it is not more likely than not the deferred tax assets will be realized based on our history of losses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our revenue for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
The following discussion and analysis are for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, unless otherwise stated. Discussion and analysis for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 may be found in the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our final prospectus related to the direct listing of our Class A common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market, filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, on September 28, 2021.
(1)Amounts include stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 includes $1.1 million and $11.1 million, respectively, of compensation expense related to common stock sales by select executives, which sales were made above fair value and were facilitated by us. For more information, refer to Note 5 of our consolidated financial statements.
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations data, for each of the periods presented, as a percentage of revenue.
* less than 1%
Note: Certain figures may not sum due to rounding
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased $64.8 million, or 63%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily due to growth of our paying customer base of 54% and revenue generated from our existing paying customers as reflected by our dollar-based net retention of 123% as of December 31, 2021 compared to 119% as of December 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased $21.2 million, or 70%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $12.4 million in third-party hosting costs as we increased capacity to support paying customer usage and growth of our paying customer base and $6.9 million in personnel and related expenses directly associated with an increase in headcount, including an increase in allocated overhead costs. Additionally, cost of revenue increased by $1.9 million due to the amortization of acquired intangibles assets related to our business combinations and amortization of internal-use software costs.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $22.2 million, or 85%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $10.9 million in stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes as a result of increased headcount, increased value of stock-based awards, and additional expense due to the satisfaction of the performance-based vesting condition of certain equity awards upon the Direct Listing. This increase also was attributable to an increase of $10.0 million in personnel and related expenses directly associated with an increase in headcount, including an increase in allocated overhead costs.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $34.2 million, or 66%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $23.7 million in personnel and related expenses directly associated with an increase in headcount, including an increase in allocated overhead costs. This increase was also attributable to an increase of $6.8 million related to expenses to support our marketing, lead generation and advertising programs. The increase was also due to a $3.7 million increase in stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes as a result of increased headcount, increased value of stock-based awards, and additional expense due to the satisfaction of the performance-based vesting condition of certain equity awards upon the Direct Listing, offset by less expenses from secondary sales of common stock by sales and marketing personnel in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $37.3 million, or 206%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $22.4 million in fees for professional services incurred in connection with our Direct Listing and in preparation for operating as a public company. The increase was also attributable to a $7.7 million increase in stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes as a result of increased headcount, increased value of stock-based awards, and additional expense due to the satisfaction of the performance-based vesting condition of certain equity awards upon the Direct Listing. This increase also was attributable to an increase of $5.8 million in personnel and related expenses directly associated with an increase in headcount, including an increase in allocated overhead costs, and $1.2 million in increased insurance fees, mainly attributable to directors' and officers' liability insurance necessary for operating as a public company.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net decreased $0.1 million, or 28%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease is related to a $0.1 million decrease in income resulting from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates due to increased operations in foreign jurisdictions in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes increased $0.2 million, or 24%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 mainly due to increased foreign taxes resulting from increased foreign income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed operations primarily through the net proceeds we have received from the sales of our preferred stock and common stock as well as cash generated from the sale of subscriptions to our platform. We have generated losses from our operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $179.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and negative cash flows from operating activities for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including revenue growth and costs incurred to support our platform, including growth in our customer base and customer usage, increased research and development expenses to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure, and increased general and administrative expenses to support being a public company.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $307.4 million and restricted cash of $0.9 million. Additionally, a substantial source of our cash provided by operating activities is our deferred revenue, which is included on our consolidated balance sheets as a liability. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which is recorded as revenue over the term of the subscription agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we had $69.3 million of deferred revenue, all of which was recorded as a current liability. This deferred revenue will be recognized as revenue when or as the related performance obligations are met.
We assess our liquidity primarily through our cash on hand as well as the projected timing of billings under contract with our paying customers and related collection cycles. We believe our current cash and cash equivalents on hand will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may seek to raise additional funds at any time through equity, equity-linked arrangements, and debt. If we are unable to raise additional funds when desired and at reasonable rates, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business and Industry-We may require additional capital to support the growth of our business, and this capital might not be available on acceptable terms, if at all.”
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collection from sales of subscriptions to our paying customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel-related expenses, marketing expenses, and third-party hosting-related and software expenses. In the last several years, we have generated negative cash flows from operating activities and have supplemented working capital requirements through net proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and common stock.
Net cash used in operating activities of $31.7 million for fiscal 2021 reflects our net loss of $75.0 million, adjusted by non-cash items such as stock-based compensation expense of $34.4 million and depreciation and amortization of $3.1 million as well as net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $6.2 million. The net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of a $28.5 million increase in deferred revenue, resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, and a $4.5 million increase in accrued expenses and accounts payable, resulting primarily from increases in accrued professional services, marketing, accrued payroll, and benefits due to an increase in the size of our operations. These increases were partially offset by a $16.7 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current and noncurrent assets related to an increase in prepayments made in advance for future services, an increase in deferred commissions of $9.2 million, and a $3.0 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher customer billings.
Net cash used in operating activities of $10.4 million for fiscal 2020 reflects our net loss of $24.6 million, adjusted by non-cash items such as stock-based compensation expense of $16.6 million and depreciation and amortization of $1.7 million as well as net cash used from changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.3 million. The net cash used from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of a $7.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current and noncurrent assets related to an increase in prepayments made in advance for future services, an increase in deferred commissions of $7.2 million, and a $5.6 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher customer billings. These decreases were partially offset by an $11.0 million increase in deferred revenue, resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, and a $4.1 million increase in accrued expenses and accounts payable, resulting primarily from increases in accrued professional services, marketing, accrued payroll, and benefits due to an increase in the size of our operations.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $1.5 million for fiscal 2021 consisted of $1.7 million in capitalized internal-use software development costs and $1.5 million in purchases of property and equipment. These decreases were partially offset by $1.7 million in net cash acquired upon the acquisition of a privately-held company.
Net cash used in investing activities of $5.9 million for fiscal 2020 consisted of $3.7 million in cash paid for an acquisition, $1.2 million of capitalized internal-use software development costs, and $1.0 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $222.6 million for fiscal 2021 primarily consisted of $199.8 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of Series F preferred stock, $21.8 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $1.1 million of net cash provided through sales of common stock to cover tax-related amounts that had not yet been remitted to the respective taxing jurisdictions. It is expected that this $1.1 million net cash received will be paid in subsequent periods and will be recorded as a financing cash outflow at such time.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $54.2 million for fiscal 2020 primarily consisted of $49.6 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of Series E preferred stock, $0.2 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of Series D preferred stock, and $4.4 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Remaining Performance Obligations
Remaining performance obligations (“RPO”) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, including the expected timing of recognition is as follows:
Our RPO represents the amount of contracted future revenue that has not yet been recognized, including both deferred revenue and non-cancellable contracted amounts that will be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. RPO excludes performance obligations from overages. RPO is influenced by a number of factors, including the timing of renewals, the timing of purchases, average contract terms, and seasonality. Due to these factors, it is important to review RPO in conjunction with product revenue and other financial metrics disclosed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, the contractual commitment amounts in the table below are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Purchase orders issued in the ordinary course of business are not included in the table below, as our purchase orders represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements.
(1)Consists of future real estate-related non-cancellable minimum rental payments under operating leases and real estate commitments with substitution rights.
(2)Included in this commitment is a hosting arrangement with AWS. We entered into the 60-month contract in August 2021. The contract may be terminated by either party if the other party is in material breach of the contract and such breach remains uncured for 30 days. Pursuant to the terms of the contract, we are required to spend a minimum of $267 million over the five-year term of the contract. As of December 31, 2021, we had $250 million remaining on this commitment.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. Additionally, in connection with our Direct Listing, we entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers, or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements, and there are no claims that we are aware of that could reasonably be expected to have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, as well as related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from sales of subscription services. Revenue is recognized when, or as, the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring the control of the promised service to a customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these services. We account for revenue contracts with customers by applying the requirements of ASC 606, which includes the following steps:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with the customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of the revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied.
Our SaaS subscription agreements with customers enable them to access and send event volume data to our platform. Subscription arrangements with customers do not provide the customer with the right to take possession of our software at any time. Instead, customers are granted continuous access to the platform over the contractual period. A time-elapsed method is used to measure progress because our obligation is to provide continuous service over the contractual period and control is transferred evenly over the contractual period. Accordingly, the fixed consideration related to subscription revenue is recognized ratably over the contract term beginning on the date access to the subscription product is provisioned. The typical subscription term is 12 months with various payment terms ranging from monthly to annual up-front payments. Most contracts are non-cancelable over the contractual term. Some customers have the option to purchase additional subscription services at a stated price. These options are evaluated on a case-by-case basis but generally do not provide a material right as they do not provide a discount to the customer that is incremental to the range of discounts typically given for the same services that are sold to a similar class of customers, even when the stand-alone selling price of the services subject to the option is highly variable.
Deferred Contract Acquisition Costs (Deferred Commissions)
We capitalize sales commissions that are recoverable and incremental due to the acquisition of customer contracts. We determine whether costs should be deferred based on its sales compensation plans, if the commissions are in fact incremental and would not have occurred absent the customer contract.
Commissions paid upon the initial acquisition of a contract are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit, determined to be five years. The period of benefit is estimated by considering factors such as the expected life of our subscription contracts, historical customer attrition rates, technological life of our platform, as well as other factors. Sales commissions for renewal of a subscription contract are not considered commensurate with the commissions paid for the acquisition of the initial subscription contract given the substantive difference in commission rates between new and renewal contracts. We determine the period of benefit for renewal subscription contracts by considering the contractual term for renewal contracts.
Amounts anticipated to be recognized within 12 months of the balance sheet date are recorded as deferred commissions, current, with the remaining portion recorded as deferred commissions, noncurrent, in the consolidated balance sheets. Amortization of deferred commissions is included in sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statements of operations. We periodically review these deferred commissions to determine whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that could impact recoverability or the period of benefit. There were no impairment losses recorded during the periods presented.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based payment awards granted to employees, directors, and non-employees based on the estimated fair values on the date of the grant and vesting criteria. For options, vesting is typically over a four-year period and is contingent upon continued employment on each vesting date. In general, options granted to newly hired employees vest 25% after the first year of service and ratably each month over the remaining 36-month period. For RSUs, vesting is typically over a four-year period and is contingent upon continued employment on each vesting date. In general, RSUs granted to employees vest 25% after the first year of service and ratably each quarter over the remaining 36-month period.
The fair value of options granted are estimated on the grant date. Options granted pursuant to the 2021 Incentive Award Plan (the "2021 Plan") are valued utilizing the Black-Scholes option pricing model and options granted pursuant to the 2014 Plan are valued utilizing the Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of the grant date fair value is affected by the estimated fair value of our common stock as well as additional assumptions regarding a number of other subjective variables. These variables include expected stock price volatility over a contractual or expected term, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, the risk-free interest rate for a contractual or expected term, and expected dividends. For assumptions utilized in each respective model, refer to Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We recognize compensation expense for service-based stock-based awards as an expense over the employee’s or director’s requisite service period on a straight-line basis. We also have certain options and awards that have performance-based vesting conditions upon certain liquidity events. As a result of the Direct Listing, the liquidity event was met for all outstanding awards with a performance condition and therefore the related expense was recognized using the accelerated attribution method. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur. Stock-based compensation expense is allocated to cost of revenue and operating expenses on the consolidated statements of operations based on the associated employee’s functional department.
Determining Fair Value of Stock Options
The fair value of each option granted to employees under the 2021 Plan is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes pricing model. Based on the nature of the underlying options granted under the 2014 Plan, the fair value of each option granted to employees is estimated on the date of grant using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The fair value of each grant of stock option was determined by us using the two methods and the respective assumptions discussed below. The determination of each of these inputs is subjective and generally requires a level of judgment.
Expected volatility - The expected stock price volatility assumption was determined by examining the historical volatilities of a group of industry peers over a period equal to the expected life of the options, as we did not have sufficient trading history for our common stock.
Contractual term (Monte Carlo) - The contractual term of stock options is used to model the expected exercise behavior of the option holders with a 10-year exercise period. This method utilizes a Monte Carlo simulation based on historical exercise data as the options are not considered to be "plain-vanilla" where a simplified method is allowed as certain holders have up until option expiration to exercise regardless of employment status. The Monte Carlo simulation models expected exercise behavior utilizing an estimated stock price at which the holder of the option would choose to exercise an option prior to the end of the stated term. For this assumption, we utilized a value multiple on the strike price of 4.0 times.
Expected term (Black-Scholes) - Expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term assumptions are determined based on the vesting terms, exercise terms, and contractual lives of the options. For stock options considered to be “plain-vanilla” options, we estimate the expected term based on the simplified method, which is essentially the weighted average of the vesting period and contractual term, as our historical option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term.
Expected dividend - The expected dividend assumption was based on our history and expectation that it will not declare dividend payout for the near future.
Risk-free interest rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the contractual terms.
Fair value of common stock - Prior to the Direct Listing, the fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors, which intended all options granted to be exercisable at a price per share not less than the per share fair value of common stock underlying those options on the date of grant. The valuations of our common stock were determined in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. The board of directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock at each meeting in which awards were approved. The factors considered included, but were not limited to:
(i)the results of contemporaneous independent third-party valuations of our common stock;
(ii)the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of its common stock;
(iii)the lack of marketability of our common stock;
(iv)actual operating and financial results;
(v)current business conditions and projections;
(vi)the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering, direct listing, or sale of our Company, given prevailing market conditions; and
(vii)precedent transactions involving our shares.
In valuing our common stock, the fair value of our business was determined using various valuation methods, including combinations of income and market approaches. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that our company will generate. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate that is derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly-traded companies in our industry or similar business operations as of each valuation date and is adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in our cash flows. The market approach estimates value based on a comparison of our company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business and similar to us in economic drivers and operating characteristics. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple is determined and then applied to our prior financial results and future financial forecasts to estimate the value of our business. Concurrent with preferred stock financings, we also used the option pricing model to back solve the value of our common stock utilizing our most recent round of financing, which implies a total equity value as well as a per share common stock value.
For each valuation, the fair value of our business determined by the income and market approaches was then allocated to the common stock using either the option-pricing method (“OPM”), or a hybrid of the probability-weighted expected return method (“PWERM”) and OPM methods.
Our valuations prior to March 31, 2021 were allocated based on the OPM. Beginning March 31, 2021, our valuations were allocated based on a hybrid method of the PWERM and the OPM. Using the PWERM, the value of our common stock was estimated based upon a probability-weighted analysis of varying values for our common stock assuming possible future events for our company, including a scenario assuming we became a publicly-traded company and a scenario assuming we continued as a privately-held company.
In addition, we also considered and included secondary transactions involving our capital stock in our valuations. In our evaluation of those transactions, we considered the facts and circumstances of each transaction to determine the extent to which they represented a fair value exchange. Factors considered include transaction volume, timing, whether the transactions occurred among willing and unrelated parties, and whether the transactions involved investors with access to our financial information.
For valuations after the Direct Listing, our board of directors determined the fair value of each share of underlying Class A common stock based on the closing price of our Class A common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market as reported on the date of grant. As our Class A common stock is publicly traded, it is subject to potentially significant fluctuations in the market price. Increases and decreases in the market price of our common stock will increase and decrease the fair value of our stock-based awards granted in future periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding recent accounting pronouncements.