Item 7.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Overview
We are a leading system provider of megawatt-scale power resiliency solutions that Orchestrate the Rhythm and Harmony of Power on the Grid™, and protect and expand the capability of our Navy's fleet. Our solutions enhance the performance of the power grid, protect our Navy’s fleet, and lower the cost of wind power. In the power grid market, we enable electric utilities, industrial facilities, and renewable energy project developers to connect, transmit and distribute smarter, cleaner and better power through our transmission planning services and power electronics and superconductor-based systems. In the wind power market, we enable manufacturers to field highly competitive wind turbines through our advanced power electronics and control system products, engineering, and support services. Our power grid and wind products and services provide exceptional reliability, security, efficiency and affordability to our customers.
Our power system solutions help to improve energy efficiency, alleviate power grid capacity constraints, improve system resiliency, and increase the adoption of renewable energy generation. Demand for our solutions is driven by the growing needs for modernized smart grids that improve power reliability, security and quality, the U.S. Navy's effort to upgrade in-board power systems to support fleet electrification, and the need for increased renewable sources of electricity, such as wind and solar energy. Concerns about these factors have led to increased spending by corporations and the military, as well as supportive government regulations and initiatives on local, state, and national levels, including renewable portfolio standards, tax incentives and international treaties.
We manufacture products using two proprietary core technologies: PowerModule™ programmable power electronic converters and our Amperium® high temperature superconductor ("HTS") wires. These technologies and our system-level solutions are protected by a broad and deep intellectual property portfolio consisting of hundreds of patents and licenses worldwide.
We operate our business under two market-facing business units: Grid and Wind. We believe this market-centric structure enables us to more effectively anticipate and meet the needs of power generation project developers, the Navy's ship protection systems, electric utilities and wind turbine manufacturers.
• Grid. Through our Gridtec™ Solutions, our Grid business segment enables electric utilities and renewable energy project developers to connect, transmit and distribute power with exceptional efficiency, reliability, security and affordability. We provide transmission planning services that allow us to identify power grid congestion, poor power quality, and other risks, which help us determine how our solutions can improve network performance. These services often lead to sales of our grid interconnection solutions for wind farms and solar power plants, power quality systems and transmission and distribution cable systems. We also sell ship protection products to the U.S. Navy through our Grid business segment.
• Wind. Through our Windtec™ Solutions, our Wind business segment enables manufacturers to field wind turbines with exceptional power output, reliability and affordability. We supply advanced power electronics and control systems, license our highly engineered wind turbine designs, and provide extensive customer support services to wind turbine manufacturers. Our design portfolio includes a broad range of drivetrains and power ratings of 2 MW and higher. We provide a broad range of power electronics and software-based control systems that are highly integrated and designed for optimized performance, efficiency, and grid compatibility.
Our fiscal year begins on April 1 and ends on March 31. When we refer to a particular fiscal year, we are referring to the fiscal year beginning on April 1 of that same year. For example, fiscal 2021 refers to the fiscal year beginning on April 1, 2021. Other fiscal years follow similarly.
On October 31, 2018, we entered into a Subcontract Agreement with Commonwealth Edison Company (“ComEd”) (the “Subcontract Agreement”) for the manufacture and installation of the Company’s resilient electric grid ("REG") system within ComEd’s electric grid in Chicago, Illinois (the “Project”). As provided in the Subcontract Agreement, the Subcontract Agreement became effective upon the signing of an amendment by us and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (“DHS”) to the existing contract (the “Prime Contract”) between us and DHS on June 20, 2019. Unless terminated earlier by us, ComEd or DHS according to the terms of the Subcontract Agreement, the term of the Subcontract Agreement will continue until we complete our warranty obligations under the Subcontract Agreement. Under the terms of the Subcontract Agreement, we agreed, among other things, to provide the REG system and to supervise ComEd’s installation of the REG system in Chicago. As part of our separate cost sharing arrangement with DHS under the Prime Contract, we received funding provided by DHS in connection with the Subcontract Agreement of approximately $10.0 million, which represents the total amount of revenue we recognized over the term of the Subcontract Agreement and includes $1.0 million that we have agreed to reimburse ComEd for costs incurred by ComEd while undertaking its tasks under the Subcontract Agreement (the “Reimbursement Amount”). In addition, we are required to deliver an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $5.0 million to secure certain Company obligations under the Subcontract Agreement, which we have done, and deposited $5.0 million in an escrow account as collateral to secure such letter of credit. ComEd has agreed to provide the site and provide all civil engineering work required to support the operation and integration of the REG system into ComEd’s electric grid. Other than the Reimbursement Amount, ComEd is responsible for its own costs and expenses. DHS’s approval to commence with construction was obtained on June 20, 2019. Substation work on the project began in late 2019 and we successfully integrated the REG system on Com Ed's electric power grid and the REG system became fully operational in August 2021.
On October 1, 2020, we entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”) with the selling stockholders named therein. Pursuant to the terms of the Stock Purchase Agreement and concurrently with entering into such agreement, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding (i) shares of capital stock of Northeast Power Systems, Inc., a New York corporation (“NEPSI”), and (ii) membership interests of Northeast Power Realty, LLC, a New York limited liability company, which holds the real property that serves as NEPSI’s headquarters (the "NEPSI Acquisition"). NEPSI is a U.S.-based global provider of medium-voltage metal-enclosed power capacitor banks and harmonic filter banks for use on electric power systems. As a result of this transaction, NEPSI became a wholly-owned subsidiary and is operated by our Grid business segment.
The NEPSI purchase price was $26.0 million in cash on hand and 873,657 restricted shares of our common stock. As part of the transaction, in the future, the selling stockholders may receive up to an additional 1,000,000 restricted shares of our common stock upon the achievement of certain specified future revenue objectives during varying periods of up to four years after the closing.
On May 6, 2021, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of (i) Neeltran, Inc., a Connecticut corporation (“Neeltran”) that supplies rectifiers and transformers to industrial customers, and (ii) Neeltran International, Inc., a Connecticut corporation (“International”), as well as the real property that serves as Neeltran’s headquarters.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve. We are experiencing substantial inflationary pressure in our supply chain, some delays in sourcing materials needed for our products and some production disruption resulting from higher than typical employee absenteeism due to the highly contagious omicron variant which have increased our cost of revenues and decreased gross margin. The extent to which the outbreak impacts our business, liquidity, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. Changes in macroeconomic and market conditions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, or for other reasons, such as the ongoing war between Russia and Ukraine, including inflation, labor force availability, sourcing, material delays and global supply chain disruptions could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operation.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended March 31, 2020, including a year-to-year comparison between fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Revenues
Total revenues increased by 24% to $108.4 million in fiscal 2021 from $87.1 million in fiscal 2020. Our revenues are summarized as follows (in thousands):
Revenues in our Grid business unit are derived from our D-VAR product sales, NEPSI product sales, Neeltran product sales, HTS wire sales, ship protection systems ("SPS"), government-sponsored electric utility projects and other prototype development contracts. We also engineer, install and commission our products on a turnkey-basis for some customers. The Grid business unit accounted for 91% of total revenues in fiscal 2021 and 81% in fiscal 2020. Grid revenues increased 40% to $98.9 million in fiscal 2021 from $70.5 million in fiscal 2020. The increase in revenues was driven by the contribution from the NEPSI Acquisition and Neeltran Acquisition as well as growth in the D-VAR, Volt Var Optimization ("VVO") and SPS product lines.
Revenues in our Wind business unit are derived from wind turbine electrical control systems and core components, wind turbine license and development contracts, service contracts and consulting arrangements. Our Wind business unit accounted for 9% of total revenues in fiscal 2021 and 19% in fiscal 2020. Revenues in the Wind business unit decreased 42% to $9.6 million in fiscal 2021 from $16.6 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease over the prior year period was primarily driven by shipments of electrical control systems ("ECS") to Doosan in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 with no similar shipments in fiscal 2021.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues increased by 36% to $94.9 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $69.7 million in fiscal 2020. Gross margin decreased to 12% in fiscal 2021 from 20% in fiscal 2020. The decrease in gross margin in fiscal 2021 was due to an unfavorable product mix, inflation pressure in our supply chain, some delays in sourcing materials due to the COVID-19 pandemic and purchase accounting adjustments associated with the Neeltran Acquisition. Cost of revenues in fiscal 2021 includes total amortization expense of $0.2 million as a result of the NEPSI and Neeltran acquired backlog intangible assets. In addition, a fair value purchase adjustment of approximately $0.6 million for the step-up basis assigned to acquired inventory, to properly reflect the fair value in purchase accounting, was charged to cost of revenues in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. The step up was assigned to acquired work-in-progress and finished goods inventory that were completely delivered during fiscal 2021.
Operating Expenses
Research and development
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses decreased by 5% to $10.5 million, or 10% of revenue in fiscal 2021, compared to $11.0 million, or 13% of revenue, in fiscal 2020. The decrease in R&D expenses is a result of lower total compensation expense.
Selling, general, and administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses increased by 9% to $27.5 million, or 25% of revenue in fiscal 2021 from $25.3 million, or 29% of revenue, in fiscal 2020. The increase in SG&A expenses on a dollar basis is primarily the result of higher compensation, higher stock compensation expense and additional outside services expenses.
Amortization of acquisition related intangibles
We recorded $2.5 million in fiscal 2021 and $1.2 million in fiscal 2020 in amortization expense related to our core technology and know-how, customer relationships, and other intangible assets. The increase in amortization expense is primarily a result of the NEPSI and Neeltran Acquisitions.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
The change in fair value of our contingent consideration for the earnout payment on the NEPSI Acquisition resulted in a gain of $ 5.9 million in the year ended March 31, 2022. The change in the fair value of our contingent consideration for the earnout payment on the NEPSI Acquisition resulted in a loss of $3.0 million in the year ended March 31, 2021. The change in the fair value was primarily driven by the change in our stock price, which is a key valuation metric.
Operating loss
Our operating loss is summarized as follows (in thousands):
The Grid segment generated an operating loss of $20.7 million in fiscal 2021 and $13.3 million in fiscal 2020. The increase in the Grid business unit operating loss was due to lower gross margins driven by less favorable margins from the Neeltran acquired backlog as well as purchase accounting adjustments related to the acquisition.
The Wind segment generated an operating loss of $1.6 million in fiscal 2021 and $3.3 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in the Wind business unit operating loss was due to lower costs of revenues on lower revenues driven by fewer shipments of ECS than in fiscal 2020.
Unallocated corporate expenses in fiscal 2021 consisted of a gain on contingent consideration of $5.9 million offset by stock-based compensation expense of $4.7 million. Unallocated corporate expenses in fiscal 2020 consisted of a loss on contingent consideration of $3.0 million and stock-based compensation expense of $3.5 million.
Interest income, net
Interest income, net was $0.1 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $0.4 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest income, net, was related to a lower cash balance earning lower interest rates in fiscal 2021 than in fiscal 2020.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net was less than $0.1 million in fiscal 2021, compared to other expense, net of $0.8 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in other expense was driven by the impacts of more favorable fluctuations in foreign currencies in fiscal 2021.
Income Taxes
We recorded an income tax benefit of $1.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to income tax benefit of $0.8 million in fiscal 2020. The increase in income tax benefit is a result of purchase accounting for the acquired intangible assets and the resulting deferred tax liability from the NEPSI Acquisition. The Company recorded a deferred tax liability of $2.3 million, primarily for the difference in book and tax basis on the intangible assets acquired in fiscal 2021. As a result, the Company was able to benefit from additional deferred tax assets and therefore released a corresponding valuation allowance of $2.3 million during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. The tax benefit was offset during fiscal 2021 by income tax expense in foreign jurisdictions.
Net loss
Net loss was $19.2 million in fiscal 2021, compared to net loss of $22.7 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in net loss was driven primarily by the change in fair value of the contingent consideration for the earnout payment on the NEPSI Acquisition.
Please refer to the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A, for a discussion of certain factors that may affect our future results of operations and financial condition.
Non-GAAP Measures
Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position or cash flow that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The non-GAAP measures included in this Form 10-K, however, should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to the comparable measure prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We define non-GAAP net loss as net loss before stock-based compensation, amortization of acquisition-related intangibles, acquisition costs, changes in fair value of contingent consideration, and other non-cash or unusual charges. We believe non-GAAP net loss assists management and investors in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding these non-cash charges and other items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, we use non-GAAP net loss as a factor to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies. A reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP net loss is set forth in the table below (in thousands, except per share data):
We incurred non-GAAP net losses of $17.1 million or $0.63 per share for fiscal 2021, compared to $14.1 million, or $0.59 per share, for fiscal 2020. The increase in non-GAAP net loss in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was due to a higher operating loss driven by lower gross margin and higher operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have experienced recurring operating losses and as of March 31, 2022 had an accumulated deficit of $1,020.5 million.
Our cash requirements depend on numerous factors, including the successful completion of our product development activities, our ability to commercialize our REG and ship protection system solutions, the rate of customer and market adoption of our products, collecting receivables according to established terms, the continued availability of U.S. government funding during the product development phase of our superconductor-based products and whether Inox is successful in executing on Solar Energy Corporation of India Limited orders or in obtaining additional orders under the new central and state auction regime. We continue to closely monitor our expenses and, if required, expect to reduce our operating and capital spending to enhance liquidity
In February 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 that will expire in February 2024 (the “Form S-3”). The Form S-3 allows us to offer and sell from time-to-time up to $250 million of common stock, debt securities, warrants or units comprised of any combination of these securities. The Form S-3 is intended to provide us flexibility to conduct registered sales of our securities, subject to market conditions, in order to fund our future capital needs. The terms of any future offering under the Form S-3 will be established at the time of such offering and will be described in a prospectus supplement filed with the SEC prior to the completion of any such offering.
At March 31, 2022, we had cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash of $49.5 million, compared to $80.7 million at March 31, 2021, a decrease of $31.2 million. As of March 31, 2022, we had approximately $2.6 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash in foreign bank accounts. Our cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash are summarized as follows (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities was $19.0 million and $8.7 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in net cash used in operations in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was driven primarily by decreased collections in fiscal 2021 and higher inventory balances in fiscal 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities was $7.2 million in fiscal 2021, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $2.5 million in fiscal 2020. The increase in net cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was due primarily to the sale of marketable securities in fiscal 2020 in which there was no similar transaction in fiscal 2021 offset by decreased cash used for acquisitions in fiscal 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.1 million and $50.8 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily due to the proceeds from our October 2020 offering of common stock in which there was no similar transaction in fiscal 2021.
At March 31, 2022, we had $6.1 million of restricted cash included in long-term assets and $2.8 million of restricted cash in short-term assets. At March 31, 2021, we had $5.6 million of restricted cash included in long-term assets and $2.2 million of restricted cash in short-term assets. These amounts included in restricted cash primarily represent collateral deposits to secure surety bonds and letters of credit for various customer contracts including the Subcontract Agreement with ComEd. These deposits are held in interest bearing accounts.
We are a party to many contractual obligations involving commitments to make payments to third parties. These obligations impact our short-term and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs. Certain contractual obligations are reflected on the consolidated balance sheet as of March 31, 2022, while others are considered future commitments. We have various contractual arrangements, under which we have committed to purchase certain minimum quantities of goods or services on an annual basis. For information regarding our other contractual obligations, refer to Note 12, "Contingent Consideration," Note 14, "Debt," Note 15, "Leases" and Note 17, "Commitments and Contingencies" to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We believe we have sufficient available liquidity to fund our operations and capital expenditures for the next twelve months. In addition, we may seek to raise additional capital, which could be in the form of loans, convertible debt or equity, to fund our operating requirements and capital expenditures. Our liquidity is highly dependent on our ability to increase revenues, including our ability to collect revenues under our agreements with Inox, control our operating costs, and our ability to raise additional capital, if necessary. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise additional capital on favorable terms or at all, or execute on any other means of improving our liquidity as described above. Additionally, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or other sources of instability, including the ongoing war between Russia and Ukraine, on the global financial markets may reduce our ability to raise additional capital, if necessary, which could negatively impact our liquidity. We also continue to closely monitor our expenses and, if required, we intend to reduce our operating and capital spending to enhance liquidity.
Legal Proceedings
From time to time, we are involved in legal and administrative proceedings and claims of various types. We record a liability in our consolidated financial statements for these matters when a loss is known or considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. We review these estimates each accounting period as additional information is known and adjust the loss provision when appropriate. If a matter is both probable to result in liability and the amounts of loss can be reasonably estimated, we estimate and disclose the possible loss or range of loss to the extent necessary to make the consolidated financial statements not misleading. If the loss is not probable or cannot be reasonably estimated, a liability is not recorded in our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. The amendments in ASU 2016-13 provide more decision-useful information about the expected credit losses on financial instruments and other commitments to extend credit held by a reporting entity at each reporting date. Following the release of ASU 2019-10 in November 2019, the new effective date, as long as we remain a smaller reporting company, would be annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of ASU 2016-13 may have on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 provide for simplified accounting to several income tax situations and removal of certain accounting exceptions. As of April 1, 2021, we have adopted ASU 2019-12 and noted no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In October 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers. The amendments in ASU 2021-08 will improve the accounting for acquired revenue contracts with customers in a business combination. Following the release of ASU 2021-08 in October 2021, the new effective date will be annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, that the adoption of ASU 2021-08 may have on our consolidated financial statements.
In November 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-10, Government Assistance (Topic 832): Disclosures by Business Entities about Government Assistance. The amendments in ASU 2021-10 will improve financial reporting by requiring disclosures that increase the transparency of transactions with government accounted for by applying a grant or contribution accounting model by analogy. Following the release of ASU 2021-10 in November 2021, the new effective date will be annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021. We do not expect the impact of the adoption of ASU 2021-10 to be material on our consolidated financial statements.
We do not believe that, outside of those disclosed here, there are any other recently issued accounting pronouncements that will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires that we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ under different assumptions or conditions. Our accounting policies that involve the most significant judgments and estimates are as follows:
Revenue recognition
For certain arrangements, such as contracts to perform research and development, prototype development contracts and certain customized product sales, we record revenues using the over-time method, measured by the relationship of costs incurred to total estimated contract costs. Over-time revenue recognition accounting is predominantly used on certain turnkey power systems installations for electric utilities and long-term prototype development contracts with the U.S. government. In addition, some contracts contain an element of variable consideration, including liquidated damages and/or penalties, which requires payment to the customer in the event that delivery timelines or milestones are not met. We estimate the total consideration payable by the customer when the contracts contain variable consideration provisions, based on the most likely amount anticipated to be recognized for transferring the promised goods or services. As a result, we may constrain revenue to the extent that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved.
Significant judgement is required to estimate the total expected costs and variable consideration for projects that typically have a timeline of 12-24 months. Any increase or decrease in estimated costs to complete a performance obligation without a corresponding change to the contract price could impact the calculation of cumulative revenue to date and gross profit on the project. Similar, if we recognize revenue based upon our current estimate of variable consideration, and our estimate is later adjusted, we may be required to increase or decrease cumulative revenue to date and gross profit on the project. Factors that may result in a change to our estimate include delays in manufacturing, unforeseen engineering problems, the performance of subcontractors and material suppliers, among others.
We have a long history of working with multiple types of projects and preparing cost estimates, and we rely on the expertise of key personnel to prepare what we believe are reasonable best estimates given available facts and circumstances. Due to the nature of the work involved, however, judgment is involved to estimate the total costs to complete, and the amounts estimated could have a material impact on the revenue we recognize in each accounting period. We cannot estimate unforeseen events and circumstances which may result in actual results being materially different from previous estimates.
See Note 4, “Revenue Recognition,” for further information regarding the Company’s adoption of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Business Acquisitions
We account for acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. The purchase price for each acquisition is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. The excess purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Intangible assets, if identified, are also recorded.
Determining the fair value of certain assets and liabilities assumed is judgmental in nature and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions as well as the use of specialists as needed. The Company utilizes management estimates and an independent third-party valuation firm to assist in determining the fair values of assets acquired, including intangible assets and liabilities assumed. The primary intangible assets acquired include customer relationship and trade names. Intangible assets are initially valued using a methodology commensurate with the intended use of the asset. The fair value of customer relationships is measured using the multi-period excess earnings method (“MPEEM”). The fair value of the trade names is measured using a relief-from-royalty (“RFR”) approach. The basis for future sales projections for both the MPEEM and RFR are based on internal revenue forecasts which the Company believes represents reasonable market participant assumptions. The future cash flows are discounted using an applicable discount rate. The key uncertainties in the calculations, as applicable, are the selection of an appropriate royalty rate, assumptions used in developing estimates of future cash flows, including revenue growth and expense forecasts, assumed customer attrition rates, as well as perceived risks associated with those forecasts in determining the discount rate. There is inherent uncertainty in forecasted cash flows and therefore, actual results may differ and could result in a subsequent impairment charge of acquired intangibles and/or goodwill.
The consideration for our acquisitions may include future payments that are contingent upon the occurrence of a particular event. We record a contingent consideration obligation for such contingent consideration payments at fair value on the acquisition date. We estimate the fair value of contingent consideration obligations through valuation models that incorporate probability adjusted assumptions related to the achievement of the milestones and the likelihood of making related payments. Significant judgment is employed in determining these assumptions as of the acquisition date and for each subsequent period. Accordingly, future business and economic conditions, as well as changes in any of the assumptions described above, can materially impact the fair value of contingent consideration recorded at each reporting period. See Note 3, "Acquisitions," for additional information. See Note 3, "Acquisitions," for additional information.
Valuation of long-lived assets
We periodically evaluate our long-lived assets, consisting principally of fixed and amortizable intangible assets for potential impairment. We evaluate our long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances suggest that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets may not be recoverable from the estimated undiscounted future cash flows.
Our judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on market and operational performance. Indicators of potential impairment include:
•
a significant change in the manner in which an asset group is used;
•
a significant decrease in the market value of an asset group;
•
identification of other impaired assets within a reporting unit;
•
a significant adverse change in its business or the industry in which it is sold;
•
a current period operating cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection or forecast that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the asset group; and
•
significant advances in our technologies that require changes in our manufacturing process.
We evaluate recoverability of long-lived assets and definite-lived intangible assets by estimating the undiscounted future cash flows associated with the expected uses and disposition of those assets. When those caparisons indicate that the carrying value of those assets is greater than the undiscounted cash flows, we recognize an impairment loss for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value. The Company has not made any material changes to the method of evaluating for impairment during the last three years. There were no indicators requiring further impairment testing on our long-lived assets during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 or 2021.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of cost over net assets of acquired businesses that are consolidated. We perform our annual assessment of goodwill on February 28th of each fiscal year and whenever events or changes in circumstances or a triggering event indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. An entity is permitted to first assess qualitatively whether it is necessary to perform a goodwill impairment test. Significant judgment is required to determine if an indication of impairment has taken place. Factors to be considered include the following: adverse change in operating results, decline in strategic business plans, significantly lower future cash flows, and sustainable declines in market data such as market capitalization. The quantitative impairment test is required only if the entity concludes that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. We determine the fair value of a reporting unit based on an income approach utilizing a discounted cash flow adjusted for entity specific factors. The income approach includes estimates and assumptions about revenue growth rates, operating margins and terminal growth rates, discounted by an estimated weighted-average cost of capital derived from other publicly-traded companies that are similar but not identical from an operational and economic standpoint. These estimates are based on historical experiences, our projects of future operating activity and our weighted-average cost of capital. A significant change in events, circumstances or any of these assumptions could adversely affect these estimates, which could result in an impairment.
We performed our annual assessment of goodwill on February 28, 2022 and noted no triggering events from the analysis date to March 31, 2022 and determined that there was no impairment to goodwill. See Note 5, “Goodwill,” for further information regarding the our goodwill valuation assumptions.
Income taxes
Our provision for income taxes is comprised of a current and a deferred portion. The current income tax provision is calculated as the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current fiscal year. The deferred income tax provision is calculated for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards using expected tax rates in effect in the years during which the differences are expected to reverse. All deferred tax assets and liabilities are presented as non-current in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
We regularly assess our ability to realize our deferred tax assets. Assessments of the realization of deferred tax assets require that management consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, and make significant judgments about many factors, including the amount and likelihood of future taxable income. Based on all the available evidence, we have recorded valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realizable due to the taxable losses that have been incurred since our inception and uncertainty around our future profitability.
Accounting for income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if, based on the technical merits, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We reevaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activity. Any changes in these factors could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision. See Note 13, “Income Taxes,” of our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our income tax assumptions and expenses.