ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and analysis includes forward-looking information that involves risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements because of many factors, including those discussed under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
The following discussion highlights our results of operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the twelve months ended June 30, 2022 and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of the statements of financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis are based on our audited financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which we have prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. You should read the discussion and analysis together with such financial statements and the related notes thereto.
We are not currently profitable, and we cannot provide any assurance that we will ever be profitable. We incurred a net loss of $9,059,923 for the twelve months ended June 30, 2022, and we incurred a net loss of $29,277,016 for the period from November 14, 2017 (date of incorporation) to June 30, 2022.
The assessment of the Company’s ability to meet its future obligations is inherently judgmental, subjective and susceptible to change. Based on their current forecast, management believes that it will have sufficient cash and cash equivalents to maintain the Company’s planned operations for the next twelve months following the issuance of these financial statements; however, there is uncertainty in the forecast and therefore the Company cannot assert that it is probable. The Company has considered both quantitative and qualitative factors that are known or reasonably knowable as of the date of these financial statements are issued and concluded that there are conditions present in the aggregate that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
In response to the conditions, management plans include generating cash by completing financing transactions, which may include offerings of common stock. However, these plans are subject to market conditions, and are not within the Company’s control, and therefore, cannot be deemed probable. There is no assurance that the Company will be successful in implementing their plans. As a result, the Company has concluded that management’s plans do not alleviate substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Basis of Presentation
The financial statements contained herein have been prepared in accordance with GAAP and the requirements of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates if conditions differ from our assumptions. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 in the “Notes to Financial Statements,” we believe the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in preparation of our financial statements.
Internally-Developed Capitalized Software
We capitalize certain costs related to internal-use software, primarily consisting of direct labor and third-party vendor costs associated with creating the software. Software development projects generally include three stages: the preliminary project stage (all costs are expensed as incurred), the application development stage (certain costs are capitalized and certain costs are expensed as incurred) and the post-implementation/operation stage (all costs are expensed as incurred). Costs capitalized in the application development stage include costs related to the design and implementation of the selected software components, software build and configuration infrastructure, and software interfaces. Capitalization of costs requires judgment in determining when a project has reached the application development stage, the proportion of time spent in the application development stage, and the period over which we expect to benefit from the use of that software. Once the software is placed in service, these costs are amortized on the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the software, which is generally three years.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have issued three types of stock-based awards under our stock plans: stock options, restricted stock units and stock warrants. All stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and independent contractors are measured at fair value at each grant date. We rely on the Black-Scholes option pricing model for estimating the fair value of stock-based awards granted, and expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of the Company’s stock prices. Stock options generally vest over two years from the grant date and generally have ten-year contractual terms. Restricted stock units generally have a term of 12 months from the closing date of the agreement. Stock warrants issued have a term of five years. Information about the assumptions used in the calculation of stock-based compensation expense is set forth in Notes 4 and 6 in the Notes to Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
We generate substantially all our revenue from contractual arrangements with businesses, colleges and universities and K-12 schools to provide a comprehensive platform of tightly integrated technology and technology enabled services related to product offerings. Revenue related to our licensing arrangements is generally recognized ratably over the contract term commencing upon platform delivery. Revenue related to licensing arrangements recognized in a given time period will consist of contracts that went live in the current period or that went live in previous periods and are currently ongoing.
Performance Obligations and Timing of Recognition
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the Customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied.
We derive revenue from annual licensing arrangements, including maintenance fees, setup fees and other fees for course development and miscellaneous items. Our contracts with Customers typically have at least a term of one year and have a single performance obligation. The promises to set up and provide a hosted platform of tightly integrated technology and services Partners need to attract, enroll, educate, and support students are not distinct within the context of the contracts. This performance obligation is satisfied as the Partners receive and consume benefits, which occurs ratably over the contract term.
Occasionally, we will provide professional services, such as custom development, non-complex implementation activities, training, and other various professional services. We evaluate these services to determine if they are distinct and separately identifiable in the context of the contract. In our contracts with Customers that contain multiple performance obligations because of this assessment, we allocate the transaction price to each separate performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. Standalone selling prices of our solutions and services are typically estimated based on observable transactions when the solutions or services are sold on a standalone basis. When standalone selling prices are not observable, we utilize a cost-plus margin approach to allocate the transaction price.
We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations because the consideration is allocated entirely to a wholly unsatisfied promise to transfer a service that forms part of a single performance obligation (i.e., consideration received is based on the level of product offerings, which is unknown in advance). During the year ended June 30, 2022, three customers comprised approximately 69% of total revenue. During the year ended June 30, 2021, two customers comprised approximately 76% of total revenue.
We also receive fees that are fixed in nature, such as annual license and maintenance charges. The fees are independent of the number of students that are enrolled in courses with our Customers and are allocated to and recognized ratably over the service period of the contract that the Company’s platform is made available to the Customer (i.e., the Customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit of the software over the contract service period).
The following factors affect the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of our revenue and cash flows:
● The majority of our Customers are private and public learning institutions across various domestic regions
● The majority of our Customers have annual payment terms
Accounts Receivable, Contract Assets and Liabilities
Balance sheet items related to contracts consist of accounts receivable (net) and contract liabilities on our balance sheets. Accounts receivable (net) is stated at net realizable value, and we utilize the allowance method to provide for doubtful accounts based on management’s evaluation of the collectability of the amounts due. Our estimates are reviewed and revised periodically based on historical collection experience and a review of the current status of accounts receivable. Historically, actual write-offs for uncollectible accounts have not significantly differed from prior estimates. There was no allowance for doubtful accounts on accounts receivable balances as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
We may recognize revenue prior to billing a Customer when we have satisfied or partially satisfied our performance obligations as billings to our Customers may not be made until after the service period has commenced. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we do not have any contract assets.
Contract liabilities as of each balance sheet date represent the excess of amounts billed or received as compared to amounts recognized in revenue on our statements of operations as of the end of the reporting period, and such amounts are reflected as a current liability on our balance sheets as deferred revenue. We generally receive payments prior to completion of the service period and our performance obligations. These payments are recorded as deferred revenue until the services are delivered or until our obligations are otherwise met, at which time revenue is recognized.
Some contracts also involve annual license fees, for which upfront amounts are received from Customers. In these contracts, the license fees received in advance of the platform’s launch are recorded as contract liabilities.
Results of Operations
Revenue
We generated revenues of $697,001 for the year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to $674,580 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Revenue growth compared to prior year for the twelve months ended June 30, 2022 was primarily driven by growth in the sale of annual license fees and associated implementation and customization services.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and personnel-related expenses, including executive management, legal, finance, human resources and other departments that do not provide direct operational services. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees and other corporate expense.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022, were $5,183,863 as compared to $4,620,431 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase of $563,432 is primarily due to stock-based compensation related to stock awards and options issued to its employees and board members in the fiscal year 2022.
Technology and Content Development
Technology and content development expenses consist primarily of personnel and personnel-related expense and contracted services associated with the ongoing improvement and maintenance of our platform as well as hosting and licensing costs. Technology and content expense also include the amortization of capitalized software costs.
Technology and content development expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022, were $3,059,962 as compared to $2,276,555 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase of $783,407 is primarily due to the recognition of a settlement obligation to a vendor for early termination of its agreement amounting to $229,076 in 2022, increase in the amortization of capitalized software and overall increase in payroll in fiscal year 2022.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense consist primarily of activities to attract Customers to our offerings. This includes personnel and personnel-related expenses, various search engine and social media costs as well as the cost of advertising.
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 were $1,509,694 as compared to $1,751,606 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease of $241,912 is primarily due to significantly increased expenditures in the fiscal year 2021 as the Company increased focus on digital presence to drive lead generation and pipeline growth in support of the sales and marketing division. In 2021, the Company focused on creation of value-added content, social posts and case studies which did not occur in significance in 2022.
Interest Income
For the year ended June 30, 2022, interest income totaled $9,230 as compared to interest income of $1,593 for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Interest Expense.
Interest expense amounted to $12,635 for the year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to interest expense (including amortization of issuance costs) of $3,613,873 for the year ended June 30, 2021. See Note 8 to Notes to Financial Statements.
Net Loss
Our net loss for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $9,059,923 as compared to a net loss for the year ended June 30, 2021 of $11,586,292. The loss was substantially lower during the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to 2021 as a result of interest expense incurred in connection with our Offering in the prior fiscal year. Our net loss from operations decreased because of the changes noted above.
Capital Expenditures
During the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had capital asset additions of $616,235 and $842,326, respectively, which were comprised of $599,660 and $768,899 respectively, in capitalized technology and content development, and $16,575 and $73,427, respectively, of property and equipment, including primarily computer equipment and software. We will continue to capitalize significant software development costs, comprised primarily of internal payroll, payroll related and contractor costs, as we build out and complete our technology platforms.
Financial Position, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
Overview
We are not currently profitable, and we cannot provide any assurance that we will ever be profitable, as indicated by our losses noted above.
During the period from November 14, 2017 (date of incorporation) to September 30, 2020, we raised net proceeds of approximately $11,760,000 from private placement financing transactions (stock and debt). On September 25, 2020, we completed the Offering of 3,000,000 shares of its common stock, $0.0001 par value per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share (total net proceeds of approximately $12.8 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering costs).
On August 2, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), under which, subject to specified terms and conditions, we may sell up to $16.5 million of shares of common stock. Our net proceeds under the Purchase Agreement will depend on the frequency of sales and the number of shares sold to Lincoln Park and the prices at which we sell shares to Lincoln Park. On August 2, 2021, we sold 759,109 shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park in an initial purchase under the Purchase Agreement for a total purchase price of $1,500,000. We also issued 152,715 shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park as consideration for its irrevocable commitment to purchase our common stock under the Purchase Agreement.
On February 16, 2022, we closed on an offering of common stock and received approximately $2.51 million of cash proceeds, net of underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering costs (Note 6 to the Financial Statements).
As of June 30, 2022, our cash balance totaled $7,155,367.
The Company is developing its customer base and has not completed its efforts to establish a stabilized source of revenue sufficient to cover its expenses. The Company has had a history of net losses and negative cash flows from operating activities since inception and expects to continue to incur net losses and use cash in its operations in the foreseeable future.
In addition, the Company has received a notice from the Nasdaq related to their failure to maintain a minimum bid price of $1 per share. The Company is not currently in compliance with the Nasdaq listing rules and if the Company does not regain compliance, the common stock of the Company could be delisted from the Nasdaq exchange. If the Company’s common stock is delisted, it may affect the Company’s ability to obtain financing, trade or sell shares of their common stock, and/or forecasted operations could be negatively impacted in an amount that the Company cannot currently quantify.
The assessment of the Company’s ability to meet its future obligations is inherently judgmental, subjective and susceptible to change. Based on their current forecast, management believes that it will have sufficient cash and cash equivalents to maintain the Company’s planned operations for the next twelve months following the issuance of these financial statements; however, there is uncertainty in the forecast and therefore the Company cannot assert that it is probable. The Company has considered both quantitative and qualitative factors that are known or reasonably knowable as of the date of these financial statements are issued and concluded that there are conditions present in the aggregate that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
In response to the conditions, management plans include generating cash by completing financing transactions, which may include offerings of common stock. However, these plans are subject to market conditions, and are not within the Company’s control, and therefore, cannot be deemed probable. There is no assurance that the Company will be successful in implementing their plans. As a result, the Company has concluded that management’s plans do not alleviate substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under applicable SEC rules.