Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to the historical financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risk, assumptions and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions, forecasts and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled "Risk Factors," which you should carefully read to gain an
understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Please also see the section titled "Forward-Looking Statements" at the beginning of this report.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development, and commercialization of novel small molecule therapeutics to address chronic and progressive fibrotic diseases. Our goal is to transform the treatment paradigm for patients suffering from these potentially life-threatening conditions for which there are no approved medicines or where existing approved medicines have limitations. Our lead product candidate, ANG-3070, is a highly selective oral tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor (TKI) in development as a treatment for fibrotic diseases, particularly in the kidney and lung. Enrollment is ongoing in a dose-finding Phase 2 trial of ANG-3070 in primary proteinuric kidney diseases (PPKD) and we expect to file an IND in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) by the end of 2022. We are also continuing to develop our preclinical programs. Our ROCK2 program is targeted towards the treatment of fibrotic diseases. Our CYP11B2 program is targeted towards diseases related to aldosterone synthase dysregulation.
Prior to January 2022 our lead product was ANG-3777, a hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) mimetic we were evaluating in multiple indications of acute organ injury, including delayed graft function (DGF) and for the treatment of AKI associated with cardiac surgery involving cardiopulmonary bypass (CSA-AKI). In 2021, we also studied ANG-3777 in patients with severe COVID-19 related pneumonia at high risk for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). On October 26, 2021, we announced the Phase 3 trial of ANG-3777 in DGF did not achieve its primary endpoint and the data were not expected to be sufficient evidence to support an indication in the studied DGF population. On December 9, 2021, we announced the Phase 2 trial of ANG-3777 in CSA-AKI did not achieve its primary endpoint. We do not intend to continue the clinical development plan for ANG-3777 set forth in the Vifor License, which had included a Phase 3 study in CSA-AKI and a Phase 4 confirmatory study in donor kidney transplant patients who were at risk for developing DGF, given we do not believe the earlier Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trial results in the respective indications support a regulatory approval. We have no funds budgeted for additional clinical trials for ANG-3777.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales since our inception and do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless we successfully develop and we or our collaborators commercialize our product candidates, which we do not expect to occur for several years, if ever. Our net losses were $54.6 million and $80.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $215.1 million. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As we seek to advance ANG-3070 in clinical trials and our other product candidates through preclinical development, our expenses and operating losses may increase over time.
In addition, if we seek regulatory approval for any of our wholly-owned product candidates or those for which we retain the right to commercialize in the future, we would need to incur additional expenses as we expand our clinical, regulatory, quality, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities, incur significant commercialization expenses for marketing, sales, manufacturing and distribution if we obtain marketing approval for such product candidates.
We rely on third parties in the conduct of our preclinical studies and clinical trials and for manufacturing and supply of our product candidates. We have no internal manufacturing capabilities, and we expect to continue to rely on third parties, many of whom are single-source suppliers, for our preclinical study and clinical trial materials. In addition, we do not yet have a marketing or sales organization or commercial infrastructure. Accordingly, we will incur significant expenses to develop a marketing and sales organization and commercial infrastructure in advance of generating any product sales of wholly-owned product candidates or those for which we retain the right to commercialize. Furthermore, we will need to make continued investment in development studies, registration activities and the development of commercial support functions including quality assurance and safety pharmacovigilance before we will be in a position to sell any of our product candidates, if approved.
The Initial Public Offering and Concurrent Private Placement
The Initial Public Offering (IPO) and Concurrent Private Placement, which both closed on February 9, 2021, generated aggregate net proceeds of approximately $107.0 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions, private placement fee and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has placed strains on the providers of healthcare services, including the healthcare institutions where we conduct our clinical trials. These strains have resulted in institutions prohibiting the initiation of new clinical trials, enrollment in existing trials and restricting the on-site monitoring of clinical trials. We also follow FDA guidance on clinical trial conduct during the COVID-19 pandemic, including the remote monitoring of clinical data.
The global pandemic of COVID-19 continues to rapidly evolve. The extent to which COVID-19 may continue impact our business, including our clinical trials, and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain due to the continuing emergence of new variants and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate duration of the pandemic and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease.
At this time, we do not expect any disruption in our supply chain of drugs necessary to conduct our clinical trials, and we believe we will be able to supply the drug needs of our clinical trials in 2022. However, we are continuing to evaluate our clinical supply chain in light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
License, Collaboration and Grant Agreements
License Agreement with Vifor Pharma
In November 2020, we granted Vifor Pharma, an exclusive, global (excluding Greater China), royalty-bearing license, for the commercialization of ANG-3777 in all Renal Indications, beginning with DGF and CSA-AKI. The Vifor License also grants Vifor Pharma exclusive rights, with a right to sublicense subject to our consent for certain specified conditions, to develop and manufacture ANG-3777 for commercialization in Renal Indications worldwide (excluding Greater China) in cooperation with us or independently. We retain the right to develop and commercialize combination therapy products combining ANG-3777 with our other proprietary molecules, subject to Vifor Pharma's right of first negotiation with respect to global (excluding Greater China) rights to such combination therapy products in the Renal Indications.
Pursuant to the Vifor License and specifically based upon the clinical development plan for ANG-3777 set forth in the Vifor License, we are entitled to receive $80 million in upfront and near-term clinical milestone payments, including $30 million in up-front cash that was received in November 2020, and a $30 million equity investment, a $5 million convertible note that subsequently converted into common stock with the IPO and $25 million of which was received in the Concurrent Private Placement with our IPO. We are also eligible to receive post-approval milestones of up to approximately $260.0 million and sales-related milestones of up to $1.585 billion, providing a total potential deal value of up to $1.925 billion (subject to certain specified reductions and offsets), plus tiered royalties on net sales of ANG-3777 at royalty rates of up to 40%. Under the Vifor License, we are responsible for executing a pre-specified clinical development plan designed to obtain regulatory approvals of ANG-3777 for DGF and CSA-AKI. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized license revenue related to the Vifor License of $27.5 million and $0.2 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded $2.3 million as the current portion of deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheet related to the Vifor License. As of December 31, 2020, we recorded $29.8 million as deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheet related to the Vifor License.
On October 26, 2021, we announced that the Phase 3 trial of ANG-3777 in DGF did not achieve its primary endpoint and the data were not expected to be sufficient evidence to support an indication in the studied DGF population. On December 14, 2021, we announced that the Phase 2 trial of ANG-3777 in CSA-AKI did not achieve its primary endpoint. The Vifor License includes additional milestone and royalty objectives related to the clinical development plan for ANG-3777 and we do not expect to receive any clinical, post-approval, or sales milestones, or royalties, as we do not intend to continue to pursue such clinical development plan for ANG-3777, which had included a Phase 3 study for CSA-AKI and a Phase 4 confirmatory study in DGF. In 2022, we and Vifor Pharma continue to work to complete the planned analyses of the results of the clinical trials announced in the fourth quarter of 2021 and to discuss the future of the collaboration based upon such analyses. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded the remaining performance obligation as current deferred revenue of $2.3 million which is expected to be completed by the end of 2022.
Components of Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the key factors our management believes are necessary for an understanding of our financial statements.
Revenue
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our revenue to date primarily has been derived from government funding consisting of U.S. government grants and contracts, and revenue under our license agreements, specifically the Vifor License.
Grant Revenue
Our grants and contracts reimburse us for direct and indirect costs relating to the grant projects and also provide us with a pre-negotiated profit margin on total direct and indirect costs of the grant award, excluding subcontractor costs, after giving effect to directly attributable costs and allowable overhead costs. Funds received from grants and contracts are generally deemed to be earned and recognized as revenue as allowable costs are incurred during the grant or contract period and the right to payment is realized.
Contract Revenue
Our license agreements comprise elements of upfront license fees, milestone payments based on development and royalties based on net product sales. The timing of our operating cash flows may vary significantly from the recognition of the related revenue. Income from upfront payments is recognized when we satisfy the performance obligations in the contract, which can result in recognition at either a point in time or over the period of continued involvement. Other revenue, such as milestone payments, are recognized when achieved.
Our revenue to date has been generated from payments received pursuant to the Vifor License Agreement. We recognize revenue from upfront payments over the term of our estimated period of performance using a cost-based input method under Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
In addition to receiving an upfront payment, we may also be entitled to milestones and other contingent payments upon achieving predefined objectives. If a milestone is considered probable of being reached, and if it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone amount would also be included in the transaction price.
We expect that any license revenue we generate from any future collaboration partners, will fluctuate in the future as a result of the timing and amount of upfront, milestones and other collaboration agreement payments and other factors.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Grant Revenue
Our cost of grant revenue primarily relates to personnel-related costs and expenses for grant projects.
Research and Development Expenses
To date, our research and development expenses have primarily related to discovery efforts and preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
▪personnel costs, including salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits and stock-based compensation, for personnel in research and development functions;
▪costs associated with medical affairs activities;
▪fees paid to consultants, clinical testing sites and contract research organizations (CROs), including in connection with our preclinical studies and clinical trials, and other related clinical trial fees, such as for investigator grants, patient screening, laboratory work, clinical trial database management, clinical trial material management and statistical compilation, analysis and reporting;
▪contracted research and license agreement fees with no alternative future use;
▪costs related to acquiring, manufacturing and maintaining clinical trial materials and laboratory supplies;
▪depreciation of equipment and facilities;
▪legal expenses related to clinical trial agreements and material transfer agreements; and
▪costs related to preparation of regulatory submissions and compliance with regulatory requirements.
Other than with respect to reimbursable expenses required to be recorded under our government grants and contracts, we do not allocate our expenses by product candidates. A significant amount of our direct research and development expenses include payroll and other personnel expenses for our departments that support multiple product candidate research and development programs and, other than as specified above, we do not record research and development expenses by product. However, research and development expenses were primarily driven by expenses relating to the development of ANG-3777 and ANG-3070 in 2021 and 2020. Of our total
research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, 62% and 73%, respectively, of such expenses were from external third-party sources and the remaining 38% and 27%, respectively, were from internal sources.
We expect our research and development expenses to be slightly lower in the near term, even though we will continue the development of our product candidates and continue to invest in research and development activities. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming, and successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of any of our clinical or preclinical product candidates or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from these product candidates may commence. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
▪the scope, rate of progress and expense of our ongoing, as well as any additional, clinical trials and other research and development activities;
▪future preclinical and clinical trial results;
▪obtaining market access and reimbursement approvals; and
▪the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct preclinical or clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our preclinical or clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of our clinical development programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, such as salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits and stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, operational, finance and human resources functions. Other significant general and administrative expenses include allocation of facilities costs, accounting and legal services and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents. A portion of the general and administrative expenses are reimbursed through the overhead rates contained in our grants with the U.S. Government.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses to be generally consistent in the near term to support our continued research and development activities. We also expect to generally maintain our current level of expenses associated with operating as a public company, including expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and standards applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Other Income (Expense)
Convertible Notes Recorded at Fair Value
We elected the fair value option for recognition of our convertible notes. Our convertible notes were subject to re-measurement each reporting period with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statements of operations. All of our convertible notes were converted into shares of our common stock upon the closing of our initial public offering.
Liability Classified Series C Convertible Preferred Stock Recorded at Fair Value
Series C convertible preferred stock includes settlement features that result in liability classification. The initial carrying value of the Series C convertible preferred stock was accreted to the settlement value, the fair value of the securities to be issued upon the conversion of the Series C Preferred Stock. The discount to the settlement value was accreted to interest expense using the effective interest method. During 2020, certain of the convertible notes were exchanged for Series C convertible preferred stock. As the exchange was accounted for as a modification, the Series C convertible preferred stock that was exchanged for the convertible notes (the Exchanged Series C Shares) continued to be recorded at fair value. The Exchanged Series C Shares were subject to re-measurement each reporting with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statements of operations. All shares of our Series C convertible preferred stock converted into common stock in connection with the IPO.
Warrant Liability
We have accounted for certain of our freestanding warrants to purchase shares of our common stock as liabilities measured at fair value, in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (ASC 815). The warrants are subject to re-measurement at each reporting period with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statements of operations.
Foreign Exchange Transaction Gain
Foreign currency transaction gains, primarily related to intercompany loans, are recorded as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations.
Earnings in Equity Method Investment
Earnings in equity method investment represents our 10% interest in NovaPark that is accounted for under the equity method.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations
Comparison for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
_______________________
*Not meaningful
Contract Revenue
Contract revenue increased by $27.3 million, from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is attributable to revenue recognized related to the upfront payment from Vifor Pharma pursuant to the Vifor License Agreement entered into in 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we have substantially satisfied the performance obligation under the Agreement which caused an acceleration of the deferred revenue. We do not expect to receive any further substantial revenues under the Vifor License Agreement and we expect the remaining unearned revenue under the Vifor License Agreement to be recognized by the end of 2022.
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue decreased by $1.9 million, or 70.0%, from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in reimbursable costs relating to our grant from the U.S. Department of Defense for the year ended December 31, 2021. We do not expect to receive any further substantial grant revenues for the foreseeable future.
Cost of Grant Revenue
Cost of grant revenue decreased by $0.8 million, or 63.6%, from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in personnel-related costs and expenses applied for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $9.7 million, or 24.9%, from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase of $8.5 million in personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expenses, as a result from increases in headcount and an increase of $1.0 million in CRO and CMO expenses from increased clinical and non-clinical trial activities, primarily related to the development of ANG-3777 and ANG-3070. These increases were partially offset by an employee retention credit of $1.2 million received in 2021 as a reduction to payroll taxes.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.5 million, or 2.8%, from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase of $2.5 million of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expenses, resulting from increases in headcount and vesting of performance-based stock units upon IPO, and an increase of $2.7 million of corporate fees mainly due to purchase of business insurance, offset by a reduction of $5.1 million of professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting, tax and other services primarily associated with preparing us for our IPO in 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net changed by a reduction in expense of $9.6 million, from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021. This decrease in expense is primarily attributable to a reduction in interest expense of $7.0 million due to interest associated with convertible notes and Series C convertible preferred stock in 2020 that were converted into equity upon our IPO in February 2021 and an increase of $2.6 million in fair value of our warrant liability, convertible notes, and Series C convertible preferred stock for which we have elected the fair value option. The convertible notes and warrants both require re-measurement at each balance sheet date with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statement of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception, and we anticipate that we will incur losses for at least the next several years. To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have funded our operations primarily through the receipt of grants, the sale of debt and equity securities, and proceeds from license agreements. In February 2021, we generated aggregate net proceeds of approximately $107.0 million from our IPO and Concurrent Private Placement, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions. As of December 31, 2021, we had $88.8 million of cash and cash equivalents and an accumulated deficit of $215.1 million.
Prior to our IPO, we issued $36.2 million in aggregate principal amount of convertible notes to various investors and we also issued 34,928 shares of Series C convertible preferred stock at $642.75 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $22.3 million. Upon the closing of our IPO, all then outstanding convertible notes and shares of convertible preferred stock were converted into 5,870,829 shares of our common stock.
In April 2020, we were approved for and received a loan of approximately $0.9 million from Hanmi Bank under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act) and the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA). The loan was evidenced by a promissory note and agreement, dated April 21, 2020 (the PPP Note). The PPP Note proceeds were available to be used to pay for payroll costs, including salaries, commissions, and similar compensation, group health care benefits, and paid leaves; rent; utilities; and interest on certain other outstanding debt, if any. The interest rate on the PPP Note was a fixed rate of 1% per annum. The SBA approved our PPP Loan forgiveness application on May 26, 2021 for the entire principal amount of the PPP Loan and accrued interest.
Future Cash Needs and Funding Requirements
Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least 12 months, well into 2023, following the issuance date of our consolidated financial statements. However, we have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of biotechnology products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
▪the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing ANG-3070 or any other product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
▪the outcome of our ongoing and future clinical trials, including our Phase 2 clinical trial of ANG-3070 in patients with PPKD;
▪whether we are able to take advantage of any FDA expedited development and approval programs for any of our product candidates;
▪the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business, including our clinical trials and financial condition;
▪the willingness of the FDA and foreign regulatory authorities to accept the results of our completed, ongoing, and planned clinical trials and preclinical studies and other work, as the basis for review and approval of ANG-3070;
▪the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining and maintaining FDA and any foreign regulatory approvals;
▪the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue, including our product candidates in preclinical development;
▪the ability of our product candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
▪our need to expand our research and development activities, including to conduct additional clinical trials;
▪market acceptance of our product candidates, including physician adoption, market access, pricing and reimbursement;
▪the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, products, product candidates and technologies;
▪our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
▪our need and ability to hire additional personnel, including management, clinical development, medical and commercial personnel;
▪the effect of competing technological, market developments and government policy;
▪the costs associated with being a public company, including our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems;
▪the costs associated with securing and establishing commercialization and manufacturing capabilities, as well as those associated with packaging, warehousing and distribution;
▪the costs associated with being a commercial company with approved products for sale, including our obligation to meet applicable healthcare laws and regulations and implement robust compliance programs;
▪the economic and other terms, timing of and success of our existing licensing arrangements and any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter in the future and timing and amount of payments thereunder; and
▪the timing, receipt and amount of sales and general commercial success of any future approved products, if any.
Until such time as we or our collaborators can generate significant revenue from sales of ANG-3070 or any other product candidate, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through public or private equity offerings or debt financings or other sources of capital, including collaborations, licenses, credit or loan facilities, receipt of research contributions or grants, tax credit revenue or a combination of one or more of these funding sources. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through additional collaborations, or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our net cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $52.6 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $54.6 million and a change in net operating assets and liabilities of $26.0 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $27.8 million. The net non-cash charges were primarily related to a $14.0 million change in fair value of convertible notes, Series C convertible preferred stock and warrant liabilities, amortization of debt issuance costs of $1.9 million, and stock-based compensation expense of $12.0 million, partially offset by a gain of $0.9 million from the forgiveness of our PPP loan. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was due to a decrease of $27.5 million in deferred revenue due to substantial satisfaction of our performance obligation under the Vifor License Agreement, a decrease of $0.9 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to timing of invoices and an increase of $0.8 million in grants receivable due to the recognition of the qualified Australian tax credit, partially offset by a decrease of $4.0 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, primarily due to the subsequent receipt of $5.0 million convertible note receivable under Vifor License Agreement in 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $22.9 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $80.1 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $31.5 million and a change in net operating assets and liabilities of $25.8 million. The net non-cash charges were primarily related to a $16.5 million change in fair value of convertible notes, Series C convertible preferred stock and warrant liabilities, amortization of debt issuance costs of $7.7 million, stock-based compensation expense of $4.7 million and placement agent fees of $1.7 million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was due to an increase of $29.8 million in deferred revenue due to the upfront fee from the Vifor License Agreement and $3.7 million in accrued expenses due to increased clinical-related activities, partially offset by an increase of $2.0 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a decrease of $5.6 million in accounts payable due to our overall growth, increased research and development spending and timing of payments.
Investing activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash used in investing activities of $0.4 million and $41,000, respectively, was primarily used to purchase of fixed assets for research activities.
Financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $107.2 million, primarily due to net proceeds of $107.5 million from the IPO and Concurrent Private Placement, $1.8 million from the exercise of warrants and stock options, and $0.3 million from a sale and leaseback arrangement, partially offset by taxes paid related to net share settlement upon vesting of restricted stock awards of $2.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $52.4 million, primarily due to net proceeds of $31.2 million from the issuance of convertible notes and warrants, $20.0 million from the issuance of liability classified Series C convertible preferred stock net of issuance costs and $0.9 million in proceeds from our PPP loan.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The critical accounting policies requiring estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Contract Revenue
We account for revenue earned from contracts with customers under Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) ("ASC 606"). Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(1) Identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(3) Determine the transaction price;
(4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(5) Recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract, whether each promised good or service is distinct, and determine those that are performance obligations. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when or as the performance obligation is satisfied.
We enter into agreements under which it may obtain upfront payments, milestone payments, royalty payments and other fees. Promises under these arrangements may include licenses of intellectual property, research services, including selection campaign research services for certain replacement targets, the obligation to share information during the research and the participation of alliance managers and in joint research committees, joint patent committees and joint steering committees. We assess these promises within the context of the agreements to determine the performance obligations.
Licenses of Intellectual Property: If a license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other promises or performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring proportional performance for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront payments. We evaluate the measure of proportional performance each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone payments: We evaluate whether the regulatory and development milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amounts to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. We evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjusts the estimate of the overall transaction price.
Sales-based milestones and royalties: For sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, we determine whether the sole or predominant item to which the royalties relate is a license. When the license is the sole or predominant item to which the sales-based royalty relates, we recognize revenue at the later of: (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any sales-based royalty revenue resulting from any license agreement.
Deferred revenue, which is a contract liability, represents amounts received by us for which the related revenues have not been recognized because one or more of the revenue recognition criteria have not been met. The current portion of deferred revenue represents the amount expected to be recognized within one year from the consolidated balance sheet date based on the estimated performance period of the underlying performance obligation. The noncurrent portion of deferred revenue represents amounts expected to be recognized after one year through the end of the performance period of the performance obligation.
Using the cost-based input method, we recognize revenue based on actual costs incurred as a percentage of total estimated costs as we complete each performance obligation. As such, we use significant assumptions to determine the total estimated costs for us to complete the performance obligation identified under the Vifor License Agreement as well as the performance period. We reassess the total estimated costs and performance period at each reporting period. We changed the estimated costs significantly from $231.5 million at inception (November 2020) to $26.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and revised the performance period from 9.5 years to 2.2 years due to new information available at each reporting period. As of December 31, 2021, we determined we have substantially completed our performance obligation under the Vifor License Agreement. The effect of this change in estimate was an increase in contract revenue by $24.2 million, a reduction in net loss by $24.2 million and an increase in basic and diluted earnings per share by $0.86 for the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 3 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Grant Revenue
We concluded that our government grants are not within the scope of ASC 606 as they do not meet the definition of a contract with a customer. We have concluded that the grants meet the definition of a contribution and are non-reciprocal transactions, and have also concluded that Subtopic 958-605, Not-for-Profit-Entities-Revenue Recognition, does not apply, as we are a business entity and the grants are with governmental agencies.
In the absence of applicable guidance under GAAP, we developed a policy for the recognition of grant revenue when the allowable costs are incurred and the right to payment is realized.
We believe this policy is consistent with the overarching premise in ASC 606, to ensure that revenue recognition reflects the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services, even though there is no exchange as defined in ASC 606. We believe the recognition of revenue as costs are incurred and amounts become realizable is analogous to the concept of transfer of control of a service over time under ASC 606.
Research and Development
Research and development costs include, but are not limited to, payroll and personnel expenses, laboratory supplies, preclinical studies, compound manufacturing costs, consulting costs and allocated overhead, including rent, equipment, depreciation and utilities. Research and development cost may be offset by research and development refundable tax rebates received by our wholly-owned Australian subsidiary.
We have agreements with various Contract Research Organizations ("CROs") and third-party vendors. We estimate research and development accruals of amounts due to the CRO based on the level of services performed, progress of the studies, including the phase or completion of events, and contracted costs. We include the
estimated costs of research and development provided, but not yet invoiced, in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. We record payments made to CROs under this arrangement in advance of the performance of the related services as prepaid expenses and other current assets until the services are rendered. We make judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued liabilities. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for all stock-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of stock options, restricted stock awards ("RSAs"), restricted stock units ("RSUs"), including restricted stock units with non-market performance and service conditions ("PSUs") to be recognized in the financial statements, based on their respective grant date fair values. We estimate the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We value the RSAs, RSUs and PSUs based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management's best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management's judgment. We record expense for stock-based compensation related to stock options, RSAs and RSUs over the requisite service period. As the PSUs have a performance condition, we recognize compensation expense for each vesting tranche over the respective requisite service period of each tranche if and when our management deems probable that the performance conditions will be satisfied. We may recognize a cumulative true-up adjustment related to PSUs once a condition becomes probable of being satisfied if the related service period had commenced in a prior period. We record all stock-based compensation costs in general and administrative or research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations based upon the respective employee or non-employee's roles within our company. We record forfeitures as they occur.
See Note 9 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options. Certain of such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation could be materially different.
Warrant Liability
We account for certain common stock warrants outstanding as a liability, in accordance with ASC 815, at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each reporting period until exercised, and we recognize any change in fair value in the consolidated statements of operations as a component of other income (expense). We have estimated the fair value of the warrants issued by us using a variant of the Black Scholes option pricing model. We valued the underlying equity included in the Black Scholes option pricing model based on the equity value implied from sales of preferred and common stock.
Income Taxes
We record income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes (ASC 740), which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. We determine deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. We provide valuation allowances if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit would more likely than not be realized assuming examination by the taxing authority. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. To date, there have been no interest or penalties charged in relation to the unrecognized tax benefits.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full description of recent accounting standards.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are a smaller reporting company and an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act for emerging growth companies include presentation of only two years of audited financial statements in a registration statement for an initial public offering, an exemption from the requirement to provide an auditor's report on internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended (Sarbanes-Oxley) an exemption from any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation, and less extensive disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that (i) we are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting standards as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2026, (ii) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more, (iii) the date on which we are deemed to be a "large accelerated filer," as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act), which means the market value of equity securities that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter and (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still qualify as a "smaller reporting company" and/or “non-accelerated filer” which may allow us to take advantage of many of the same exemptions from disclosure requirements including not being required to comply for a period of time with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley, and reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements.
Item7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
The financial statements of Angion Biomedica Corp, listed below are set forth in Item 8 of this Annual Report for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (Moss Adams LLP, Seattle, Washington, PCAOB ID: 659)
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
Angion Biomedica Corp.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Angion Biomedica Corp. (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the related consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, stockholders’ equity (deficit) and cash flows for the years then ended, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audit, we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures to respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ Moss Adams LLP
Seattle, Washington
March 30, 2022
We have served as the Company's auditor since 2018.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(in thousands, except share and per share amounts)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
(in thousands, except share and per share amounts)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
(in thousands, except share amounts)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
(in thousands, except share amounts)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(in thousands)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1-Description of the Business and Financial Condition
Angion Biomedica Corp. ("Angion" or", the "Company") is a clinical biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of novel small molecule therapeutics to address acute organ injuries and fibrotic diseases. The Company was incorporated in Delaware in 1998.
Forward Stock Split
On January 25, 2021, the board of directors of the Company approved an amendment to the Company's certificate of incorporation to effect a forward stock split ("Forward Split") of shares of the Company's common stock on a one-for 1.55583 basis, which was effected on February 1, 2021. All references to common stock, convertible preferred stock, warrants to purchase common stock, stock options, restricted stock awards ("RSAs"), restricted stock units ("RSUs"), including restricted stock units with non-market performance and service conditions ("PSUs"), per share amounts and related information contained in the consolidated financial statements have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the effect of the forward stock split for all periods presented. No fractional shares of the Company's common stock were issued in connection with the Forward Split. Any fractional share resulting from the Forward Split was rounded down to the nearest whole share, and any stockholder entitled to fractional shares as a result of the Forward Split will received a cash payment in lieu of receiving fractional shares.
Initial Public Offering and the Concurrent Private Placement
On February 9, 2021, the Company’s registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-252177) relating to its initial public offering (IPO) of common stock became effective. The IPO closed on February 9, 2021 at which time the Company issued 5,750,000 shares of its common stock at a price to the public of $16.00 per share, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase an additional 750,000 shares of common stock. In addition to the shares being sold in the IPO, the Company sold an additional 1,562,500 shares of its common stock at the public offering price of $16.00 per share to entities affiliated with Vifor International, Ltd., an existing stockholder (the “Concurrent Private Placement”) for gross proceeds of $25.0 million. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, all of the outstanding shares of convertible preferred stock and outstanding convertible notes automatically converted into shares of common stock.
The IPO and Concurrent Private Placement generated aggregate net proceeds of approximately $107.0 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions, private placement fee and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company.
Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, there were no shares of convertible preferred stock outstanding and there were no convertible notes outstanding. In connection with the closing of the IPO, the Company restated its Restated Certificate of Incorporation to change the authorized capital stock to 300,000,000 shares designated as common stock, and 10,000,000 shares designated as preferred stock, with a par value of $0.01 per share and $0.01 per share, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, the Company has devoted substantially all of its efforts and financial resources to conducting research and development activities, including drug discovery and pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, establishing and maintaining its intellectual property portfolio, organizing and staffing the Company, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. The Company has incurred losses from operations and negative cash flows from operating activities since inception and expects to continue to incur substantial losses for the next several years as it continues to fully develop and, if approved, commercialize its product candidates. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $88.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and an accumulated deficit of $215.1 million. Prior to its IPO, the Company has funded its operations through United States government grants, the issuance of convertible notes (see Note 6), sales of convertible preferred stock and common stock (see Notes 7) and warrants (see Note 10) and licensing agreements (see Note 12).
The planned expansion of the Company's clinical and discovery programs will require significant funds. Management expects to continue to incur significant expenses and to incur operating losses for the foreseeable
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
future. The Company has evaluated and concluded there are no conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year following the date these consolidated financial statements are issued and believes its existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet the projected operating requirements well into 2023.
Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The Company's consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") and include the accounts of the Company, its wholly owned subsidiary, Angion Biomedica Europe Limited, which was dissolved on March 16, 2021, and its wholly owned subsidiary, Angion Pty Ltd., which was established on August 22, 2019. The Company established Angion Pty Ltd., an Australian subsidiary, for the purpose of qualifying for research credits for studies conducted in Australia. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Segments
Operating segments are identified as components of an enterprise about which separate discrete financial information is available for evaluation by the chief operating decision-maker (“CODM”) in making decisions regarding resource allocation and assessing performance. The Company views its operations and manages its business as one operating segment.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to the useful lives of long-lived assets, the measurement of stock-based compensation, change in fair value of warrant liabilities prior to IPO, accruals for research and development activities, income taxes and revenue recognition. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on other relevant assumptions that are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions
The United States Dollar (“USD”) is the functional currency for the Company’s operations outside the United States. Accordingly, nonmonetary assets and liabilities originally acquired or assumed in other currencies are recorded in USD at the exchange rates in effect at the date they were acquired or assumed. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in other currencies are translated into USD at the exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date. Translation adjustments are recorded in other comprehensive income (loss) in the consolidated statements of operations. Gains and losses realized from non-USD transactions, including intercompany balances not considered as permanent investments, denominated in currencies other than an entity’s functional currency are included in other income (expense) in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Concentrations of Credit Risk and Off-Balance Sheet Risk
Cash and cash equivalents are financial instruments that are potentially subject to concentrations of credit risk. The Company's cash and cash equivalents are deposited in accounts at large financial institutions, and amounts may exceed federally insured limits. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts and believes it is not exposed to significant risk on its cash balances due to the financial position of the depository institution in which those deposits are held.
Additionally, the Company established guidelines regarding approved investments and maturities of investments, which are designed to maintain safety and liquidity.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
The Company maintains its cash equivalents in securities and money market funds with original maturities less than three months.
The Company has no financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk of loss.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company’s cash equivalents were held in institutions in the United States and included deposits in a money market fund which were unrestricted as to withdrawal or use.
Grants Receivable
Grants receivable is comprised of unbilled amounts due from various grants from the National Institutes of Health ("NIH") and other U.S. government agencies for costs incurred prior to the period end under reimbursement contracts. All amounts are readily available for draw from the Federal Government Payment Management System and, accordingly, no allowance for doubtful amounts has been established. If amounts become uncollectible, they are charged to operations.
Deferred Offering Costs
Deferred offering costs consist of legal and accounting fees incurred through the balance sheet date that were directly related to the Company's IPO and were reflected as issuance costs upon the completion of the offering. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, $2.8 million of deferred costs previously included in prepaid expenses and other current assets were netted with additional paid in capital in the consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded deferred offering costs of zero and $2.0 million, respectively.
Property and Equipment
Property, equipment and leasehold improvements are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization is computed using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives as follows:
Normal repairs and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If circumstances require a long-lived asset or asset group to be tested for possible impairment, the Company first compares undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group to its carrying value. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset or asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying value exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary. The impairment losses as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were zero and $58 thousand, respectively.
Fair Value Measurement
Certain assets and liabilities are carried at fair value under GAAP. Fair value is determined using the principles of ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement. Fair value is described as the price that would be received to sell an asset or
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The fair value hierarchy prioritizes and defines the inputs to valuation techniques as follows:
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets.
Level 2: Inputs are observable for the asset or liability either directly or through corroboration with observable market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs.
The inputs used to measure the fair value of an asset or a liability are categorized within levels of the fair value hierarchy. The fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the same level of the fair value hierarchy as the lowest level input that is significant to the measurement.
The Company's cash and cash equivalents, accounts payable and accrued expenses are carried at cost, which approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of these instruments.
Leases
The Company accounts for its leases under ASC 842, Leases. Under this guidance, arrangements meeting the definition of a lease are classified as operating or finance leases, and are recorded on the consolidated balance sheets as both a right of use asset and a lease liability, calculated by discounting fixed lease payments over the lease term at the rate implicit in the lease or the Company's incremental borrowing rate. Lease liabilities are increased by interest and reduced by payments each period, and the right of use asset is amortized over the lease term. For operating leases, interest on the lease liability and the amortization of the right of use asset results in straight-line rent expense over the lease term. Variable lease expenses are recorded when incurred.
In calculating the right of use assets and lease liabilities, the Company elects to combine lease and non-lease components. The Company excludes short-term leases having initial terms of 12 months or less from the new guidance as an accounting policy election, and recognizes rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Investments in Related Party Entities
The Company holds a 10% and a 2.4% interest in two entities, NovaPark, LLC ("NovaPark") and Ohr Cosmetics, LLC ("Ohr"), respectively. There is common ownership between the Director and Chairman Emeritus of the Company and each entity, and our Chief Executive Officer is also owns approximately 0.80% of the membership interests in Ohr. See Note 15. In accordance with ASC 323, Investments -Equity Method and Joint Ventures, the Company has significant influence but not control over NovaPark as its ownership in the limited liability company exceeds 3-5%. Accordingly, the Company records the NovaPark investment under the equity method of accounting. The Ohr investment is recorded at cost.
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for certain common stock warrants outstanding as a liability, in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each reporting period until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations as a component of other income (expense). The fair value of the warrants issued by the Company has been estimated using a variant of the Black Scholes option pricing model. The underlying equity included in the Black Scholes option pricing model was valued based on the closing price of common stock at each measurement date.
Convertible Notes Payable at Fair Value
As permitted under ASC 825, Financial Instruments ("ASC 825"), the Company has elected the fair value option for recognition of its convertible notes. In accordance with ASC 825, the Company recognizes these convertible notes at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in the consolidated statements of operations. The fair value option may be applied instrument by instrument, but it is irrevocable. As a result of applying the fair value option, direct costs and fees related to the convertible notes were recognized in general and administrative
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
expense in earnings as incurred and not deferred. The estimated fair value of the convertible notes was determined by utilizing a present value cash flow model and the values of the equity underlying the conversion options were estimated using company equity values implied from the Subject Company Transaction Method which includes the back-solve and scenario-based methods (Probability Weighted Expected Return Method). See Note 4. Accrued interest for the notes has been included in the change in fair value of convertible notes in the consolidated statements of operations. All outstanding convertible notes were converted into common stock upon the close of the IPO on February 9, 2021 and no balances remained outstanding as of December 31, 2021. See Note 6.
Convertible Preferred Stock
Series C convertible preferred stock included settlement features that result in liability classification. The initial carrying value of the Series C convertible preferred stock was accreted to the settlement value, the fair value of the securities issued upon the conversion of the Series C convertible preferred stock. The discount to the settlement value was accreted to interest expense using the effective interest method. During 2020, certain convertible notes were exchanged for Series C convertible preferred stock. As the exchange was accounted for as a modification, the Series C convertible preferred stock that was exchanged for the convertible notes was recorded at fair value and subject to re-measurement at each reporting period with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statements of operations. All outstanding shares of convertible preferred stock were converted into common stock upon the close of the Company’s IPO on February 9, 2021. See Note 7. As of December 31, 2021, there was no convertible preferred stock outstanding.
Treasury Stock
The Company records the repurchase of shares of common stock at cost based on the settlement date of the transaction. These shares are classified as treasury stock, which is a reduction to stockholders' equity. Treasury stock is included in authorized and issued shares but excluded from outstanding shares. As of December 31, 2021, all outstanding treasury shares were retired in October 2021 upon approval by the Board of Directors.
Revenue
The Company does not have any products approved for sale and has not generated any revenue from product sales. The Company’s revenue to date has been primarily derived from government funding consisting of U.S. government grants and contracts, and revenue under its license agreements.
Contract Revenue
The Company accounts for revenue earned from contracts with customers under Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) ("ASC 606"). Under ASC 606, the Company recognizes revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following five steps:
(1) Identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(3) Determine the transaction price;
(4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(5) Recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
At contract inception, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract, whether each promised good or service is distinct, and determines those that are performance obligations. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when or as the performance obligation is satisfied.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
The Company enters into agreements under which it may obtain upfront payments, milestone payments, royalty payments and other fees. Promises under these arrangements may include research licenses, research services, including selection campaign research services for certain replacement targets, the obligation to share information during the research and the participation of alliance managers and in joint research committees, joint patent committees and joint steering committees. The Company assesses these promises within the context of the agreements to determine the performance obligations.
Licenses of Intellectual Property: If a license to its intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other promises or performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring proportional performance for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront payments. The Company evaluates the measure of proportional performance each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone payments: The Company evaluates whether the regulatory and development milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amounts to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. The Company evaluates factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. At the end of each reporting period, the Company re-evaluates the probability of achievement of milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust the estimate of the overall transaction price.
Sales-based milestones and royalties: For sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, the Company determines whether the sole or predominant item to which the royalties relate is a license. When the license is the sole or predominant item to which the sales-based royalty relates, the Company recognize revenue at the later of: (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, the Company has not recognized any sales-based royalty revenue resulting from any license agreement.
Deferred revenue, which is a contract liability, represents amounts received by the Company for which the related revenues have not been recognized because one or more of the revenue recognition criteria have not been met. The current portion of deferred revenue represents the amount expected to be recognized within one year from the consolidated balance sheet date based on the estimated performance period of the underlying performance obligation. The noncurrent portion of deferred revenue represents amounts expected to be recognized after one year through the end of the performance period of the performance obligation.
Grant Revenue
The Company concluded that the Company's government grants are not within the scope of ASC Topic 606 as they do not meet the definition of a contract with a customer. The Company has concluded that the grants meet the definition of a contribution and are non-reciprocal transactions, and has also concluded that Subtopic 958-605, Not-for-Profit-Entities-Revenue Recognition, does not apply, as the Company is a business entity and the grants are with governmental agencies.
In the absence of applicable guidance under GAAP, the Company developed a policy for the recognition of grant revenue when the allowable costs are incurred and the right to payment is realized.
The Company believes this policy is consistent with the overarching premise in ASC Topic 606, to ensure that revenue recognition reflects the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services, even though there is no exchange as defined in ASC Topic 606. The Company believes the recognition of revenue as costs are incurred and amounts become realizable is analogous to the concept of transfer of control of a service over time under ASC Topic 606.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
Research and Development
Research and development costs include, but are not limited to, payroll and personnel expenses, laboratory supplies, preclinical studies, compound manufacturing costs, consulting costs and allocated overhead, including rent, equipment, depreciation and utilities. Research and development cost maybe offset by research and development refundable tax rebates received by our wholly-owned Australian subsidiary.
The Company has agreements with various Contract Research Organizations ("CROs") and third-party vendors. Research and development accruals of amounts due to the CRO are estimated based on the level of services performed, progress of the studies, including the phase or completion of events, and contracted costs. The estimated costs of research and development provided, but not yet invoiced, are included in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. Payments made to CROs under such arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets until the services are rendered. The Company makes judgments and estimates in determining the accrued expenses balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, the Company adjusts its accrued expenses. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred.
Advertising Costs
Advertising costs are expensed as incurred. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, advertising costs were not significant.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all stock-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of stock options, RSAs, RSUs, including "PSUs" to be recognized in the financial statements, based on their respective grant date fair values. The Company estimates the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The RSAs, RSUs and PSUs are valued based on the fair value of the Company's common stock on the date of grant. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management's best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management's judgment. The Company records expense for stock-based compensation related to stock options, RSAs and RSUs over the requisite service period. As the PSUs have a performance condition, compensation expense is recognized for each vesting tranche over the respective requisite service period of each tranche if and when the Company's management deems probable that the performance conditions will be satisfied. The Company may recognize a cumulative true-up adjustment related to PSUs once a condition becomes probable of being satisfied if the related service period had commenced in a prior period. All share-based compensation costs are recorded in general and administrative or research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations based upon the respective employees or non-employee's roles within the Company. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740"), which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. The Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, the Company recognizes the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit would more likely than not be realized assuming examination by the taxing authority. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. To date, there have been no interest or penalties charged in relation to the unrecognized tax benefits.
Net Loss Per Share
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
Basic net loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. Diluted net loss per share excludes the potential impact of convertible preferred stock, common stock options, warrants and unvested shares of restricted stock and restricted stock units because their effect would be anti-dilutive due to the Company's net loss. Since the Company had net losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, basic and diluted net loss per common share are the same.
Comprehensive Loss
Comprehensive loss represents the net loss for the period and other comprehensive income. Other comprehensive income reflects certain gains and losses that are recorded as a component of stockholders’ deficit and are not reflected in the statements of operations. The Company’s other comprehensive income consists of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. ASU No. 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. This guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2021. Early adoption is permitted for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company adopted this standard as of January 1, 2021, which did not have material impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740)-Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (ASU 2019-12), which is intended to simplify accounting for income taxes. It removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. ASU 2019-12 was effective for the Company for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods therein. The Company adopted this standard as of January 1, 2021, which did not have material impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-01, Investments-Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments-Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815)-Clarifying the Interactions between Topic 321, Topic 323, and Topic 815 (a consensus of the Emerging Issues Task Force). This update clarifies whether an entity should consider observable transactions that require it to either apply or discontinue the equity method of accounting for the purposes of applying the measurement alternative and how to account for certain forward contracts and purchased options to purchase securities. For public entities, this guidance was effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company adopted this standard as of January 1, 2021, which did not have material impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In October 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-10, Codification Improvements. ASU 2020-10 provides amendments to a wide variety of topics in the FASB’s Accounting Standards Codification, which applies to all reporting entities within the scope of the affected accounting guidance. ASU 2020-10 was effective for the Company for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods therein. The Company adopted this standard as of January 1, 2021, which did not have material impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In November 2021, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2021-10, Government Assistance (Topic 832): Disclosures by Business Entities about Government Assistance. ASU 2021-10 requires business entities to disclose, in notes to their financial statements, information about certain types of government assistance they receive. ASU 2021-10 also adds a new Topic 832, Government Assistance, to the FASB’s Codification. ASU 2021-10 is effective for financial statements of all entities, including private companies, for annual periods beginning
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
after December 15, 2021, with early application permitted. The Company adopted this standard as of January 1, 2021, which did not have material impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326) Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (ASU No. 2016-13), which requires an entity to utilize a new impairment model known as the current expected credit loss (“CECL”) model to estimate its lifetime “expected credit loss” and record an allowance that, when deducted from the amortized cost basis of the financial assets and certain other instruments, including but not limited to available-for-sale debt securities. Credit losses relating to available-for-sale debt securities will be recorded through an allowance for credit losses rather than as a direct write-down to the security. As an emerging growth company, ASU No. 2016-13 is effective for the Company for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on its consolidated financial statements.
Note 3-Revenue and Deferred Revenue
Grant Revenue
Our grants and contracts reimburse us for direct and indirect costs relating to the grant projects and also provide us with a pre-negotiated profit margin on total direct and indirect costs of the grant award, excluding subcontractor costs, after giving effect to directly attributable costs and allowable overhead costs. Funds received from grants and contracts are generally deemed to be earned and recognized as revenue as allowable costs are incurred during the grant or contract period and the right to payment is realized.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized grant revenue of $0.8 million and $2.7 million, respectively.
Contract Revenue
The Company’s contract revenue has been generated from payments received pursuant to a license agreement (the "Vifor License") with Vifor International, Ltd. ("Vifor Pharma") with headquarters located in Switzerland. The Company recognized revenue from upfront payments over the term of our estimated period of performance using a cost-based input method under Topic 606. The Company expects to continue recognizing revenue from upfront payments related to the Vifor License using the cost-based input method.
Vifor License Agreement
In November 2020, the Company entered into a license agreement with Vifor Pharma, granting Vifor Pharma global rights (excluding China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau) to develop, manufacture and commercialize ANG-3777 in all therapeutic, prophylactic and diagnostic uses for renal indications, including forms of acute kidney injury (AKI), and congestive heart failure (collectively, the Renal Indications). Pursuant to the Vifor License, the Company received $60 million in upfront and equity payments, including $30 million in up-front cash received in November 2020, and a $30 million equity investment, $5 million of which was a convertible note that subsequently converted into common stock with the IPO and $25 million of which was received in the Concurrent Private Placement with the Company’s IPO. The Company is also eligible to receive post-approval milestones of up to approximately $260.0 million and sales-related milestones of up to $1.585 billion, providing a total potential deal value of up to $1.925 billion (subject to certain specified reductions and offsets), plus tiered royalties on net sales of ANG-3777 at royalty rates of up to 40%. Under the Vifor License, the Company is responsible for executing a pre-specified clinical development plan designed to obtain regulatory approvals of ANG-3777 for delayed graft function (DGF) and AKI associated with cardiac surgery involving cardiopulmonary bypass (CSA-AKI). Based on the ANG-3777 clinical trial data disclosed in the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company does not expect to receive any
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
additional clinical, post-approval, or sales milestones, or royalties, as it does not intend to continue to pursue the clinical development plan for ANG-3777 set forth in the Vifor License.
On October 26, 2021, the Company announced that its Phase 3 trial of ANG-3777 in DGF did not achieve its primary endpoint and the data from the Phase 3 trial was not expected to provide sufficient evidence to support an indication in the studied DGF population. On December 9, 2021, the Company announced its Phase 2 trial of ANG-3777 in CSA-AKI did not achieve its primary endpoint and the data from the Phase 2 trial was not expected to provide sufficient evidence to support a Phase 3 trial in the studied CSA-AKI population. Angion and Vifor continue to analyze data from the CSA-AKI trial. The Company does not intend to continue the clinical development plan for ANG-3777 set forth in the Vifor License, which had included a Phase 3 study in CSA-AKI and a Phase 4 confirmatory study in DGF. In 2022, we and Vifor Pharma continue to work to complete the planned analyses of the results of the clinical trials announced in the fourth quarter of 2021 and to discuss the future of the collaboration based upon such analyses.
Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License at its sole discretion upon the earlier of (i) the acceptance for filing of an NDA covering products incorporating ANG-3777 filed with the FDA (after completion of the relevant Phase 3 clinical trial for such products), or (ii) the third anniversary of the effective date of the Vifor License. Both the Company and Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License in its entirety if the other is in material breach of the Vifor License and has not cured the breach (if curable) within 60 days, or 90 days for incurable breach. In certain circumstances, in the event of the Company’s material breach of the Vifor License, Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License with respect to certain major markets. In addition, both parties have the right to terminate the Vifor License upon insolvency of the other party.
The Company identified the following performance obligations in the Vifor License based upon the clinical development plan for ANG-3777: (1) the global license (excluding greater China), (2) the development services, including the clinical development services including a post-approval confirmatory study, the technical development services and regulatory services and (3) the required participation on Joint Committees for coordination and oversight. The Company determined that the license is not capable of being distinct due to the specialized nature of the development services to be provided by the Company, and, accordingly, this promise was combined with the development services and participation in the joint committees as one single performance obligation.
In order to determine the transaction price, the Company evaluated all the payments to be received during the duration of the contract. Certain milestones and additional fees were considered variable consideration, which were not included in the transaction price at contract inception. The Company determined that the transaction price at the inception of the Vifor License is $15.0 million, which is 50% of the $30.0 million upfront payment due to the potential setoff defined in the contract. The Company will re-evaluate the transaction price in each reporting period and as uncertain events are resolved or other changes in circumstances occur.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company reported topline results from two ANG-3777 clinical trials under the Vifor License. The Company determined it will no longer continue the current clinical development plan for ANG 3777 DGF and CSA-AKI, which had included a Phase 3 study for CSA-AKI and a Phase 4 confirmatory study in DGF, given neither trial achieved statistical significance on its primary endpoint. In connection therewith, the Company adjusted the transaction price to include $15.0 million in previously constrained variable consideration. As of December 31, 2021, the Company concluded that it has significantly satisfied the performance obligation under Vifor License and will fully conclude the ANG-3777 project by the end of 2022.
Using the cost-based input method, the Company recognizes revenue based on actual costs incurred as a percentage of total estimated costs as the Company completes its performance obligation. The cumulative effect of revisions to estimated costs to complete the Company’s performance obligation will be recorded in the period in which changes are identified and amounts can be reasonably estimated. These actual costs consist primarily of internal full time equivalent (FTE) efforts and third-party contract costs related to the Vifor License.
The Company reassessed the performance period as the Company is currently closing out the planned analyses from both trials but does not intend to continue the clinical development plan for ANG-3777 set forth in the Vifor License, which had included a Phase 3 study for CSA-AKI and a Phase 4 confirmatory study in DGF, given these clinical results. As such, the estimated date to fully conclude ANG-3777 by the end of December 2022 was determined to represent the completion of the Company’s performance obligation under the Vifor License. Additionally, the Company revised the total estimated costs for completion of the performance obligation to reflect
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
the winding down of ANG-3777-related studies. The performance period is expected to end in the fourth quarter of 2022 instead of the fourth quarter of 2026. The effect of this change in estimate was an increase in contract revenue by $24.2 million, a reduction in net loss by $24.2 million and an increase in basic and diluted earnings per share by $0.86 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized license revenue related to the Vifor License of $27.5 million and $0.2 million. As of December 31, 2021, $2.3 million was recorded as the current portion of deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheet related to the Vifor License. As of December 31, 2020, $29.8 million was recorded as deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheet related to the Vifor License.
Note 4-Fair Value Measurements
The following table classifies the Company's financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis into the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
___________________
(1) Included in cash and cash equivalents on the consolidated balance sheets. This balance includes cash requirements settled on a nightly basis.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
There were no transfers made among the three levels in the fair value hierarchy during periods presented.
The following table presents changes in Level 3 liabilities measured at fair value (in thousands):
Both observable and unobservable inputs were used to determine the fair value of positions that the Company has classified within the Level 3 category. Unrealized gains and losses associated with liabilities within the Level 3 category include changes in fair value that were attributable to both observable (e.g., changes in market interest rates) and unobservable (e.g., changes in unobservable long- dated volatilities) inputs.
The Company used an option model to measure the fair value of the Notes (on conversion date). The values of the equity underlying the conversion options in the model were estimated using equity values implied from sales of convertible preferred stock. The fair value of the Notes was impacted by the model selected as well as assumptions surrounding unobservable inputs. Key unobservable inputs include the expected volatility of the underlying equity, and the timing of an expected liquidity event.
The fair value of the warrants issued by the Company has been estimated using a variant of the Black Scholes option pricing model. The underlying equity included in the Black Scholes option pricing model was valued based on the equity value implied from sales of preferred and common stock at each measurement date. The fair value of the warrants was impacted by the model selected as well as assumptions surrounding unobservable inputs including the underlying equity value, expected volatility of the underlying equity, risk free interest rate and the expected term.
Convertible Notes
The fair value adjustment during the year ended December 31, 2021 was based on the final settlement amount using a conversion price of $11.57 per share on February 9, 2021. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, there were no convertible notes outstanding.
Series C Preferred Stock
The fair value adjustment during the year ended December 31, 2021 was based on the final settlement amount using a conversion price of $11.57 per share on February 9, 2021. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, there were no shares of convertible preferred stock outstanding.
Warrant Liability
The fair value adjustment for the net exercise of warrants with an exercise price of $6.43 during the year ended December 31, 2021 was based on the final settlement amount using the IPO price on February 9, 2021. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, the fair value of the warrants issued by the Company were estimated using a variant of the Black Scholes option pricing model. The underlying equity included in the Black Scholes option pricing model was valued based on the closing price of common stock at each measurement date.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the fair value of the warrants increased by $2.9 million and $4.9 million, respectively. The change in fair value of warrant liability in both periods was recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
A summary of the weighted average (in aggregate) significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs) used in measuring the Company's warrant liabilities that were categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
Note 5-Balance Sheet Components
R&D tax credit receivable
The Company also recorded an Australian tax credit as provided by the Australian Taxation Office for qualified research and development expenditures incurred through its subsidiary, Savara Australia Pty. Limited. Under Australian tax law, Australia remits a research and development tax credit equal to 43.5% of qualified research and development expenditures, not to exceed established thresholds. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated an Australian tax credit of $0.8 million which was included in prepaid expenses and other current assets on the consolidated balance sheets and the Company received the tax credit in January 2022.
Property and Equipment, Net
The Company's property and equipment, net was comprised of the following (in thousands):
Depreciation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.1 million.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
Prepaid and Other Current Assets
Prepaid and other current assets were comprised of the following (in thousands):
Accrued Expenses
Accrued expenses were comprised of the following (in thousands):
Note 6-Convertible Notes Payable
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had convertible notes with an aggregate principal amount of $39.8 million and $1.8 million accrued interest outstanding.
Conversion of Convertible Notes Payable
In January 2021, the Company issued 33,978 shares of common stock upon the conversion of certain of the outstanding 2020 Notes. In connection with the IPO in February 2021, with an IPO price of $16.00 per share, the remaining outstanding convertible notes were converted into 3,636,189 shares of the Company’s common stock based on a conversion price of $11.57 per share. There were no convertible notes outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Note 7- Series C Convertible Preferred Stock
The following table summarizes the aggregate values recorded for the Series C convertible preferred stock as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Conversion of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock
In connection with the IPO in February 2021, with an initial public offering price of $16.00 per share, all shares of Series C convertible preferred stock outstanding plus accrued dividends were automatically converted into an aggregate of 2,234,640 shares of common stock with a conversion price of $11.57 per share. There were no shares of convertible preferred stock outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Note 8-Stockholders' Equity
Common Stock
Each share of common stock entitles the holder to one vote on all matters submitted to a vote of the Company’s stockholders. Common stockholders are not entitled to receive dividends, unless declared by the Board of Directors.
Treasury stock
The retirement of treasury stock was recorded as a reduction of common stock and additional paid-in capital at the time such retirement was approved by our Board of Directors in October 2021.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, zero and $1.8 million was included in treasury stock in the consolidated balance sheets.
Note 9-Stock-Based Compensation
2015 Plan
In June 2019, the Company approved an Amended and Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan (the "2015 Plan") permitting the granting of incentive stock options, non-statutory stock options, restricted stock and other stock-based awards. Following the effectiveness of the 2021 Equity Incentive Plan ("2021 Plan"), the Company ceased making grants under the 2015 Plan. However, the 2015 Plan continues to govern the terms and conditions of the outstanding awards granted under it. Shares of common stock subject to awards granted under the 2015 Plan that cease to be subject to such awards by forfeiture or otherwise after the termination of the 2015 Plan will be available for issuance under the 2021 Plan.
2021 Plan
On January 25, 2021, the Company's board of directors approved the 2021 Plan which permits the granting of incentive stock options, non-statutory stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units and other stock-based awards to employees, directors, officers and consultants. On January 25, 2021, shares of common stock equal to 11% of the post-IPO capitalization, with annual increases, up to a maximum of 60,000,000 shares of common stock were authorized for issuance under the 2021 Plan.
Stock Options
The fair value of each employee and non-employee stock option grant was estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model based on the following inputs:
Each of these inputs is subjective and generally requires significant judgment.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the Company’s stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method, which is based on the mid-point between the contractual term and vesting period.
Volatility-The Company determines volatility based on the historical volatilities of comparable publicly traded life science companies over a period equal to the expected term because it does not have sufficient trading history for its common stock price. The comparable companies were chosen based on the similar size, stage in the life cycle, or area of specialty. The Company will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding volatility on its own stock becomes available.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award.
Dividend Yield-The Company has never paid and has no plans to pay any dividends on its common stock. Therefore, the Company has used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Fair Value of Common Stock-For periods prior to the IPO, the Company determined the estimated fair value of its common stock using the Subject Company Transaction Method which includes the back-solve and scenario-based methods (Probability Weighted Expected Return Method) to arrive at estimated fair values. Subsequent to the IPO, the fair value was based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the grant date.
The following assumptions were used to estimate the fair value of stock option awards: The following table summarizes information as of December 31, 2021 and activity during 2021 related to the Company’s stock option plans:
The aggregate intrinsic value in the above table is calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value of the Company's common stock price and the exercise price of the stock options. The weighted average grant date fair value per share for the stock option grants during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $10.25 and $5.48, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the total unrecognized compensation related to unvested stock option awards granted was $6.1 million, which the Company expects to recognize over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.4 years.
Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units
The Company's RSA and RSU activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 were as follows:
Performance-based Restricted Stock Units
The Company had 556,530 PSUs outstanding that were granted in June 2019. Vesting of the PSUs is dependent upon the satisfaction of both a service condition and a performance condition, an initial public offering or a change of control, as defined in the 2015 Plan. As the IPO occurred in February 2021, the performance condition was met and 185,510 PSUs vested and were released upon the closing of the IPO. Another 185,510 PSUs vested and released were in June 2021 upon the second anniversary of the grants. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 185,510 PSUs outstanding.
The following table summarizes the total stock-based compensation expense for the stock options, RSUs, RSAs, PSUs compensation issued in shares recorded in the consolidated statements of operations (in thousands):
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
In January 2021, the board of directors of the Company approved the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the "ESPP"). The ESPP was effective on the date immediately prior to the effectiveness of the Company's registration statement relating to the IPO. A total of 390,000 shares of common stock were initially reserved for issuance under the ESPP. The offering period and purchase period will be determined by the Board of Directors. As of December 31, 2021, 390,000 shares under the ESPP remain available for purchase and no offerings had been authorized.
Note 10-Warrants
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the outstanding warrants to purchase the Company's common stock were comprised of the following:
In accordance with ASC 815, the warrants classified as liabilities are recorded at fair value at the issuance date, with changes in the fair value recognized in the consolidated statements of operations at the end of each reporting period. Refer to Note 4 for changes in the fair value recognized during the periods reported.
In accordance with ASC 815, the warrants classified as equity do not meet the definition of a derivative and are classified in stockholders' equity (deficit) in the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company's warrant activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
_________________________________
(1) 613,892 shares from warrant exercised were tendered back to the Company to cover the exercise price of the warrant.
Conversion of Warrants
In February 2021, all warrants outstanding issued with 2015 Notes, 2016 Notes, 2017 Notes, and 2018 Notes with an exercise price of $6.43 per share were net exercised into an aggregate of 844,335 shares of common stock upon the IPO with a conversion price of $11.57 per share.
Note 11-Commitments and Contingencies
Operating Leases
The Company leases office and laboratory space in Uniondale, New York from NovaPark, a related party, under an agreement classified as an operating lease that expires on June 20, 2026. The Company's lease does not require any contingent rental payments, impose any financial restrictions, or contain any residual value guarantees. Variable expenses generally represent the Company's share of the landlord's operating expenses, including management fees. The Company does not act as a lessor or have any leases classified as financing leases.
The Company leases office space in Fort Lee, New Jersey, comprising approximately 2,105 square feet for approximately $0.1 million per year, under a non-cancelable operating lease through March 31, 2022. However, this arrangement is excluded from the calculation of lease liabilities and right of use assets as its term is less than one year. The lease is subject to charges for common area maintenance and other costs. The Company is not going to renew the New Jersey lease after March 31, 2022.
In July 2020, the Company entered into a lease for office furniture in San Francisco, California set to expire in July 2025, with an annual lease payment of approximately $13,000.
In February 2021, the Company entered into a lease for clinical and regulatory space in Newton, Massachusetts (the “Newton lease”), comprising approximately 6,157 square feet for approximately $0.2 million per year, under a non-cancelable operating lease through June 30, 2024. Pursuant to the Newton lease, the Company had 4 months of free rent starting from February 15, 2021 to June 14, 2021. The Company has one option to extend the term of the lease for 3 years with 9 months’ notice.
The following table provides the components of the Company's rent expense (in thousands):
The following table summarizes quantitative information about the Company's NovaPark operating leases (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, maturities of lease liabilities were as follows (in thousands):
Financing obligation
In 2021, the Company entered into a sale and leaseback arrangement with a third-party financing institution as a financing mechanism to fund certain of its capital expenditures primarily related to operating equipment, whereby the physical asset is sold concurrent with an agreement to lease the asset back. The initial leaseback term is 42 months starting from November 2021. The arrangement includes a renewal option as well as a repurchase option at fair value with a cap at the end of the term. The arrangement does not qualify as an asset sale as control of the equipment did not transfer to the third party and is accounted for as a failed sale-leaseback. Therefore, the Company accounts for the arrangement as a financing transaction and records the proceeds received as a financing obligation. The leased assets are included in property and equipment, net on the consolidated balance sheets and are subject to depreciation.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received $0.3 million in connection with the sale and leaseback of certain equipment.
The following table summarizes quantitative information about the Company's financing obligation (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, maturities of financing obligation were as follows (in thousands):
Litigation
The Company is not a party to any material legal proceedings and is not aware of any pending or threatened claims. From time to time, the Company may be subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of its business activities.
Indemnification
The Company enters into standard indemnification arrangements in the ordinary course of business. Pursuant to these arrangements, the Company indemnifies, holds harmless and agrees to reimburse the indemnified parties for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified party, in connection with any trade secret, copyright, patent or other intellectual property infringement claim by any third party with respect to its technology. The term of these indemnification agreements is generally perpetual any time after the execution of the agreement. The maximum potential amount of future payments the Company could be required to make under these arrangements is not determinable. The Company has never incurred costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification agreements. As a result, the Company believes the fair value of these agreements is minimal.
Paycheck Protection Program
In April 2020, the Company received funds in the amount of $0.9 million pursuant to a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program of the 2020 CARES Act ("PPP") administered by the Small Business Association. The loan has an interest rate of 1.0% and a term of 24 months. No payments were due for the first 16 months, although interest accrued, and monthly payments were due over the next 8 months to retire the loan plus accrued interest. Funds
from the loan could only be used for certain purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and a portion of the loan used to pay certain costs were forgivable, all as provided by the terms of the PPP. The loan was evidenced by a promissory note, which contained customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults and breaches of representations and warranties. The SBA approved the Company's PPP Loan forgiveness application on May 26, 2021 for the entire principal amount of the PPP Loan and accrued interest. As a result, the Company recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the loan in the amount of $0.9 million.
Employee Retention Credit ("ERC")
The Employee Retention Credit ("ERC") under the CARES Act is a refundable tax credit which encourages businesses to keep employees on the payroll during the COVID-19 pandemic. Eligible employers could qualify for up to $5,000 of credit for each employee based on qualified wages paid after March 12, 2020 and before January 1, 2021. The Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") subsequently issued Notice 2021-23 and Notice 2021-49 which collectively extended the ERC eligibility to cover qualified wages paid after December 31, 2020 and before January 1, 2022. Qualified wages are the wages paid to an employee for the time that the employee is not providing services due to an economic hardship, specifically, either (1) a full or partial suspension of operations by order of a governmental authority due to COVID-19, or (2) a significant decline in gross receipts.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company received $1.5 million and zero, respectively for ERC and applied the benefit as a reduction to the payroll expenses in the consolidated statement of operations.
Note 12-Income Taxes
The Company recognized no tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The difference between the Company's effective tax rate of 0% and the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21% is largely due to the Company's net operating losses, which are offset by the corresponding valuation allowance. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. The Company has established a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty that such assets will be realized. The Company periodically evaluates the recoverability of the deferred assets. At such time as it is determined that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will be realized, the valuation allowance will be reduced.
Losses before income taxes includes the following components:
The provision for income taxes provision (benefit) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consists of the following (in thousands):
The reconciliations between the federal statutory income tax rate and the Company's effective income tax rate were as follows:
Significant components of the Company's deferred tax asset at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $118.5 million available to reduce future taxable income, if any, for federal income tax purposes. Approximately $9.6 million of federal net operating losses can be carried forward to future tax years and begin to expire in 2035. The federal net operating losses generated for the years beginning after December 31, 2017, approximately $108.9 million in total, can be carried forward indefinitely.
The NOL carryforward may be subject to an annual limitation under Section 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and similar state provisions if the Company experienced one or more ownership changes which would limit the amount of NOL and tax credit carryforwards that can be utilized to offset future taxable income and tax respectively. In general, an ownership change as defined by Section 382 and 383, results from the transactions increasing ownership of certain stockholders or public groups in the stock of the corporation of more than 50 percentage points over a three-year period. The Company has not completed a Section 382 and 383 analysis to assess whether an ownership change has occurred or whether there have been multiple ownership changes since the Company's formation due to the complexity and cost associated with such study and the fact there may be additional such ownership changes in the future. If a change in ownership were to have occurred or occurs in the future, the NOL and tax credits carryforwards could be eliminated or restricted. If eliminated, the related asset would be removed from the deferred tax asset schedule with a corresponding reduction in the valuation allowance. Due to the existence of the valuation allowance, limitations created by future ownership changes, if any, will not impact the Company's effective tax rate.
The Company files income tax returns in the United States, California, Massachusetts, New York and New Jersey. Due to the Company's losses incurred, the Company is subject to the income tax examination by authorities since inception. The Company's policy is to recognize interest expense and penalties related to income tax matters as tax expense. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no significant accruals for interest related to unrecognized tax benefits or tax penalties.
At December 31, 2021, the Company's reserve for unrecognized tax benefits is approximately $3.7 million. Due to the full valuation allowance at December 31, 2021, current adjustments to the unrecognized benefits will have no impact to the Company's effective income tax rate.
Reconciliation of uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (in thousands):
Total amount of unrecognized tax benefits, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate was as follows (in thousands):
The Company does not anticipate material changes to its uncertain tax positions for the next twelve months.
In conjunction with the 2018 Act that amends the Internal Revenue Code that reduced the U.S. corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018 and modified policies, credits, and deductions (the "Tax Act"), the SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 ("SAB 118") to address the application of GAAP in situations when a registrant does not have the necessary information available, prepared, or analyzed (including computations) in reasonable detail to complete the accounting for certain income tax effects of the Tax Act. The Company has completed its evaluation and determined that there was no net impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as the corresponding adjustment was made to the valuation allowance.
Note 13-Employee Benefit Plan
Employee Benefit Plan
The Company sponsors a retirement savings plan that is intended to qualify for favorable tax treatment under Section 401(a) of the Code, and contains a cash or deferred feature that is intended to meet the requirements of Section 401(k) of the Code. Participants may make pre-tax and certain after-tax (Roth) salary deferral contributions to the plan from their eligible earnings up to the statutorily prescribed annual limit under the Code. Participants who are 50 years of age or older may contribute additional amounts based on the statutory limits for catch-up contributions. Participant contributions are held in trust as required by law. No minimum benefit is provided under the plan. An employee’s interest in his or her salary deferral contributions is 100% vested when contributed. Contributions, subject to established limits, are matched at a dollar for dollar rate up to 3% of an individual’s earnings and fifty cents on the dollar on the next 4-5% of earnings.
Note 14-Net Loss Per Share
The following table sets forth the computation of the Company’s basic and diluted net loss per share attributable to common stockholders, which excludes shares which are legally outstanding but subject to repurchase by the Company (in thousands, except share and per share data):
The table below provides potentially dilutive securities not included in the calculation of the diluted net loss per share because to do so would be anti-dilutive:
___________________________________
(1)The number of shares issuable upon conversion of the 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes and Series C preferred stock has been estimated using the Company's common stock fair value at December 31, 2020, discounted by 20%.
Note 15-Related Party Transactions
Ohr Investment
In a series of investments in November 2013 and July 2017, the Company invested a total of $150,000 to acquire a membership interest in Ohr Cosmetics, LLC ("Ohr"), an affiliated company.
The Company owns and the family of the Company's director and Chairman Emeritus owns approximately 2.4% and 80.6%, respectively, of the membership interests in Ohr. Our Chief Executive Officer is also owns approximately 0.80% of the membership interests in Ohr. The Chairman Emeritus’s son is the manager of Ohr.
In November 2013, the Company granted Ohr an exclusive worldwide license, with the right to sublicense, under the Company's patent rights covering one of the Company's CYP26 inhibitors, ANG-3522, for the use in treating conditions of the skin or hair. Sublicensees may not grant further sublicenses under the Company's patent rights other than to affiliates of such sublicensees and entities with which sublicensees are collaborating for the research, development, manufacture and commercialization of the products. Ohr will pay the Company a royalty at a rate in the low single digits on gross revenue of products incorporating ANG-3522, and milestone payments potentially totaling up to $9.0 million based on achievement of sales milestones. Royalties and milestone payments will be paid until the later of 15 years from the first commercial sale of a licensed product or the last to expire licensed patent rights. The royalty rate is subject to adjustments under certain circumstances. The Company believes that the Ohr License was made on terms no less favorable to the Company than those that the Company could obtain from unaffiliated third parties.
No revenue from this license agreement was recognized for the years presented.
NovaPark Investment and Lease
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a 10% interest in NovaPark. Members of the Company's director and Chairman Emeritus’s 's immediate family own a majority of the membership interests of NovaPark. The Company accounts for its aggregate 10% investment in NovaPark under the equity method. The following table provides the activity for the NovaPark investment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The Company rents office and laboratory space in Uniondale, New York from NovaPark under a lease that expires June 20, 2026. The Company recorded rent expense for fixed lease payments of $1.1 million and $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company recorded rent expense for variable expenses related to the lease of $0.5 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See Note 11.
Convertible Notes
In connection with the IPO in February 2021, Victor Ganzi, Gilbert Omenn and Karen Wilson, directors of the Company, and Raj Venkatesan, brother of the Chief Executive Officer and director of the Company, converted all their outstanding convertible notes into an aggregate of 149,500 shares of common stock with a conversion price of $11.57. As of December 31, 2021, there were no convertible notes outstanding.
Series C Convertible Preferred Stock
In connection with the IPO in February 2021, Jay Venkatesan, M.D., the President and Chief Executive Officer and director of the Company converted all his outstanding preferred stock into an aggregate of 165,094 shares of common stock with a conversion price of $11.57 per share. As of December 31, 2021, there were no shares of convertible preferred stock outstanding.
Consultant Fees
Angion paid consulting fees under an agreement with the wife of the director and Chairman Emeritus of the Company for Company management services. Consultant fees paid to the wife were approximately zero and $0.1 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This consultant agreement was terminated in February 2022.
Other
Dr. Michael Yamin, a former member of the Board of Directors of the Company, is a Scientific Advisor for Pearl Cohen Zedek Latzer Baratz LLP (Pearl Cohen). In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company paid Pearl Cohen $3.9 thousand and $0.1 million in legal fees, respectively.
In January 2018, the Company also entered into a consulting agreement with Dr. Yamin pursuant to which he agreed to provide consulting services to the Company in the areas of biomedical research and development. Pursuant to the terms of the consulting agreement, Dr. Yamin, in his capacity as a consultant, received $0.1 million during each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Dr. Yamin resigned from the Company's Board of Directors in March 2020. Dr. Yamin's resignation was not due to any disagreement with the Company, the Board or management of the Company.
Note 16-Subsequent Events
On January 4, 2022, the Company announced a reduction in force impacting somewhat less than half of its current employees. The Company’s decision to engage in this reduction resulted from an assessment of its internal resources needs, given the results of the Phase 3 study of ANG-3777 in patients at risk for DGF would likely not support a regulatory approval in that population and the Phase 2 study in CSA-AKI would not support a Phase 3 trial in that indication. This reduction was a cost-cutting measure across the organization to support the Company’s 2022 primary focus on the clinical development of its investigational asset ANG-3070, a highly selective, oral tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor in development as a treatment for fibrotic diseases, particularly in the kidney and lung, as well as advancing preclinical assets to IND-enabling studies.
On February 25, 2022, the Company entered into a Separation Agreement with Itzhak D. Goldberg, M.D., who formerly served as Executive Chairman and Chief Scientific Officer and currently serves as a director and Chairman Emeritus on our Board. Pursuant to the terms of the Separation Agreement, Dr. Goldberg will receive severance benefits of approximately $1.1 million. Under our Amended and Second Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan and our 2021 Incentive Award Plan, Dr. Goldberg will continue to vest his PSUs and stock options and exercisability of his options, so long as he remains in continuous service with the Company as a director on the Board or otherwise.
On March 1, 2022, the Company entered into a Separation Agreement with Elisha Goldberg, former employee and son of Itzhak D. Goldberg, M.D., who currently serves as a director and Chairman Emeritus on the Company’s Board. Pursuant to the terms of the Separation Agreement, Mr. Goldberg will receive severance benefits of approximately $0.5 million. Mr. Goldberg will also have the right to exercise any vested stock options he may have received under our Amended and Second Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan or our 2021 Incentive Award Plan until December 31, 2022, which extended the exercise period by 11 months.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our management, with the participation of our President and Chief Executive Officer and our Chief Financial Officer, our principal executive officer and principal accounting and financial officer, respectively, have evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) as of December 31, 2021.
Disclosure controls and procedures are controls and other procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our reports filed or submitted under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported, within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms. Disclosure controls and procedures include controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our reports filed under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to management, including our President and Chief Executive Officer and our Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. Based on the evaluation of our disclosure controls and procedures, our President and Chief Executive Officer and our Chief Financial Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were not effective as of December 31, 2021 due to the material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting described below. In light of this fact, our management has performed additional analyses, reconciliations, and other post-closing procedures and has concluded that, notwithstanding the material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting, the consolidated financial statements for the periods covered by and included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K fairly present, in all material respects, our financial position, results of operations and cash flows for the periods presented in conformity with U.S. GAAP.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Except for the changes in connection with the ongoing remediation of the previously identified material weakness discussed below, there has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting during the year ended December 31, 2021, that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
In connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, we identified control deficiencies in the design and operation of our internal control over financial reporting that constituted material weaknesses. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
The material weaknesses identified in our internal control over financial reporting related to (i) insufficient resources with knowledge and expertise in U.S. GAAP to properly evaluate certain complex transactions, including debt instruments and equity instruments; and (ii) insufficient financial reporting and close controls to ensure that incurred expenses are accrued at period end and deliverables from third party contractors are reviewed for accuracy.
During 2021, we took a number of actions to remediate these material weaknesses, including:
•engaging SEC compliance and technical accounting consultants to assist in evaluating transactions for conformity with U.S. GAAP;
•hiring additional finance and accounting personnel to augment accounting staff and to provide more resources for complex accounting matters and financial reporting; and
•strengthening our financial reporting and close relating to incurred expenses by ensuring our data capture procedures are clearly defined and that responsible personnel, including supervisory personnel, have adequate training regarding the process and expectation.
We are still in the process of implementing these controls. We intend to continue to take steps to remediate the material weaknesses through formalizing documentation of policies and procedures and further evolving our accounting processes.
While we believe that these efforts will improve our internal control over financial reporting, the design and implementation of our remediation is ongoing and will require validation and testing of the design and operating effectiveness of our internal controls over a sustained period of financial reporting cycles. The actions that we are taking are subject to ongoing senior management review, as well as audit committee oversight. We will not be able to conclude whether the steps we are taking will fully remediate the material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting until we have completed our remediation efforts and subsequent evaluation of their effectiveness.
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act. Our internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with GAAP. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Our management assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021. In making this assessment, management used the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in Internal Control-Integrated Framework (2013 framework). Based on our assessment, management concluded our internal control over financial reporting was not effective as of December 31, 2021, based on the COSO criteria, due to the existence of the material weaknesses.
Inherent Limitation on the Effectiveness Over Financial Reporting
The effectiveness of any system of internal control over financial reporting, including ours, is subject to inherent limitations, including the exercise of judgment in designing, implementing, operating, and evaluating the controls and procedures, and the inability to eliminate misconduct completely. Accordingly, any system of internal control over financial reporting, including ours, no matter how well designed and operated, can only provide reasonable, not absolute assurances. In addition, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. We intend to continue to monitor and upgrade our internal controls as necessary or appropriate for our business, but there can be no assurance that such improvements will be sufficient to provide us with effective internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections
None.
Part III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Management
Executive Officers
The following table sets forth information regarding our executive officers and directors as of March 1, 2022:
________________________
(1) Member of the audit committee.
(2) Member of the compensation committee.
(3) Member of the nominating and corporate governance committee.
(4) Dr. Goldberg resigned his employment in February 2022 and no longer serves as an Executive Officer of Angion. Dr. Goldberg continues to serve as a Director and Chairman Emeritus.
Executive Officers and Employee Directors
Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D., President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman. Dr. Venkatesan was appointed Chairman of the Board in January 2022, and he has been our President and Chief Executive Officer and director since May 2018. Dr. Venkatesan has served as a Managing Partner of Alpine BioVentures, an investment firm, since July 2015. From July 2015 to August 2018, Dr. Venkatesan served as President of Alpine Immune Sciences, an immunotherapy company that he co-founded as a Managing Partner of Alpine BioVentures, and also served as its Chief Executive Officer from July 2015 to June 2016. Additionally, as Managing Partner of Alpine BioVentures, from January 2014 to August 2014, Dr. Venkatesan served as Founder and Chief Executive Officer of Alpine BioSciences, a biotechnology company, which was acquired by Cascadian Therapeutics, where he then served as Executive Vice President and General Manager from August 2014 to May 2015 (subsequently acquired by Seagen, Inc.). Since January 2008, Dr. Venkatesan has served as the founder and managing member of Ayer Capital, a global healthcare fund. Prior to that, he served as a director at Brookside Capital, part of Bain Capital, where he co-managed healthcare investments. He was also a consultant at McKinsey & Co., a consulting firm, and a venture investor with Patricof & Co. Ventures (now Apax Partners), an investment firm. Dr. Venkatesan has served on the board, of Alpine Immune Sciences, Inc. (Nasdaq: ALPN) since June 2015. Dr. Venkatesan previously served on the board of Exicure Inc. (Nasdaq: XCUR) from March 2014 to December 2020 and Iovance Biotherapeutics Inc. (Nasdaq: IOVA) from September 2013 to March 2018. He has an M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, an M.B.A. from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and a B.A. from Williams College. We believe that Dr. Venkatesan's leadership experience and investment experience in the biopharmaceutical industry qualify him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
John F. Neylan, M.D. Dr. Neylan was appointed Executive Vice President and Head of Research in March 2022, and he has served as our Chief Medical Officer since December 2018. From April 2015 to December 2018, Dr. Neylan served as Chief Medical Officer of Keryx, a biopharmaceutical company focused on nephrology. From May 2008 to April 2015, Dr. Neylan served as Senior Vice President, Clinical Development, at Genzyme
Corporation, a biopharmaceutical company focusing on specialty metabolic diseases. From 2000 to 2008, Dr. Neylan served as Vice President, Research and Development for Wyeth Research, a pharmaceutical company, overseeing the clinical development of transplantation therapeutics and providing medical affairs support to the transplant franchise. Dr. Neylan has also held prestigious positions in academia, including Professor of Medicine at Emory University and Assistant Professor of Medicine at University of California, Davis, serving at both institutions as Medical Director of the respective Renal Transplant Programs, with oversight of the clinical research programs. Dr. Neylan has a B.S. from Duke University and an M.D. from Rush Medical School in Chicago. He completed his Internal Medicine residency at Vanderbilt University and fellowships in Nephrology and in Transplantation and Immunogenetics at Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard University. He was formerly the President of the American Society of Transplantation, past Board Member of the National Kidney Foundation and a past Industry Representative on the FDA Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory Committee.
Jennifer J. Rhodes, J.D. Ms. Rhodes was appointed Executive Vice President and Chief Business Officer in March 2022 and she has served as, General Counsel, Chief Compliance Officer and Corporate Secretary since January 2020. In February 2019, Ms. Rhodes also became a director of Legal Aid at Work, a non-profit legal services organization. Ms. Rhodes previously served as General Counsel and Corporate Secretary at Adamas Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a public pharmaceutical company, from April 2016 until January 2020, during which time she also served as Chief Compliance Officer since August 2016 and Chief Business Officer since January 2017. Prior to that, Ms. Rhodes served as General Counsel at Medivation, Inc., a biopharmaceutical company, from June 2012 to September 2015, where she was responsible for Medivation's legal matters, and also served as Corporate Secretary from April 2013 to September 2015 and as Chief Compliance Officer from July 2012 to October 2014. From May 2006 to June 2012, Ms. Rhodes was an Assistant General Counsel at Pfizer Inc., a biopharmaceutical company, where she supported the U.S. Primary Care Business and its Primary Care Medicines Development Group and served as a global product lead for Pfizer Inc.'s primary care medicines. Prior to joining Pfizer Inc., she was an associate in the regulatory law and international trade practice areas at Weil, Gotshal & Manges, LLP from October 2000 to April 2006. Ms. Rhodes has a J.D. from Wake Forest University School of Law and a B.A. in Economics from Newcomb College of Tulane University.
Gregory S. Curhan. Mr. Curhan has served as our Chief Financial Officer since June 2020 through his capacity as a partner at FLG Partners, LLC (FLG Partners), a Silicon Valley chief financial officer services firm. Prior to joining FLG Partners, LLC, Mr. Curhan was Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice President Corporate Development of Providence Medical Technology, a venture-backed medical device manufacturer, December 2016 until January 2020. Prior to that, Mr. Curhan was a Business Development Officer at Brighton Jones, a financial planning company, from December 2012 to December 2016. Mr. Curhan has a B.A. in Economics from Dartmouth College.
Non-Employee Directors
Victor F. Ganzi. Mr. Ganzi has been a member of our board of directors since April 2018, and lead independent director since February 2021. He has served as Non-Executive Chairman of the board of directors of Willis Towers Watson (Nasdaq: WTW), a global advisory, broking and solutions company, since January 2019 and as a director since January 2016. Previously, he served as a director of Towers Watson beginning on January 1, 2010, as Chairman of Towers Watson's Audit Committee, and a member of its Nominating and Governance Committee. Mr. Ganzi is presently a consultant and corporate director, serving on the public company board of Aveanna Healthcare Holdings Inc., a provider of pediatric and adult home healthcare and hospice care since 2016, and serving on the boards of numerous private and not-for-profit organizations, including PGA Tour, Inc., the Partnership to End Addiction, the Whitney Museum of American Art and the Madison Square Boys and Girls Club. Mr. Ganzi was the President and Chief Executive Officer of The Hearst Corporation, a private diversified communications company, from 2002 to 2008. He served as Hearst's Executive Vice President from 1997 to 2002 and as its Chief Operating Officer from 1998 to 2002. Prior to joining Hearst in 1990, Mr. Ganzi was the managing partner at the international law firm of Rogers & Wells (now part of Clifford Chance). Mr. Ganzi previously served as a director of Gentiva Health Services, Inc., Wyeth and Hearst-Argyle Television, Inc. Mr. Ganzi has a B.S. in Accounting summa cum laude, from Fordham University, a J.D. from Harvard Law School and an L.L.M. in Taxation from New York University. We believe that Mr. Ganzi's years of experience serving on boards and legal expertise qualify him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Itzhak D. Goldberg, M.D., Dr. Goldberg was appointed Chairman Emeritus in January 2022, after having been a director and Chairman of the Board since March 2018. Dr. Goldberg also served as Executive Chairman and Chief Scientific Officer between March 2018 and March 2022, after serving as our Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer and Scientific Director since our founding in April 1998. Dr. Goldberg was formerly a faculty
member at Harvard Medical School, Radiation Oncologist-in-Chief for the North Shore-LIJ (Northwell) Health System, and Professor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. He is a Fellow of the American College of Radiology. Dr. Goldberg has an M.D. from Albert Einstein College of Medicine, was a postdoctoral research fellow at Harvard Medical School and was subsequently trained as a radiation oncologist at the Harvard Joint Center for Radiation Therapy. We believe that Dr. Goldberg's extensive experience in the biopharmaceutical industry qualifies him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Allen R. Nissenson, M.D. Dr. Nissenson has been a member of our board of directors since January 2020. He completed serving as the Emeritus Chief Medical Officer of DaVita Kidney Care in January 2022, where he has served since January 2020 and where he previously served as Chief Medical Officer from August 2008 to January 2020. He is currently an Emeritus Professor of Medicine at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, where he has served since August 2008 and where he previously served as Director of the Dialysis Program from July 1977 to August 2008 and Associate Dean from July 2005 to August 2008. Dr. Nissenson is also currently on the board of directors of Rockwell Medical Inc., a public biopharmaceutical company, which he joined in June 2020 and Diality, a private technology development company. Dr. Nissenson is a past chair of Kidney Care Partners and past co-chair of the Kidney Care Quality Alliance. He is a former president of the Renal Physicians Association (RPA) and current member of the Government Affairs Committee. Dr. Nissenson also previously served as president of the Southern California End-Stage Renal Disease Network, as well as chair of the Medical Review Board. He served as a Robert Wood Johnson Health Policy Fellow of the National Academy of Medicine from 1994 to 1995 and worked in the office of the late Senator Paul Wellstone. Dr. Nissenson has an M.D. from Northwestern University Medical School and is the recipient of various awards, including the President's Award of the National Kidney Foundation, the Lifetime Achievement Award in Hemodialysis, the American Association of Kidney Patients' (AAKP) Medal of Excellence Award and, in 2017, the RPA Distinguished Nephrology Service Award. We believe that Dr. Nissenson's years of experience in the healthcare industry qualify him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Gilbert S. Omenn, M.D., Ph.D. Dr. Omenn has been a member of our board of directors since January 2020. Since 1997, Dr. Omenn has been a faculty member at the University of Michigan, where he is currently the Harold T. Shapiro Distinguished University Professor of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, Internal Medicine, Human Genetics, and Public Health. Earlier, he was the dean of the School of Public Health and Community Medicine and professor of medicine at the University of Washington. Dr. Omenn served as Executive Vice President for Medical Affairs of the University of Michigan and as Chief Executive Officer of the University of Michigan Health System from 1997 to 2002. From 1977 to 1981 he was associate director of the White House Office of Science & Technology Policy and then the Office of Management & Budget. Dr. Omenn is a member of the National Academy of Medicine and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He chaired the Presidential/Congressional Commission on Risk Assessment and Risk Management, the NAS/NAE/IOM Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, and the Advisory Committee for the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. He served on the National Commission on the Environment, the NIH Scientific Management Review Board, and the CDC Director's Advisory Committee. He is a past president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Since 2014, Dr. Omenn has served as a director of Galectin Therapeutics Inc., a biotechnology company (Nasdaq: GALT), and since 2020 as a director of Amesite Inc, an AI-based educational technology company (Nasdaq: AMST). Dr. Omenn previously served as a director of Amgen, Inc. for 27 years and Rohm & Haas Company for 22 years. Dr. Omenn was a director of Esperion Therapeutics (Nasdaq: ESPR) from August 2014 to May 2018. He is a director of the Hastings Center for Bioethics and the Center for Public Integrity. Dr. Omenn has a B.A. summa cum laude from Princeton University, M.D. magna cum laude from Harvard Medical School and Ph.D. in genetics from the University of Washington. We believe that Dr. Omenn's years of experience in the healthcare industry qualify him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Karen J. Wilson. Ms. Wilson has been a member of our board of directors since April 2020. Ms. Wilson is also currently a member of the boards of directors of Connect Biopharma, LAVA Therapeutics and Vaxart, Inc. Ms. Wilson previously served as Senior Vice President of Finance at Jazz Pharmaceuticals plc, a biopharmaceutical company, until September 2020 after serving as Principal Accounting Officer and Vice President of Finance. Prior to joining the Jazz Pharmaceuticals organization in February 2011, she served as Principal Accounting Officer and Vice President of Finance at PDL BioPharma, Inc., a life sciences company. She also previously served as a Principal at the consulting firm of Wilson Crisler LLC, Chief Financial Officer of ViroLogic, Inc., a biosciences company, Chief Financial Officer and Vice President of Operations for Novare Surgical Systems, Inc., a medical device manufacturer, and as a consultant and auditor for Deloitte & Touche LLP, a professional services firm. Ms. Wilson is a Certified Public Accountant and received a B.S. in Business from the University of California, Berkeley.
We believe that Ms. Wilson is qualified to serve on our Board due to her extensive background in financial and accounting matters for public companies and her leadership experience in the life science industry.
Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act requires our directors, executive officers, and persons holding more than 10% of our common stock to report their initial ownership of the common stock and other equity securities and any changes in that ownership in reports that must be filed with the SEC. The SEC has designated specific deadlines for these reports, and we must identify in our Annual Report on Form 10-K those persons who did not file these reports when due.
We filed reports on behalf of our directors, executive officers and 10% holders during the year ended December 31, 2021. Such reports were filed consistent with the reporting obligations of Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, except that untimely reports were filed on behalf of Dr. Goldberg and Dr. Venkatesan on November 17, 2021 and December 17, 2021, respectively, reporting the shares that were withheld to satisfy tax or other government withholding obligations in connection with the vesting of PSUs.
Audit Committee
Our audit committee oversees our corporate accounting and financial reporting process.
The members of our audit committee are Karen Wilson, Victor Ganzi, Allen Nissenson and Gilbert Omenn. Ms. Wilson serves as the chairperson of the committee. All members of our audit committee meet the requirements for financial literacy under the applicable rules and regulations of the SEC and The Nasdaq Stock Market. Our board of directors has determined that Ms. Wilson is an audit committee financial expert as defined under the applicable rules of the SEC and has the requisite financial sophistication as defined under the applicable rules and regulations of The Nasdaq Stock Market. Under the rules of the SEC, members of the audit committee must also meet heightened independence standards. Our board of directors has determined that each of Ms. Wilson, Mr. Ganzi, Dr. Nissenson and Dr. Omenn are independent under the applicable rules of the SEC and The Nasdaq Stock Market. The audit committee operates under a written charter that satisfies the applicable standards of the SEC and The Nasdaq Stock Market.
Procedures by Which Security holders May Recommend Nominees to the Board of Directors
The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee of the Board has adopted procedures for considering director candidates recommended by stockholders. Stockholders who wish to recommend individuals for consideration by the Committee as candidates for potential election by the Board as directors, can deliver a written recommendation to the Corporate at Angion Biomedica Corp., 51 Charles Lindbergh Boulevard, Uniondale, New York 11553, at least 120 days prior to the anniversary date of the mailing of the proxy statement for the last annual meeting of stockholders and must include the following information: name and address of the nominating stockholder; a representation that the nominating stockholder is a record holder; a representation that the nominating stockholder intends to appear in person or by proxy at the annual meeting to nominate the person or persons specified; information regarding each nominee that would be required to be included in a proxy statement; a description of any arrangements or understandings between the nominating stockholder and the nominee; and the consent of each nominee to serve as a director, if elected.
The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee will evaluate candidates recommended by a stockholder in the same manner as candidates identified any other person, including members of the Board.
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
Our Board of directors has adopted a code of business conduct and ethics that applies to all of our employees, officers and directors, including those officers responsible for financial reporting. The code of business conduct and ethics is available on our website. We intend that any amendments to the code, or any waivers of its requirements, will be disclosed on our website.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The following is a discussion and analysis of compensation arrangements of our named executive officers (NEOs). This discussion contains forward looking statements that are based on our current plans, considerations, expectations and determinations regarding future compensation programs. Actual compensation programs that we adopt may differ materially from currently planned programs as summarized in this discussion. As an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act, we are not required to include a Compensation Discussion and Analysis section and have elected to comply with the scaled disclosure requirements applicable to emerging growth companies.
We seek to ensure that the total compensation paid to our executive officers is reasonable and competitive. Compensation of our executives is structured around the achievement of individual performance and near-term corporate targets as well as long-term business objectives.
Our NEOs for fiscal year 2021 were as follows:
▪Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D., President and Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board(1) ;
▪Itzhak Goldberg, Director and Chairman Emeritus(2)
▪John Neylan, Executive Vice President, Chief Medical Officer and Head of Research
________
(1) Dr. Venkatesan was appointed Chairman of the Board in January 2022.
(2) After serving as Executive Chairman and Chief Scientific Officer for Angion during the year ended December 31, 2021. Dr. Goldberg resigned his employment in February 2022, and no longer serves as an Executive Officer of Angion.
2021 Summary Compensation Table
The following table sets forth total compensation paid to our NEOs for the fiscal year ending on December 31, 2021 and, with respect to Dr. Venkatesan, 2020. Neither Dr. Goldberg or Dr. Neylan were named executive officers in 2020 and, accordingly, their compensation for 2020 is omitted.
___________________________________
(1)The bonus column includes discretionary annual bonuses paid to each of our NEOs in connection with their service in the applicable fiscal year. For fiscal year 2020, the bonuses were paid in March 2021. Please see the descriptions of the bonuses paid to our NEOs under "2021 Bonuses" below, including target amounts for the discretionary annual bonuses.
(2)Amounts shown represents the grant date fair value of options granted as calculated in accordance with ASC Topic 718. See Note 2 of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the assumptions used in calculating this amount.
(3)NEOs received no compensation other than salaries, bonuses, and stock option awards.
(4)Dr. Venkatesan was appointed Chairman of the Board in January 2022.
(5)After serving as Executive Chairman and Chief Scientific Officer for Angion during the year ended December 31, 2021, Dr. Goldberg resigned his employment in February 2022, and no longer serves as an Executive Officer of Angion. Dr. Goldberg continues to serve as a Director and Chairman Emeritus.
(6)Dr. Neylan was appointed Executive Vice President and Head of Research in March 2022, and continues to serve as Chief Medical Officer.
Narrative to Summary Compensation Table
2021 Salaries
Our NEOs each receive a base salary to compensate them for services rendered to our company. The base salary payable to each named executive officer is intended to provide a fixed component of compensation reflecting the executive's skill set, experience, role and responsibilities. Dr. Venkatesan's base salary in 2020 was $570,000 and was increased to $587,100, effective as of January 1, 2021. Dr. Venkatesan current annual salary, effective January 1, 2022 is $608,000. Dr. Goldberg's base salary in 2020 was $469,920 and was increased in 2021 to $484,018, effective as of January 1, 2021. Dr. Goldberg is no longer employed by Angion. Dr. Neylan's base salary in 2020 was $455,000 and was increased to $468,650, effective as of January 1, 2021. Dr. Neylan’s current annual salary, effective January 1, 2022, is $485,100. Our board of directors and compensation committee may adjust base salaries from time to time in their discretion.
2021 Bonuses
Our NEOs did not receive a 2021 discretionary cash bonus. We paid each of our NEOs a discretionary cash bonus in 2021 in connection with their contributions to Angion in 2020, based upon their bonus targets, or 50%, 40% and 40% of Dr. Venkatesan's, Dr. Goldberg’s and Dr. Neylan's base salary, respectively.
Equity-Based Compensation
In February 2021, we granted each of Dr. Venkatesan, Dr. Goldberg and Dr. Neylan an option to purchase 178,920, 70,012 and 70,012 shares of our common stock, respectively, under our 2021 Incentive Award Plan (the “2021 Plan”). Each of Dr. Venkatesan's, Dr. Goldberg’s and Dr. Neylan’s options vest as to 1/48th of the shares subject to the option on each monthly anniversary of February 5, 2021, subject to the applicable NEO being employed or in continuous service to us as defined in the 2021 Plan through such vesting date. Upon our IPO in February 2021, Dr. Venkatesan’s and Dr. Goldberg’s performance-based restricted stock units (PSUs) met the performance condition, an initial public offering as defined in the Amended and Second Restated 2015 Equity Award Plan (the “2015 Plan”). Accordingly, the vesting of such PSUs in three equal parts, with the first part vesting commenced upon the IPO in February 2021, the second part vesting for each Dr. Venkatesan and Dr. Goldberg on June 24, 2021, and the third part to vest for each on June 24, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, 371,020 PSUs have been vested.
Other Elements of Compensation
Retirement Savings and Health and Welfare Benefits
On January 1, 2021, we implemented a 401(k) Retirement Savings Program through a third-party provider. Our NEOs are eligible to participate our 401(k) Program on the same terms as other full-time employees. We match 100% of the first 3% of a participant's annual eligible contributions to their 401(k) plan, and 50% of annual eligible contribution between 3% and 5%. We terminated our simple IRA plan for our employees, including our named executive officers, who satisfy certain eligibility requirements on December 31, 2020. We believe that providing a vehicle for tax-deferred retirement savings though 401(k) Plan and our former simple IRA plan adds to the overall desirability of our executive compensation package and further incentivizes our employees, including our NEOs, in accordance with our compensation policies.
All of our full-time employees, including our NEOs, are eligible to participate in our health and welfare plans, including medical, dental and vision benefits; short-term and long-term disability insurance; and life and AD&D insurance.
Perquisites and Other Personal Benefits
We determine perquisites on a case-by-case basis and will provide a perquisite to an NEO when we believe it is necessary to attract or retain the NEO. In 2021 and 2020, we did not provide any perquisites or personal benefits to our NEOs not otherwise made available to our other employees.
Outstanding Equity Awards at 2021 Fiscal Year End
The following table lists all outstanding equity awards held by our NEOs as of December 31, 2021.
___________________________________
(1)Except as otherwise noted, options and stock awards vest as to 1/48th of the shares subject to the award on each monthly anniversary of the vesting commencement date, subject to the holder's continued service to Angion through each vesting date.
(2)The market value of shares that have not vested is calculated based on the fair market value of our common stock as of December 31, 2021.
(3)The stock option vests as to 25% of the shares on the vesting commencement date and thereafter 10% of the shares vest on each quarterly anniversary, subject to Dr. Venkatesan's continued service to us through such vesting date; provided that an additional 25% of the shares can vest if certain financing goals are achieved.
(4)The non-market performance and service conditions based restricted stock units (PSUs) vest upon the occurrence of two vesting conditions, which must be achieved within seven years from the date of grant, a service vesting condition (the Service-Based Requirement) and a liquidity event requirement (the Liquidity Event Requirement). The Liquidity Event Requirement will be satisfied as to any then-outstanding RSUs that have not terminated earlier on the first to occur of (i) a change in control of Angion or (ii) the six month anniversary of or, if earlier, March 15 of the year following an initial public offering of Angion. The PSUs condition was met upon the closing of our IPO in February 2021. Accordingly, the PSUs vest in three equal parts, with the first part vesting commenced upon the IPO in February 2021, the second part vested on June 24, 2021, and the third part to vest on June 24, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, 371,020 PSUs have been vested.
(5)The stock option shall vest as to 25% of the shares on the first anniversary of the vesting commencement date and vest as to the remaining 75% of the shares in 24 substantially equal monthly installments thereafter, such that all awards will be vested on the third year anniversary of the vesting commencement date, subject to the holder's continued service to Angion through such vesting date.
Executive Compensation Arrangements
We previously entered into offer letter agreements with each of our named executive officers in connection with his or her employment with us. These agreements set forth the terms and conditions of employment of each named executive officer, including initial base salary, equity grants and employee benefits eligibility.
Severance Plan
In connection with our IPO, we entered into new severance and change in control plan that covers all of our NEOs that supersedes and replaces the severance benefits they would otherwise be entitled to receive.
Under our severance plan that encompasses each of our NEOs, if such NEO's employment with us is terminated without "cause" or such NEO resigns for "good reason" (as each is defined in the severance plan), the applicable NEO will be entitled to receive: (i) nine months of continued base salary (or 12 months for Dr. Venkatesan) and (ii) payment or reimbursement of the cost of continued healthcare coverage for nine months (or 12 months for Dr. Venkatesan). In lieu of the foregoing benefits, if each NEO's employment with us is terminated without "cause" or such NEO resigns for "good reason" during the 12-month period following a Change in Control (as defined in the 2021 Plan), the applicable NEO will be entitled to receive: (i) 12 months of continued base salary (or 18 months for Dr. Venkatesan), (ii) payment or reimbursement of the cost of continued healthcare coverage for 12 months (or 18 months for Dr. Venkatesan), (iii) an amount equal to 12 months of such NEO's annual bonus for
the year of termination assuming 100% of target performance (or 18 months for Dr. Venkatesan) and (iv) full accelerated vesting of any of unvested equity awards (except for any performance awards). The foregoing severance benefits are subject to the applicable NEO's delivery of an executed release of claims against us and continued compliance with the NEO's confidentiality obligations under the severance plan.
Until February 28, 2022, Dr. Goldberg had separate severance arrangements with us set forth in his Employment Agreement with us dated May 1, 2018, providing him severance pay, annual bonus payments and COBRA reimbursements for eighteen (18) months for any termination without “cause”, resignation for “good reason”, or “change of control” as defined by his Employment Agreement. On February 25, 2022, we and Dr. Goldberg entered into a Separation Agreement on such terms.
Director Compensation
We approved a compensation policy for our non-employee directors (Director Compensation Program) that became effective in connection with the consummation of the IPO in February 2021 and is subject to amendment by the board of directors as appropriate. Pursuant to the Director Compensation Program, our non-employee directors receive cash compensation as follows:
•Each non-employee director will receive an annual cash retainer in the amount of $40,000 per year.
•The Non-Executive Chairperson will receive an additional annual cash retainer in the amount of $35,000 per year.
•The lead non-employee director will receive an additional annual cash retained in the amount of $20,000 per year.
•The chairperson of the audit committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $15,000 per year for such chairperson's service on the audit committee. Each non-chairperson member of the audit committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $7,500 per year for such member's service on the audit committee.
•The chairperson of the compensation committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $10,000 per year for such chairperson's service on the compensation committee. Each non-chairperson member of the compensation committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $5,000 per year for such member's service on the compensation committee.
•The chairperson of the nominating and corporate governance committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $8,000 per year for such chairperson's service on the nominating and corporate governance committee. Each non-chairperson member of the nominating and corporate governance committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $5,000 per year for such member's service on the nominating and corporate governance committee.
Under the Director Compensation Program, as amended by the board of directors on March 8, 2021, each non-employee director will automatically be granted an option to purchase 30,000 shares of our common stock upon the director's initial appointment or election to our board of directors (Initial Grant) and an option to purchase 15,000 shares of our common stock automatically on the date of each annual stockholder's meeting thereafter, (Annual Grant), unless otherwise approved by the Board. The Initial Grant will vest as to 1/36th of the underlying shares on a monthly basis over three years, subject to continued service through each applicable vesting date. The Annual Grant will vest on the earlier of the first anniversary of the date of grant or the date of the next annual stockholder's meeting to the extent unvested as of such date, subject to continued service through each applicable vesting date. The exercise price per share of director options is equal to the fair market value of a share of our common stock on the grant date, and the director options will vest in full upon (i) a termination of service due to the director's death or Disability (as defined in the 2021 Plan) and (ii) the consummation of a Change in Control (as defined in the 2021 Plan).
The following table sets forth information concerning the compensation earned by our non-employee directors during the year ended December 31, 2021.
__________________________
(1) Amounts shown represents the grant date fair value of options granted during fiscal year 2021 as calculated in accordance with ASC Topic 718. See note 2 of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the assumptions used in calculating this amount. As of December 31, 2021, Messrs. Ganzi, Nissenson and Omenn and Ms. Wilson each held options to purchase an aggregate of 53,895 shares of our common stock.
(2) Non-employee directors only received cash fees and stock awards as compensation for their service on the Board of Directors.
The Compensation Committee of the Board has reviewed and assessed Angion’s compensation policies and practices as they related to risk management are not reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on Angion.
Item 12. Security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the beneficial ownership of our common stock as of March 1, 2022 by:
•each person, or group of affiliated persons, known by us to beneficially own more than 5% of our outstanding shares of our common stock;
•each of our directors;
•each of our named executive officers; and
•all directors and executive officers as a group.
The number of shares beneficially owned by each entity, person, director or executive officer is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC, and the information is not necessarily indicative of beneficial ownership for any other purpose. Under such rules, beneficial ownership includes any shares over which the individual has sole or shared voting power or investment power as well as any shares that the individual has the right to acquire within 60 days after March 1, 2022 through the exercise of any stock option, warrants or other rights. Except as otherwise indicated, and subject to applicable community property laws, the persons named in the table have sole voting and investment power with respect to all shares of our common stock held by that person.
The percentage of shares beneficially owned is computed on the basis of 29,957,509 shares of our common stock outstanding as of March 1, 2022. Shares of our common stock that a person has the right to acquire within 60 days after March 1, 2022 are deemed outstanding for purposes of computing the percentage ownership of the person holding such rights, but are not deemed outstanding for purposes of computing the percentage ownership of any other person, except with respect to the percentage ownership of all directors and executive officers as a group.
Unless otherwise indicated below, the address for each beneficial owner listed is c/o Angion Biomedica Corp., 51 Charles Lindbergh Boulevard, Uniondale, New York 11553.
_______________________________________________________
* Represents beneficial ownership of less than 1% of the shares of our common stock.
(1) Consists of (i) 1,639,257 shares of our common stock held directly by Jay R. Venkatesan and (ii) 1,241,641 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2022.
(2) Consists of (i) 1,720,068 shares of our common stock held directly by Dr. Goldberg; (ii) 233,374 shares of our common stock held by Itzhak D. Goldberg's Grandchildren's Trust #1 and 116,687 shares of our common stock held by the Itzhak D. Goldberg's Grandchildren's Trust #2, both in which Dr. Goldberg disclaims any pecuniary interest and (iii) 273,053 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2022.
(3) Based on a Schedule 13G filed on February 14, 2022. The address of EISA-ABC, LLC is 41 Brayton Street, Englewood, NJ 07631.
(4) Consists of the shares described in footnote 1 above.
(5) Consists of the shares described in footnote 2 above.
(6) Consists of (i) 823,117 shares of our common stock held directly by Victor F. Ganzi and 155,581 shares of our common stock held by Victor F Ganzi 2012 GST Family Trust held by Victor Ganzi; (ii) 40,930 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2022.
(7) Consists of (i) 35,136 shares of our common stock held directly by John Neylan and (ii)222,431 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2022.
(8) Consists of (i) 80,326 shares of our common stock held by the Gilbert S. Omenn Revocable Trust and (ii) 40,930 shares of common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2022.
(9) Consists of 40,930 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2022.
(10) Consists of (i)18,718 shares of our common stock held directly by Karen Wilson and (ii) 40,930 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2022.
(11) Consists of (i) the shares described in footnotes 3 through 9 above, (ii) 34,399 shares of our common stock held by two other executive officers who are not in the table above, and (iii) 262,531 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options held by the two other executive officers who are not in the table above within 60 days of March 1, 2022.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
The following table summarizes our equity compensation plan information as of December 31, 2021. Information is included for equity compensation plans approved by our stockholders. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any equity compensation plans that were not approved by our stockholders.
(1) Consists of shares subject to our 2015 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2015 Plan”), our 2021 Incentive Award Plan. (the “2021 Plan”), and 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “ESPP”). The 2021 Plan contains an “evergreen” provision, pursuant to which the number of shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to awards under such plan shall be increased on the first day of each year equal to the lesser of (i) 5% of the number of shares of common stock outstanding (on an as converted basis) on the last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year, or (ii) if our Board acts prior to the first day of the fiscal year, such lesser amount that our Board determines for purposes of the annual increase of the fiscal year. As of January 1, 2022, the 2021 Plan was increased by 1,497,818 pursuant to such evergreen provision. The ESPP contains an “evergreen” provision, pursuant to which the number of shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to awards under such plan shall be increased on the first day of each year equal to the lesser of (i) 299,564 (on an as converted basis) on the last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year, or (ii) if our Board acts prior to the first day of the fiscal year, such lesser amount that our Board determines for purposes of the annual increase of the fiscal year. As of January 1, 2022, the ESPP was increased by 1% of share outstanding shares as of January 1, 2022 pursuant to such evergreen provision. No shares are reflected as being subject to rights as of December 31, 2021 as we have not started any offering periods under the ESPP and, even if we did, such number of shares could not be calculated.
(2) Shares subject to RSUs and PSUs do not have an exercise price. The weighted average exercise price for just the stock options outstanding was $8.92.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The following is a description of transactions since January 1, 2020 to which we have been a party, in which the amount involved exceeds or will exceed $120,000, and in which any of our directors, executive officers or beneficial owners of more than 5% of our capital stock, or an affiliate or immediate family member thereof, had or will have a direct or indirect material interest, other than compensation, termination and change-in-control arrangements, which are described under "Executive Compensation." We also describe below certain other transactions with our directors, executive officers and stockholders.
All of the transactions set forth below were approved by a majority of our board of directors. We believe that we have executed all of the transactions set forth below on terms no less favorable to us than we could have obtained from unaffiliated third parties. It is our intention to ensure that all future transactions between us and our officers, directors and principal stockholders and their affiliates are approved by our audit committee, once it is constituted, and a majority of the members of our board of directors, including a majority of the independent and disinterested members of our board of directors, and are on terms no less favorable to us than those that we could obtain from unaffiliated third parties.
Convertible Note Financings
All of our issued convertible promissory notes were converted to common stock in February 2021 upon our IPO. During 2020, $1.8 million convertible notes from Dr. Venkatesan were exchanged into convertible preferred stock in August 2020 which were then converted into common stock upon IPO.
In the first nine months of 2020, we issued convertible promissory notes (the Convertible Notes) to certain investors in aggregate principal amount of $34.8 million. The Convertible Notes accrued interest at a rate of 12% per annum, and convert into shares of our common stock upon the consummation of our IPO. In December 2020, we issued Vifor Pharma a convertible promissory note in aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million as part of the equity investment with a maturity date of three years, 2% interest and a conversion price of $11.57 per share, which was automatically converted into shares of our common stock upon our IPO.
The table below sets forth the principal amount, and number of shares of issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Notes issued in 2020 to our directors, executive officers or owners of more than 5% of a class of our
capital stock, or an affiliate or immediate family member thereof:
_____________________________________
(1)The terms of the Convertible Notes provide that the notes and accrued dividends will convert at a price that is equal to a 20% discount to the price of the common stock offered in our IPO. The number of shares reflected are based on an initial public offering price of $16.00 per share and assumed the conversion occurs on February 9, 2021.
(2)Dr. Omenn is a member of our board of directors. Amount shown includes Convertible Notes held by the Gilbert S. Omenn Revocable Trust, an estate planning instrument for which Mr. Omenn is trustee.
(3)Consists of common stock converted from both convertible notes outstanding and convertible preferred stock outstanding.
(4)Dr. Venkatesan is our chief executive officer and a member of our board of directors.
(5)Mr. Ganzi is a member of our board of directors.
(6)Ms. Wilson is a member of our board of directors.
(7)Vifor (International) Ltd. is our licensing partner.
Transactions with NovaPark LLC
We rent office and laboratory space in Uniondale, New York from NovaPark LLC (NovaPark), an affiliated company, under a lease that expires on June 20, 2026. The space that we rent is part of a 110,000-square-foot general laboratory and development facility (the NovaPark Facility) for biological and chemistry research owned by NovaPark. We recorded rent expense for fixed lease payments of $1.1 million and $1.0 million for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We recorded rent expense for variable expenses related to the lease of $0.5 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We, Dr. Goldberg and Rina Kurz, Dr. Goldberg's spouse, own 10%, 45% and 45%, respectively, of the membership interests in NovaPark LLC.
The NovaPark Facility has been financed by a mortgage pursuant to which NovaPark's payment obligations are guaranteed by Dr. Goldberg, including a limited personal guarantee up to an amount of $2.1 million. In 2016, in connection with the refinancing of the mortgage, we entered into an indemnification agreement with Dr. Goldberg, pursuant to which we agreed to indemnify Dr. Goldberg from any loss arising out of any claim or action asserted by the mortgage lender against Dr. Goldberg related to Dr. Goldberg's personal limited guarantee of the mortgage. In February 2020, we and Dr. Goldberg terminated the indemnification agreement.
Consultant Fees and Employment of Immediate Family
We have paid consulting fees under an agreement with Rina Kurz, Dr. Goldberg's spouse, for management and administrative services relating to our U.S. government grants and contracts. For the year ended December 31, 2021, consultant fees paid to Ms. Kurz were approximately $0.1 million. We believe the consulting arrangement with Ms. Kurz was made on terms no less favorable to us than those that we could obtain from unaffiliated third parties. Angion terminated Ms. Kurz’s consultant agreement in February 2022.
Elisha Goldberg, Dr. Goldberg's son, who formerly served as our Vice President and Director of Strategy, was separated from his employment with us on January 31, 2022 as part of our reduction in force announced in January 2022. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Elisha Goldberg was paid $0.3 million in salary and total award of options during 2021 representing less than 0.1% of our fully diluted capitalization.
Policies and Procedures for Related Party Transactions
Our board of directors has adopted a related party transaction policy setting forth the policies and procedures for the identification, review and approval or ratification of related party transactions. This policy covers, with certain exceptions set forth in Item 404 of Regulation S-K under the Securities Act, any transaction, arrangement or
relationship, or any series of similar transactions, arrangements or relationships, in which we and a related party were or will be participants and the amount involved exceeds $120,000, including purchases of goods or services by or from the related party or entities in which the related party has a material interest, indebtedness and guarantees of indebtedness. In reviewing and approving any such transactions, our audit committee will consider all relevant facts and circumstances as appropriate, such as the purpose of the transaction, the availability of other sources of comparable products or services, whether the transaction is on terms comparable to those that could be obtained in an arm's length transaction, management's recommendation with respect to the proposed related party transaction, and the extent of the related party's interest in the transaction.
Director Independence
Our board of directors currently consists of six members. Our board of directors has determined that all of our directors, other than Dr. Venkatesan and Dr. Goldberg, qualify as "independent" directors in accordance with The Nasdaq Stock Market listing requirements. Dr. Venkatesan and Dr. Goldberg are not considered independent because they were employees of Angion Biomedica Corp. in 2021. As of March 2022, Dr. Goldberg was no longer an employee of Angion. In addition, as required by The Nasdaq Stock Market rules, our board of directors has made a subjective determination as to each independent director that no relationships exist that, in the opinion of our board of directors, would interfere with the exercise of independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities of a director. In making these determinations, our board of directors reviewed and discussed information provided by the directors and us with regard to each director's business and personal activities and relationships as they may relate to us and our management. There are no family relationships among any of our directors or executive officers.
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees
The following table sets forth all fees billed for professional audit, tax and other services rendered by Moss Adams LLP (in thousands):
__________________________
(1) Audit fees are for professional services for the audit of our financial statements, the review of quarterly interim financial statements, and for services that are normally provided by the accountant in connection with other regulatory filings or engagements. Fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 include services associated with our IPO and services rendered for the 2021 audit. Fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 include services associated with our IPO.
(2) Tax fees are for compliance and consultation.
(3) Other fees are for grant compliance audit fee in 2021 and 2020.
Part IV
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a)Financial Statements: See “Index to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
(b)Exhibits.
Exhibit
Number Exhibit
Description Incorporated by
Reference Filed Herewith
Form Date Number
3.1 Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation
8-K 2/9/2021 3.1
3.2 Amended and Restated Bylaws
8-K 2/9/2021 3.2
4.1 Reference is made to exhibits 3.1 through 3.2.
4.2 Form of Common Stock Certificate.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 4.2
4.3 Form of Warrant to Purchase Common Stock.
S-1 1/15/2021 4.3
4.4 Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of March 31, 2020, by and among Angion Biomedica Corp. and the investors party thereto.
S-1 1/15/2021 4.6
4.5 Description of Registrant’s Securities Registered Pursuant to Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
X
10.1 Agreement of Lease, dated June 21, 2011, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and NovaPark LLC, as amended.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.1
10.2† Licensing Agreement, dated November 6, 2020, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Vifor (International) Ltd.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.4
10.2(a)† Amendment - First Amendment dated July 1, 2021 to Licensing Agreement, dated November 6, 2020, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Vifor (International) Ltd.
X
10.3(a)# Second Amended and Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.5(a)
10.3(b)#
Form of Incentive Stock Option Grant under 2015 Equity Incentive Plan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.5(b)
10.3(c)#
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Grant under 2015 Equity Incentive Plan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.5(c)
10.3(d)#
Form of Stock Option Exercise under 2015 Equity Incentive Plan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.5(d)
10.4(a)#
2021 Incentive Award Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.6(a)
10.4(b)#
Form of Stock Option Grant Notice and Stock Option Agreement under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.6(b)
10.4(c)#
Form of Restricted Stock Award Grant Notice and Restricted Stock Award Agreement under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.6(c)
10.4(d)#
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Grant Notice and Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.6(d)
10.5# 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.7
10.6# Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated March 29, 2019, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Jay R. Venkatesan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.8
10.7# Executive Employment Agreement, dated May 1, 2018, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Itzhak D. Goldberg.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.9
10.7(a) Separation Agreement, dated February 25, 2022, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Itzhak D. Goldberg
X
10.8(b) Separation Agreement, dated March 1, 2022, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Elisha Goldberg
X
10.9# Executive Employment Agreement, dated December 17, 2018, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and John F. Neylan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.10
10.10# Offer Letter, dated November 27, 2019, as amended, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Jennifer J. Rhodes.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.11
Exhibit
Number Exhibit
Description Incorporated by
Reference Filed Herewith
Form Date Number
10.11# Consulting Agreement, dated June 3, 2020, as amended, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Gregory S. Curhan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.12
10.11(a)# First Amendment dated September 9, 2022 to Consulting Agreement, dated June 3, 2020, as amended, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Gregory S. Curhan.
X
10.11(b)# Second Amendment dated December 1, 2021 to Consulting Agreement, dated June 3, 2020, as amended, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Gregory S. Curhan.
X
10.11(c)# Third Amendment dated March 17, 2022 to Consulting Agreement, dated June 3, 2020, as amended, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Gregory S. Curhan.
X
10.12# Non-Employee Director Compensation Program.
X
10.13 Form of Indemnification Agreement for directors and officers.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.14
10.14# Amended and Restated Executive Separation Benefits Plan dated November 19, 2021.
X
10.15# Supply Agreement, dated December 10, 2022, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Solara Active Pharma Sciences, Ltd.
X
2015 Stock Purchase Agreement, dated February 4, 2021, by and among Angion Biomedica Corp. and the purchasers named therein.
8-K 2/09/2021 10.1
2016# 2022 Compensation Decisions with Executive Officers
8-K 3/04/2022 Item 5.02
21.1 Subsidiaries of the registrant.
S-1 1/15/2021 21.1
23.1 Consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
X
24.1 Power of Attorney (reference is made to the signature page hereto)
X
31.1 Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
X
31.2 Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
X
32.1^ Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
X
32.2^ Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
X
__________________________________
†Portions of this exhibit have been omitted in accordance with Item 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K.
# Indicates management contract or compensatory plan.
^ The certification that accompanies this Annual Report on Form 10-K pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, is not deemed “filed” by the Registrant for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
Not applicable.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
By: /s/ JAY R. VENKATESAN, M.D.
Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D.
President and Chief Executive Officer and Chairman
Power of Attorney
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D. and Jennifer J. Rhodes, and each of them acting individually, as his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, each with full power of substitution, for him or her in any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments to this Registration Statement on Form 10-K and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the SEC, granting unto said attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of each to act alone, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done in connection therewith, as fully for all intents and purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, or his or their substitute or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this Registration Statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature Title Date
/s/ JAY R. VENKATESAN, M.D. President and Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board (Principal Executive Officer)
March 30, 2022
Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D.
/s/ GREGORY S. CURHAN
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
March 30, 2022
Gregory S. Curhan
/s/ ITZHAK D. GOLDBERG, M.D.
Director and Chairman Emeritus
March 30, 2022
Itzhak D. Goldberg, M.D.
/s/ VICTOR F. GANZI Lead Independent Director
March 30, 2022
Victor F. Ganzi
/s/ ALLEN R. NISSENSON, M.D. Director March 30, 2022
Allen R. Nissenson, M.D.
/s/ GILBERT S. OMENN, M.D., PH.D. Director March 30, 2022
Gilbert S. Omenn, M.D., Ph.D.
/s/ KAREN J. WILSON Director March 30, 2022
Karen J. Wilson