ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following section contains statements that are not statements of historical fact and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievement to differ materially from anticipated results, performance, or achievement, expressed or implied in such forward-looking statements. These statements reflect our current views with respect to future events, are based on assumptions, and are subject to risks and uncertainties. We discuss many of these risks and uncertainties at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and under the sections captioned “Business” and “Risk Factors.” The following discussion should also be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the Notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Management Overview
We are a global joint preservation company that creates and delivers meaningful advancements in early intervention orthopedic care. Based on our collaborations with clinicians to understand what they need most to treat their patients, we develop minimally invasive products that restore active living for people around the world. We are committed to leading in high opportunity spaces within orthopedics, including osteoarthritis, or OA, pain management, regenerative solutions, sports medicine soft tissue repair and bone preserving joint technologies.
We have thirty years of global expertise developing, manufacturing and commercializing products based on our hyaluronic acid, or HA, technology platform. HA is a naturally occurring polymer found throughout the body that is vital for proper joint health and tissue function. Our proprietary technologies for modifying the HA molecule allow product properties to be tailored specifically to multiple uses, including enabling longer residence time to support OA pain management and creating a solid form of HA called Hyaff, which is a platform utilized in our regenerative solutions portfolio.
In early 2020, we expanded our overall technology platform, product portfolio, and significantly enhanced our commercial infrastructure, especially in the United States, through our strategic acquisitions of Parcus Medical, a sports medicine and instrumentation solutions provider focused on soft tissue repair, and Arthrosurface, a company specializing in bone preserving partial and total joint replacement solutions. Through these acquisitions, we have transformed our company. We expanded our addressable market from the over $1 billion global OA pain management market to the over $8 billion global joint preservation market (which includes the faster growing sports medicine soft tissue repair and extremities segments), advanced our commercial capabilities, instituted systems and process to support our transformation, and expanded our product pipeline and research and development expertise in our target markets.
As we look towards the future, our business is positioned to capture value within our target market of joint preservation. We believe our success will be driven by our:
●
Decades of experience in HA-based regenerative solutions and early intervention orthopedics combined under new seasoned leadership with a strong financial foundation for future investment in meaningful solutions for our customers and their patients;
●
Robust network of stakeholders in our target markets to identify evolving unmet patient treatment needs;
●
Prioritized investment in differentiated pipeline of regenerative solutions, bone preserving implants and sports medicine soft tissue repair products;
●
Leveraging our global commercial expertise to drive growth across the portfolio, with an intentional site of care focus on ASCs in the United States;
●
Opportunity to pursue strategic inorganic growth opportunities, including potential partnerships and smaller acquisitions, technology licensing, and leveraging our strong financial foundation and operational capabilities; and
●
Energized and experienced team focused on strong values, talent, and culture.
For additional information regarding our business, please refer to “Item 1. Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Developments during the Year Ended December 31, 2021
●
We completed enrollment of the U.S. pilot clinical trial of Cingal, our combination viscosupplement / steroid product for OA pain management.
●
We completed market launch of Tactoset Injectable Bone Substitute for augmentation of suture anchor fixation. This new indication allows surgeons to use Tactoset for hardware fixation due to insufficient bone quality, increasing pull-out strength of suture anchors.
●
We launched a focused effort to advance our ESG strategy by completing an in-depth “Materiality Assessment” validating key environmental, social and governance issues of greatest importance to stakeholders.
●
We completed market launch of WristMotion Total Wrist Arthroplasty (TWA) system focused on alleviating pain and restoring full range of motion for patients with arthritic wrist joints; WristMotion TWA, along with WristMotion Hemiarthroplasty System, provide surgeons with multiple innovative and bone preserving treatment options for different stages and severities of wrist arthritis.
●
We received 510(k) clearance for a reverse shoulder implant system. This clearance sets the stage for the development and expansion of our shoulder implant portfolio targeted for the ASC.
●
We rolled out Anika’s ERP system, SAP, to legacy Parcus and Arthrosurface operations, providing additional operational capabilities in support of our growth strategy.
COVID-19 Pandemic
As discussed more fully in the section captioned “Results of Operations - Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020” below, the COVID-19 pandemic impacted our full year financial condition and operations. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the spread of the COVID-19 virus a pandemic. This pandemic has caused an economic downturn on a global scale, as well as significant volatility in the financial markets. There has been significant volatility in our results on a quarterly basis due to the worldwide cancellation or delay of elective procedures, staffing shortages and supply chain disruptions, as well as the impact on timelines associated with certain clinical studies. While elective procedure volume had a limited recovery after the initial pandemic impacts seen in the early parts of second quarter of 2020 due to the easing of COVID-19 related restrictions in certain jurisdictions, areas of the United States and other countries have recently seen, and continue to see, fluctuating infection rates increasing as the result of emerging variants of COVID-19. Continuing fluctuations in infection rates in the United States and other countries make future results difficult to predict despite recent advances in the vaccination rates of certain parts of the population. Please see the section captioned “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information with respect to the risks faced by our business in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken many precautions to provide a safe work environment for our employees and customers, including the establishment and implementation of a work from home policy, where possible. Despite increasing vaccination rates and other efforts to return to a more normalized business environment, the pandemic continues to have an impact on our business in certain jurisdictions and a resurgence of COVID-19 as a result of emerging variants or other factors, as has occurred in certain jurisdictions, could result in additional government lockdowns or other restrictions, quarantine requirements, staffing shortages or supply chain disruptions that could impact our business and operations. We may also have to take further actions that we determine are in the best interests of our employees or as required by federal, state, or local authorities. We have had some disruption in our ability to supply products to our customers due to supply chain disruptions and staffing shortages which has caused back orders or delays in certain shipments to our customers. Our commercial day-to-day operations have been impacted due to the worldwide cancellations and/or delays of elective procedures and restrictions on travel for both our employees and our clinician customers, and timelines associated with certain clinical studies and research and development programs have been delayed. While the impact has been limited to these items to date, we caution that there continues to be a possibility for potential future implementation of certain additional restrictions or other challenges associated with infections, staffing shortages or supply chain disruptions due to COVID-19 and it current or new variants in certain jurisdictions. The impact of these challenges are currently unknown, but could be significant.
Products
OA Pain Management
Our OA Pain Management product family consists of Monovisc, Orthovisc, Cingal, and Hyvisc, our injectable, HA-based viscosupplement offerings that are indicated to provide pain relief from osteoarthritis conditions.
Joint Preservation and Restoration
Our Joint Preservation and Restoration product family consists of: (a) our portfolio of over 150 bone preserving joint technology products, including partial joint replacement, joint resurfacing, and minimally invasive and bone sparing implants, designed to treat upper and lower extremity orthopedic conditions caused by trauma, injury and arthritic disease; (b) our line of sports medicine soft tissue repair solutions used to repair and reconstruct damaged ligaments and tendons due to sports injuries, trauma and disease; and (c) our orthopedic regenerative solutions products, including Hyalofast and Tactoset.
Non-Orthopedic
Our Non-Orthopedic product family consists of legacy HA-based products that are marketed principally for non-orthopedic applications, including our adhesion barrier product, advanced wound care products, our ear, nose and throat products, and our ophthalmic products.
For additional information with respect to our products, including information related to how they are sold and new product development initiatives, please see the sections captioned “Products,” “Sales Channels,” and “Research and Development” contained within “Part I. Item I. Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Statement of Operations Detail
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $147.8 million, an increase of $17.3 million, or 13%, compared to prior year. The increase in revenue was primarily driven by partial recovery from the initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sales volumes and related strategic partner ordering patterns as well as from growing commercial adoption of new products. The increase for 2021 was also in part due to inclusion of full first quarter results of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface, which we acquired on January 24, 2020 and February 3, 2020, respectively.
The following table presents product revenue by product family for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Revenue from our OA Pain Management product family increased 8% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to prior year, due primarily to partial recovery from the initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sales volumes and related strategic partner ordering patterns.
Revenue from our Joint Preservation and Restoration product family increased 23% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to prior year, due primarily to organic growth as the initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on elective procedures begins to lift in various worldwide jurisdictions, especially in the United States during 2021. We also saw rapidly growing commercial adoption of new regenerative, soft tissue and bone sparing joint products introduced in 2019, 2020 and 2021. The increase was also due in part to the inclusion of full year results from Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface which were acquired in the first quarter of 2020.
Revenue from our non-orthopedic product family increased 20% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to prior year, primarily due to timing of distributor sales as well as due to higher revenues from legacy products during the first quarter.
Gross Profit and Margin
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $82.9 million, or gross margin of 56%, as compared with $69.0 million, or gross margin of 53%, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily resulted from revenue growth and lower amortization of inventory step up costs related to the Arthrosurface and Parcus Medical acquisitions. This increase was partially offset by higher product rationalization charges, as well as lower production levels and increased reserves caused in part by staffing and supply chain challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross margin includes the impact of inventory step-up associated with the Arthrosurface and Parcus Medical acquisitions, as well as acquisition-related amortization expenses. These expenses together increased cost of revenue by $12.7 million, or 9 points of gross margin, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to increased cost of revenue of $16.9 million, or 13 points of gross margin for the same periods in 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $27.3 million, an increase of $3.9 million, or 17%, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to product development activities associated with the development of new product candidates in our research and development pipeline, execution of the Cingal pilot study and Hyalofast clinical trial.
For additional information on our research and development activities, please see the section captioned “Part I. Item 1. Business-Research and Development” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $74.1 million, an increase of $14.0 million, or 23%, as compared to the prior year. The increase in SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to full period expenses from Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface, expansion of our commercial capability in the United States and expanded marketing activities and other operational capabilities to support the growing business needs, higher stock based compensation expense, and a non-cash loss on disposal of fixed assets, partially offset by the absence of transaction costs incurred in 2020 related to acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface. Certain activities were curtailed in the year ended December 31, 2020 due to cost optimization in light of the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Goodwill Impairment Charge
We assess goodwill for impairment annually, or, under certain circumstances, more frequently, such as when events or changes in circumstances indicate there may be impairment. U.S. government policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting changes in healthcare guidelines caused a temporary suspension of domestic elective surgical procedures. As a result of these events during 2020, we experienced decreases in immediate term revenue and related cash flows which directly impacted the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface reporting unit. The results of the interim and annual impairment tests indicated that the estimated fair value of this reporting unit was less than its carrying value. Consequently, a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $42.5 million was recorded in 2020. There were no goodwill impairment charges during 2021.
Contingent Consideration Fair Value Change
In the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a $21.1 million net benefit related to the change in fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities incurred associated with the acquisition of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface in 2020. The liability for contingent consideration is remeasured at each reporting period until the contingency is resolved. The decrease in fair value of the contingent consideration was due primarily to the decrease in the likelihood that certain contingent milestones would be achieved or because certain contingent milestones were not achieved. Also, in July 2021, we made a regulatory milestone payment in connection with the Arthrosurface acquisition in the amount of $10.0 million upon obtaining a regulatory clearance for a reverse shoulder implant system.
Income Taxes
The benefit from income taxes was $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting in an effective tax rate of (70.4%). The benefit from income taxes was $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an effective tax rate of 16.2%. The net change in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to lower income before tax in 2021, favorable state tax apportionment, a $0.9 million tax benefit on the decrease in the fair value of contingent consideration and the release of a valuation allowance initially recorded in 2020 in the amount of $0.9 million due to increased likelihood regarding the realizability of certain net deferred tax assets in Italy.
Net Income (Loss)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net income was $4.1 million, or $0.28 per diluted share, compared to net loss of $24.0 million, or $1.69 per diluted share, for the prior year. The increase in net income and diluted earnings per share was primarily due to increased revenue, reduction in the fair value of contingent consideration and the absence of goodwill impairment charges, partially offset by higher operating expenses primarily driven by increased spending to expand our commercial capability in the United States and development of new products and clinical trial activity.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present certain information with respect to adjusted gross profit and adjusted gross margin, adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Tax, Depreciation and Amortization, or EBITDA, adjusted net income, adjusted diluted earnings per share or adjusted EPS, which are financial measures not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP, and is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
We have presented adjusted gross profit and adjusted gross margin, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income, adjusted EPS, because they are key measures used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and to develop operational goals for managing our business. We believe these financial measures help identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of these items in calculating these measures can provide a useful tool for period-to-period comparisons of our core operating performance. Accordingly, we believe that these measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects and allowing for greater transparency with respect to key financial metrics used by our management in their financial and operational decision-making.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin
We define adjusted gross profit as our gross profit excluding amortization of certain acquired intangible assets, the impact of inventory fair-value step up associated with our recent acquisitions and certain product rationalization charges. The amortized assets contribute to revenue generation, and the amortization of such assets will likely continue in future periods until such assets are fully amortized. These assets include the fair value of certain identified assets acquired in acquisitions, including developed technology and acquired tradenames. We define adjusted gross margin as adjusted gross profit divided by total revenue.
The following is a reconciliation of adjusted gross profit to gross profit for the years ended December 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
Adjusted gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $10.2 million to $98.1 million representing 66% of revenue. Adjusted gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $87.9 million, or 67% of revenue. This increase in adjusted gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily resulted from higher revenue due to organic growth of revenues as COVID-19 pandemic related restrictions started lifting in various worldwide jurisdictions, especially in the United States, as well as the inclusion of full period results from Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface in 2021 as we acquired these businesses in early 2020. The decrease in adjusted gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, is due primarily to unfavorable production volumes and increased reserves caused partially by supply chain and staffing challenges, due largely to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Adjusted EBITDA
We present information below with respect to adjusted EBITDA, which we define as our net income (loss) excluding interest and other income, net, income tax benefit (expense), depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, product rationalization, and acquisition-related expenses. We have also excluded the impacts of goodwill impairment charges and changes in the fair value of contingent consideration associated with our acquisition transactions in early 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA is not prepared in accordance with US GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with US GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of adjusted EBITDA rather than net income (loss), which is the nearest US GAAP equivalent. Some of these limitations are:
•
adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization, and, although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated or amortized may have to be replaced in the future, the cash requirements for which are not reflected in adjusted EBITDA;
•
we exclude stock-based compensation expense from adjusted EBITDA although (a) it has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense for our business and an important part of our employee compensation strategy and (b) if we did not pay out a portion of our compensation in the form of stock-based compensation, the cash salary and bonus expense included in operating expenses likely would be higher, which would affect our cash position;
•
we exclude acquisition related expenses, including transaction costs and other related expenses, amortization and depreciation of acquired assets in recent acquisitions, and the impact of inventory fair-value step up on cost of revenue;
•
we exclude certain impairment charges, including impairment related to In-Process Research and Development, or IPR&D, assets, certain product rationalization charges as a result of managing our financial position in light of our recent acquisitions, the impact of COVID-19 and changing regulatory requirements;
•
we exclude goodwill impairment charges and changes in the fair value of contingent consideration;
•
the expenses and other items that we exclude in our calculation of adjusted EBITDA may differ from the expenses and other items, if any, that other companies may exclude from adjusted EBITDA when they report their operating results;
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs;
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect provision for (benefit from) income taxes or the cash requirements to pay taxes; and
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments.
The following is a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
Adjusted EBITDA for year ended December 31, 2021, decreased $7.5 million as compared to 2020. The decrease in adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to an increase in operating expenses largely attributable to expansion of our commercial capability in the United States and an increase in clinical trial activity, both of which had been largely curtailed during 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a non-cash impairment charge related to fixed assets, partially offset by an increase in revenue.
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EPS
We present information below with respect to adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted EPS. We define adjusted net income (loss) as our net income (loss) excluding acquisition-related expenses, amortization and depreciation of acquired assets, the impact of inventory fair-value step up on cost of revenue and the impacts of goodwill impairment charges and changes in the fair value of contingent consideration, as well as certain impairment charges, including impairment related to IPR&D assets and non-cash product rationalization charges, each on a tax effected basis. Acquisition related expenses are those that we would not have incurred except as a direct result of acquisition transactions. Acquisition related expenses consist of investment banking, legal, accounting, and other professional and related expenses. The amortized assets contribute to revenue generation, and the amortization of such assets will recur in future periods until such assets are fully amortized. These assets include the estimated fair value of certain identified assets acquired in acquisitions, including in-process research and development, developed technology, customer relationships and acquired tradenames. We define adjusted EPS as US GAAP diluted earnings per share excluding the above adjustments to net income (loss) used in calculating adjusted net income (loss), each on a per share and tax effected basis.
The following is a reconciliation of adjusted net income (loss) to net income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
The following is a reconciliation of adjusted EPS to diluted earnings (loss) per share for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively (in thousands, expect per share data):
Adjusted net income (loss) in 2021, decreased $10.5 million as compared to 2020. The decrease in adjusted net income for the period was primarily due to an increase in selling and marketing expenses primarily attributable to increased cost to support our commercial capability in the United States, an increase in research and development expenses, an increase in share-based compensation expense due largely to forfeitures of unvested shares during the comparable period, a non-cash impairment charge related to fixed assets, production volumes and supply chain and staffing challenges, as well as a decrease in tax benefits.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Statement of Operations Detail
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $130.5 million, an increase of $15.9 million, or 14%, compared to prior year. This increase was primarily driven by growth in our Joint Preservation and Restoration product family, as a result of our acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface in early 2020, offset by a decrease in revenue from our OA Pain Management products due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on elective procedure volumes worldwide.
The following table presents product revenue by product family for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Revenue from our OA Pain Management product family decreased, primarily due to the worldwide impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on elective procedure volumes. Revenue from our Joint Preservation and Restoration products increased primarily from the addition of revenue from the Arthrosurface and Parcus Medical product portfolios following their early 2020 acquisition by us, offset in part by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on elective surgery procedure volumes worldwide. Revenue from our Non-Orthopedic product family decreased due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on procedure volumes worldwide. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes licensing related revenue in the amount of $0.1 million which was zero in 2020.
Gross Profit and Margin
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $69.0 million, or gross margin of 53%, as compared with $85.9 million, or gross margin of 75%, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to the inventory step-up associated with the Arthrosurface and Parcus Medical acquisitions, as well as acquisition-related amortization expenses, which together increased cost of revenue by $16.9 million, or 13 points of gross margin, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross margin also decreased due to lower volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, gross profit decreased due to a non-cash inventory impairment charge of $1.9 million following our determination not to pursue CE Mark renewals for certain of our legacy HA-based products primarily in the Non-Orthopedic product family.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $23.4 million, an increase of $6.8 million, or 41%, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to activities associated with new product development in our research and development pipeline, including those related to Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface following their acquisition in the first quarter of 2020, as well as preparation and initial execution activities for the Cingal Pilot study and certain European post-market clinical studies to support CE Mark approvals for our products, Hyalofast clinical study activities, and IPR&D impairment charges related to Hyalonect and Hyalobone projects.
For additional information on our research and development activities, please see the section captioned “Part I. Item 1. Business-Research and Development” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $60.1 million, an increase of $25.1 million, or 72%, as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily related to expenses associated with operating Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface following their acquisition in the first quarter of 2020, including incremental expenses to integrate our commercial infrastructure, as well as incentive compensation, partially offset by a decrease in stock compensation expense due to the forfeiture of unvested equity awards.
Goodwill Impairment Charge
We assess goodwill for impairment annually, or, under certain circumstances, more frequently, such as when events or changes in circumstances indicate there may be impairment. U.S. government policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting changes in healthcare guidelines caused a temporary suspension of domestic elective surgical procedures. As a result of these events during the first quarter of 2020, we performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment related to the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface reporting unit as of March 31, 2020. The results of these interim impairment tests indicated that the estimated fair value of this reporting unit was less than its carrying value. Consequently, a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $18.1 million was recorded in the quarter ended March 31, 2020. The decline in fair value was primarily due to decreases in immediate term revenue and related cash flows as a result of the temporary suspension of domestic elective procedures which directly impact the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface reporting unit. We also performed our annual impairment testing related to the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface reporting unit in the fourth quarter of 2020. The results of the annual impairment test indicated that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value. This was primarily due to a decline in projected net cash flows as a result of the continued impact of COVID-19 on revenue and related cash flows, the expectation that the economic recovery will take longer than expected to materialize, and additional projected investment to support future growth. Consequently, a non-cash goodwill impairment charge was recorded in the amount of $24.4 million during the fourth quarter of 2020. The total non-cash goodwill impairment charge with respect to the reporting unit amounted to $42.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contingent Consideration Fair Value Change
In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $28.7 million net benefit related to the change in fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities incurred as a result of the acquisition of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface in the first quarter of 2020. The liability for contingent consideration is remeasured at each reporting period until the contingency is resolved. The decrease in fair value of the contingent consideration was largely due to a decrease in revenue projections related primarily to the COVID-19 pandemic. On October 15, 2020, we received FDA clearance for the WristMotion Total Arthroplasty System, triggering a $5 million regulatory-based milestone payment per the Arthrosurface merger agreement.
Income Taxes
The benefit from income taxes was $4.6 million for the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020, based on an effective tax rate of 16.2%. The provision for income taxes was $8.9 million for the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2019, based on an effective tax rate of 24.7%. The net decrease in the effective tax rate benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to the $4.8 million tax expense on the impairment of non-tax deductible goodwill, partially offset by the $1.9 million tax benefit on the decrease in the fair value of the contingent consideration.
Net Income (Loss)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss was $23.9 million, or $1.69 net loss per diluted share, compared to net income of $27.2 million, or $1.89 net income per diluted share, for the prior year. The decrease in net income and diluted earnings per share was primarily a result of the increased expenses associated with acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface previously discussed, in addition to the unfavorable impact on sales and gross profit from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Concentration of Risk
We have historically derived the majority of our revenue from a small number of customers, most of whom resell our products to end-users and are significantly larger companies than us. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Mitek accounted for 45% of revenue, as compared to 49% in prior year. While we believe that our expanded commercial infrastructure will substantially diversify our revenue base, we expect to continue to be dependent on a small number of large customers, especially Mitek, for a sizeable portion of our revenues in the near-term future. The failure of these customers to purchase our products in the amounts they historically have or in amounts that we expect could materially impact our business.
In addition, if present and future customers terminate their purchasing arrangements with us, significantly reduce or delay their orders, or seek to renegotiate their agreements on terms less favorable to us, our business, financial condition, and results of operations will be adversely affected. If we accept terms less favorable than the terms of the current agreements, such renegotiations may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and/or results of operations. Furthermore, in any future negotiations we may be subject to the perceived or actual leverage that these customers may have given their relative size and importance to us. Any termination, change, reduction, or delay in orders could seriously harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Accordingly, unless and until we diversify and expand our customer base, our future success will significantly depend upon the timing and size of future purchases by our largest customers and the financial and operational success of these customers. The loss of any one of our major customers or the delay of significant orders from such customers, even if only temporary, could reduce or delay our recognition of revenues, harm our reputation in the industry, and reduce our ability to accurately predict cash flow, and, as a consequence, it could seriously harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
See Note 13, Revenue by Product Family, by Significant Customer and by Geographic Location; Geographic Information, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding significant customers.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We require cash to fund our operating activities and to make capital expenditures and other investments in the business. We expect that our requirements for cash to fund these uses will increase as our operations expand. We continue to generate cash from operating activities and believe that our operating cash flows, cash currently on our balance sheet and availability under our credit facility will be sufficient to allow us to continue to invest in our existing business, to manage our capital structure on a short and long-term basis, and to meet our anticipated operating cash needs. Cash, cash equivalents, and investments aggregated $94.4 million and $98.3 million, and working capital totaled $138.7 million and $140.5 million, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We are closely monitoring our liquidity and capital resources for any potential impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our operations.
We entered into a Third Amendment to Credit Agreement, on November 12, 2021, with Bank of America N.A. as administrative agent, amended and restated our existing revolving line of credit agreement dated October 24, 2017 and provides up to $75.0 million in the form of a senior revolving line of credit. Subject to certain conditions, we may request up to an additional $75.0 million for a maximum aggregate commitment of $150.0 million. As a precautionary measure at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we executed a drawdown of $50.0 million in April 2020, all of which we repaid during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings and we are in compliance with the terms of the credit facility.
Summary of Cash Flows (in thousands):
The following changes contributed to the net change in cash and cash equivalents from 2020 to 2021.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $8.4 million, $13.1 million, $37.0 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019. The change in 2021 was primarily attributable to payment of contingent consideration, as well as normal variations in the timing of collections, timing of certain state tax payments and a decrease in cash outflows related to acquisition related expenses. In July 2021, we paid contingent consideration in the amount of $10.0 million, $2.8 million of which was classified within operating activities and the remaining $7.2 million was classified within financing activities.
For the foreseeable future, we expect to continue to invest substantial resources in research and development for new products and clinical trials as well as continued investment in our commercial infrastructure to support our growth strategy. These costs will be funded with a combination of cash on hand and cash expected to be generated from future operations.
Investing Activities
Investing activities used $3.1 million and $71.3 million in 2021 and 2020, and provided $39.7 million in 2019. The significant use of cash from investing activities in 2020 was primarily due to the $94.6 million of consideration paid, net of cash acquired, for the acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface. Capital expenditures totaled $5.1 million, $1.6 million, and $2.8 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $6.8 million, $3.8 million and $8.1 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019. The change was primarily due to the portion of the contingent consideration payment related to financing activities, as described above, in 2021.
For a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2020, and our cash flow activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 5, 2021, which is incorporated by reference in this Report.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments
The table below summarizes our non-cancelable operating leases, purchase commitments, and contractual obligations related to future periods which are not reflected in our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2021. Purchase commitments relate primarily to non-cancellable inventory commitments and capital expenditures entered in the normal course of business:
(1)
Includes purchase commitments for materials and other day to day business requirements.
Accounting for Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not use special purpose entities or other off-balance sheet financing techniques, except for operating leases as disclosed in the contractual obligations table above, that we believe have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We monitor our estimates on an ongoing basis for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. The impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout this section captioned “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Combinations and Contingent Consideration
Amounts paid for acquisitions are allocated to the intangible and tangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, if any, based on their fair values at the dates of acquisition. This purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions with respect to intangible assets and deferred revenue obligations. Critical estimates include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, including projected revenues and expenses, and the applicable discount rates. The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations that use information and assumptions determined by management. Any excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is allocated to goodwill. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as any contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of comprehensive income. The fair value of contingent consideration includes estimates and judgments made by management regarding the probability that future contingent payments will be made.
We use the income approach to determine the fair value of certain identifiable intangible assets including developed technology and IPR&D. This approach determines fair value by estimating after-tax cash flows attributable to these assets over their respective useful lives and then discounting these after-tax cash flows back to a present value. The estimated economic lives were determined using a variety of indicators including historical usage, evolutionary changes and other observable market data. We base our assumptions on estimates of future cash flows, expected growth rates and expected trends in technology. We base the discount rate used to arrive at the present value used in this method as of the date of acquisition on the time value of money and certain industry-specific risk factors. We use the relief-from-royalty method of the income approach to determine the fair value of trade names. This approach determines fair value by estimating the after-tax royalty savings attributable to owning the intangible asset and then discounting these after-tax royalty savings back to a present value. We base our assumptions on the estimated revenue attributable to the trade name and the estimated royalty rate attributable to the trade name. We use the avoided costs/lost profits method to determine the fair of customer relationships. This approach determines fair value by estimating the projected revenues related to the asset and estimated costs to recreate the intangible asset. We believe the estimated purchased customer relationships, developed technologies, trade name, and in process research and development amounts so determined represent the fair value at the date of acquisition and do not exceed the amount a third party would pay for the assets. If the subsequent actual results and updated projections of the underlying business activity change compared with the assumptions and projections used to develop these values, we could experience impairment charges which could be material. In addition, estimated economic lives of certain acquired assets are used to calculate depreciation and amortization expense. If our estimates of the economic lives change, depreciation or amortization expenses could be accelerated or slowed.
We used the comparative sales method to determine the fair value of work-in-process (“WIP”) and finished goods inventory acquired and ultimately the inventory step- up required. The fair value of WIP inventory was estimated as the selling price less the sum of (a) costs to complete, (b) costs of disposal, and (c) a reasonable profit allowance for the selling effort of the acquiring entity based on profit for similar products. The fair value of finished goods inventory was estimated as the selling price less the sum of (a) costs of disposal and (b) a reasonable profit allowance for the selling effort of the acquiring entity based on profit for similar products.
For contingent consideration, we update these estimates and the related fair value of contingent consideration at each reporting period based on the estimated probability of achieving the earn-out targets and applying a discount rate that measures the risk associated with the expected contingent payments. Under the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface merger agreements, there are contingent consideration milestones totaling up to $100 million payable from 2020 to 2022. Parcus Medical has net sales milestones annually from 2020 to 2022, while Arthrosurface had both regulatory and net sales milestones in 2020 and 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the remaining regulatory milestone and the net sales milestone related to Arthrosurface were not achieved. The fair value of the Parcus Medical contingent consideration is estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation. Changes in the fair value can result from changes pertaining to the achievement of the defined milestones and changes in assumed discount rates. Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration are recorded in our consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2021, the contingent consideration for Parcus Medical associated with net sales in 2021 amounted to $4.3 million, which is included in current liabilities. We do not expect the remaining earn-out milestone under the Parcus Medical merger agreement to be achieved.
Revenue Recognition - General
Pursuant to ASC 606, we recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue that is recorded reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We apply the following five-step model in order to determine this amount: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are capable of being distinct or distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
We generate sales principally through three types of customers: (i) commercial partnerships (ii) hospitals and ASCs, and (iii) distributors, referred to as distribution model.
For commercial partnership sales, we sell our products directly to these partners, who perform the vast majority of the downstream sales and marketing activities to customers and end-users. These arrangements may include the grant of certain licenses, performance of development services, and the supply of product. Our largest such customer, Mitek, represented 45% of total revenues for the year-ended December 31, 2021. We recognize revenue from product sales when the customer obtains control of our product, which typically occurs upon shipment to the customer. Commercial partnership agreements may also include sales-based royalties and milestones. As we considered the license to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate for these agreements, sales-based royalties and milestones are only recognized when the later of the underlying sale occurs or the performance obligation to which some or all of the sales-based royalty has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). This is generally in the same period that our licensees complete their product sales in their territory, for which we are contractually entitled to a percentage-based royalty. We record royalty revenues based on estimated net sales of licensed products as reported to us by our commercial partners. Differences between actual and estimated royalty revenues have not been material and are typically adjusted in the following quarter when the actual amounts are known. Revenue from sales-based royalties is included in revenues in our consolidated statement of operations.
For sales to hospitals and ASCs, which generally pairs in-house sales representatives with local or regional distributors, the inventory is generally consigned so that products are available when needed for surgical procedures. No revenue is recognized upon the placement of inventory into consignment, as we retain the ability to control the inventory. Revenue is recognized typically as of the date of surgical implantation of the product.
For distributor sales, we sell our products to our distributors, generally outside the United States, who subsequently resell the products to sub-distributors and health care providers, among others. We recognize revenue from product sales when the distributor obtains control of our product, which typically occurs upon shipment to the distributor, in return for agreed-upon, fixed-price consideration. Performance obligations are generally settled quickly after purchase order acceptance; therefore, the value of unsatisfied performance obligations at the end of any reporting period is generally insignificant. We sell to a diversified base of distributors and, therefore, believes there is no material concentration of credit risk.
Certain of our supply agreements contain terms that represent a promise to deliver product at the customer’s discretion that are considered distributor options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee, and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations. Our supply agreements do not provide options that are considered material rights.
Our payment terms are consistent with prevailing practice in the respective markets in which we do business. Most of our customers make payments based on contract terms, which are not affected by contingent events that could impact the transaction price. Payment terms fall within the one-year guidance for the practical expedient, which allows us to forgo adjustment of the contractual payment amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component. Our contracts with customers do not customarily provide a right of return, unless certain product quality standards are not met.
Some of our distributor agreements have volume-based discounts with tiered pricing which are generally prospective in nature. These prospective discounts together with any free-of-charge sample units offered are evaluated as potential material rights. If the prospective discounts or free-of-charge sample units are considered material rights, these would be separate performance obligations and a portion of the sales transaction price is allocated to the material right. Revenue allocated to the material right is recognized when the additional goods are transferred to the customer or when the option expires. During 2021, the consideration allocated to material rights was not significant.
We receive payments from our customers based on billing schedules established in each contract. Up-front payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due, and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional. Deferred revenue was $1.0 million and $0.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Generally, customer contracts contain Free on Board (“FOB”) or Ex-Works shipping point terms where the customer pays the shipping company directly for all shipping and handling costs. In those contracts in which we pay for the shipping and handling, the associated costs are generally recorded along with the product sale at the time of shipment in cost of revenue when control over the products has transferred to the customer. Value-add and other taxes we collected concurrently with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Our general product warranty does not extend beyond an assurance that the product or services delivered will be consistent with stated contractual specifications, which does not create a separate performance obligation. We recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense when incurred as the amortization period of the assets that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less in accordance with the practical expedient in paragraph ASC 340-40-25-4. These costs are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Inventories
Inventories are primarily stated at the lower of standard cost and net realizable value, with approximate cost determined using the first-in, first-out method. Work-in-process and finished goods inventories include materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead. Manufacturing variances attributable to abnormally low production are expensed in the period incurred. Inventory costs associated with product candidates that have not yet received regulatory approval are capitalized if we believe there is probable future commercial use and future economic benefit.
Our policy is to write-down inventory when conditions exist that suggest inventory may be in excess of anticipated demand or is obsolete based upon assumptions about future demand for our products and market conditions. We regularly evaluate the ability to realize the value of inventory based on a combination of factors including, but not limited to, historical usage rates, forecasted sales or usage, product end of life dates, and estimated current or future market values. Inventory needs and alternative usage avenues are explored within these processes to mitigate inventory exposure. We recorded an inventory reserve of $2.9 million in 2021 based on future sales forecasts as a result of our product rationalization efforts with respect to certain of our Joint Preservation and Restoration product family.
When recorded, inventory write-downs are intended to reduce the carrying value of inventory to its net realizable value. If actual demand for our products deteriorates, or if market conditions are less favorable than those projected, additional inventory write-downs may be required. Other long-term assets include inventory expected to remain on hand beyond one year.
Goodwill and In-Process Research and Development
Goodwill is the amount by which the purchase price of acquired net assets in a business combination exceeded the fair values of net identifiable assets on the date of acquisition. Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to impairment test annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances suggest that the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable, utilizing either the qualitative or quantitative method.
We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis as of November 30 or more frequently if we believe indicators of impairment exist. We have two reporting units: the legacy Anika reporting unit and a newly created reporting unit established in 2020 upon the acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface. The remaining goodwill as of December 31, 2021 pertains to the legacy Anika reporting unit, as the goodwill with respect to the newly created reporting unit was fully impaired in 2020.
We have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. When using the qualitative method in 2021, we considered several factors, including the following:
●
the amount by which the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying value as of the date of the most recent quantitative impairment analysis, which indicated there would need to be substantial negative developments in the markets in which the reporting unit operates in order for there to be potential impairment;
●
the carrying value of the reporting unit as of the assessment date compared to their previously calculated fair value as of the date of the most recent quantitative impairment analysis;
●
the current forecasts as compared to the forecasts included in the most recent quantitative impairment analysis;
●
public information from competitors and other industry information to determine if there were any significant adverse trends in our competitors' businesses;
●
changes in the value of major U.S. stock indices that could suggest declines in overall market stability that could impact the valuation of our reporting unit;
●
whether there had been any significant increases to the weighted-average cost of capital rates for the reporting unit, which could materially lower our prior valuation conclusions under a discounted cash flow approach.
Significant assumptions utilized in the impairment analysis included valuation multiple with respect to revenue and weighted-average cost of capital. Based on sensitivity analysis performed on key assumptions at November 30, 2021, a 10% decrease valuation multiples or a 10% increase in the weighted average cost of capital assumption would not have resulted in a fair value below the reporting unit’s carrying value. Accordingly, we determined it was not more likely than not that the fair value of the legacy Anika reporting unit is less than its carrying amount and thus goodwill was not impaired as of November 30, 2021.
IPR&D represents the fair value assigned to research and development assets that we acquire that have not been completed at the date of acquisition or are pending regulatory approval in certain jurisdictions. We conduct annual impairment tests of IPR&D, by comparing the fair value of each IPR&D project to its carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds its fair value, we record an impairment loss to the extent that the carrying value of the IPR&D project exceeds its fair value. We estimate the fair value for IPR&D using the income approach which incorporates significant estimates and assumptions related to the forecasted results including revenues, expenses, expected economic life of the asset, contributory asset charges and discount rates to estimate future cash flows. During 2021 and 2020, we decided not to further invest in certain of our projects and recorded an impairment charge in the amount of $0.6 million and $1.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, in research and development expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. Based on a sensitivity analysis performed on key assumptions at November 30, 2021 with respect to the remaining IPR&D, a 10% decrease in the long-term growth factor assumption, or 10% increase in the weighted average cost of capital assumption would not have resulted in a fair value below the IPR&D carrying value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.