ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. This section generally discusses our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For discussion and analysis of our results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to the "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our 2020 Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Business
Ansys, a Delaware corporation formed in 1994, develops and globally markets engineering simulation software and services widely used by engineers, designers, researchers and students across a broad spectrum of industries and academia, including high-tech, aerospace and defense, automotive, energy, industrial equipment, materials and chemicals, consumer products, healthcare, and construction. Headquartered south of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, we employed 5,100 people as of December 31, 2021. We focus on the development of open and flexible solutions that enable users to analyze designs directly on the desktop, providing a common platform for fast, efficient and cost-conscious product development, from design concept to final-stage testing and validation. We distribute our suite of simulation technologies through direct sales offices in strategic, global locations and a global network of independent resellers and distributors (collectively, channel partners). It is our intention to continue to maintain this hybrid sales and distribution model.
Our strategy of Pervasive Engineering Simulation™ seeks to deepen the use of simulation in our core, to inject simulation throughout the product lifecycle and to embed simulation into our partners' ecosystems. The engineering software simulation market is strong and growing. The market growth is driven by customers' need for rapid, quality innovation in a cost efficient manner, enabling faster time to market of new products and lower warranty costs. We are investing in solutions to help engineers deal with increasing product complexity in:
•Electrification, including electric vehicles;
•Autonomy, including self-driving vehicles;
•5G and telecommunications; and
•IIoT.
In the longer term, we are also investing in opportunities around digital twins and simulation for additive manufacturing. Our strategy of Pervasive Engineering Simulation is aligned with the market growth.
To support our strategy of Pervasive Engineering Simulation, we will continue to follow a series of pillars that we believe will drive future growth. We will reinforce and extend our leadership in core and the high-growth solutions. We will build and grow our offerings and expertise in adjacencies to our current core competencies. We will also continue to pursue a smart and strategic acquisition strategy to grow our business, and we will partner with other industry leaders to broaden pervasive simulation into other ecosystems. Importantly, we will continue to win in the right way, built on a culture of and commitment to diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging.
We license our technology to businesses, educational institutions and governmental agencies. Growth in our revenue is affected by the strength of global economies, general business conditions, currency exchange rate fluctuations, customer budgetary constraints and the competitive position of our products. We believe that the features, functionality and integrated multiphysics capabilities of our software products are as strong as they have ever been. However, the software business is generally characterized by long sales cycles. These long sales cycles increase the difficulty of predicting sales for any particular quarter. We make many operational and strategic decisions based upon short- and long-term sales forecasts that are impacted not only by these long sales cycles, but also by current global economic conditions, including the impact of the current COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we believe that our overall performance is best measured by fiscal year results rather than by quarterly results. Please see the sub-section entitled "Company Operational Risks" under Part I. Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of the potential impact of our sales forecasts on our financial condition, cash flows and operating results.
Management addresses the competition and price pressure that it faces in the short- and long-term by focusing on expanding the breadth, depth, ease of use and quality of the technologies, features, functionality and integrated multiphysics capabilities of our software products as compared to our competitors; investing in research and development to develop new and innovative products and increase the capabilities of our existing products; supplying new products and services; focusing on customer
needs, training, consulting and support; and enhancing our distribution channels. We also evaluate and execute strategic acquisitions to supplement our global engineering talent, product offerings and distribution channels.
Overview
Update on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
We have continued to employ measures intended to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. The health and safety of our employees and their families, our partners and our broad Ansys community around the world remain a high priority. Remote access continued to remain the primary means of work for much of our workforce. We previously announced our plans for post-pandemic work arrangements. These plans include options for our employees to work from home, in the office or on a flexible basis where they can alternate between the office and home. The adoption of the arrangements is subject to evolving local guidelines on precautions to be taken to mitigate COVID-19 risk to our employees and customers. Remote work arrangements have not adversely affected our ability to maintain effective financial operations, including our financial reporting systems, internal controls over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. We expect to maintain these effective controls as we continue to work remotely during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. The spread of the virus and its variants and economic deterioration caused by them could have an impact on our business, as well as on our ability to achieve our financial guidance.
Our direct and indirect sales and support teams continue to use collaborative technology to access both Ansys’ data centers and the public cloud, and to meet virtually with customers to mitigate disruptions to our sales pipeline. Our sales team continues to engage with customers around the world in a mix of virtual and in-person meetings, depending on the location specific guidelines and customer preferences. They continue to deliver customer value and business momentum. Our research and development teams have also continued to be productive and meet our product release targets, as evidenced by the recent release of Ansys 2022 R1.
Our spending reflects our expectations for the pace at which economic recovery will occur, and we continue to invest in long-term opportunities. We have also maintained and intend to maintain our commitment to invest in our acquisitions, research and development, and certain digital transformation projects, as those projects are critical to our ability to operate efficiently and scale the business for future growth.
Please see "Risk Factors" under Part I. Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion on additional business risks, including those associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Overall GAAP and Non-GAAP Results
This section includes a discussion of GAAP and Non-GAAP results. For reconciliations of Non-GAAP results to GAAP results, see the section titled "Non-GAAP Results" herein.
The non-GAAP results exclude the income statement effects of the acquisition accounting adjustments to deferred revenue, stock-based compensation, excess payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, transaction expenses related to business combinations and adjustments for the income tax effect of the excluded items.
This section also includes a discussion of constant currency results, which we use for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons by excluding the effects of foreign currency fluctuations on the reported results. Constant currency is a non-GAAP measure. All constant currency results presented in this Item 7 exclude the effects of foreign currency fluctuations on the reported results. To present this information, the 2021 results for entities whose functional currency is a currency other than the U.S. Dollar were converted to U.S. Dollars at rates that were in effect for the 2020 comparable period, rather than the actual exchange rates in effect for 2021. Constant currency growth rates are calculated by adjusting the 2021 reported revenue and operating income amounts by the 2021 currency fluctuation impacts and comparing to the 2020 comparable period reported revenue and operating income amounts.
Our GAAP and non-GAAP results for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected the following variances:
Our results reflect an increase in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 due to growth across all revenue streams, driven by strong execution, acquisitions and by the improving global economic environment in 2021 as compared to 2020. We
also experienced increased operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to increased personnel costs, additional operating expenses related to acquisitions and higher stock-based compensation. The COVID-19 pandemic did not have a material impact on our operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Impact of Foreign Currency
Our comparative financial results were impacted by fluctuations in the U.S. Dollar during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The impacts on our GAAP and non-GAAP revenue and operating income as a result of the fluctuations of the U.S. Dollar when measured against our primary foreign currencies are reflected in the table below. Amounts in brackets indicate an adverse impact from currency fluctuations.
Although exchange rates had a favorable impact on revenue for the year, the impact on operating income was negative driven primarily by the significant strengthening in the fourth quarter of the U.S. Dollar against the Euro as compared to the same quarter in the prior year. The currency impacts were further amplified in operating income as the fourth quarter also represents the EMEA region's most significant sales period and correspondingly, its largest margin.
In constant currency, our variances were as follows:
Other Key Business Metric
Annual Contract Value (ACV) is one of our key performance metrics and is useful to investors in assessing the strength and trajectory of our business. Given that revenue is more volatile due to the upfront revenue recognition of perpetual licenses and multi-year lease license sales, we provide ACV as a supplemental metric to help evaluate the annual performance of the business. Summed over the long term, ACV and revenue are equal. However, there will be years in which ACV growth lags revenue growth and other years in which ACV growth leads revenue growth. It is used by management in financial and operational decision-making and in setting sales targets used for compensation. ACV should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue as ACV is a performance metric and is not intended to be combined with any of these items. There is no GAAP measure comparable to ACV. ACV is composed of the following:
•the annualized value of maintenance and lease contracts with start dates or anniversary dates during the period, plus
•the value of perpetual license contracts with start dates during the period, plus
•the annualized value of fixed-term services contracts with start dates or anniversary dates during the period, plus
•the value of work performed during the period on fixed-deliverable services contracts.
Our ACV was as follows:
Recurring ACV includes both lease licenses and maintenance contracts. The reduction as a percentage of total ACV in 2021 as compared to 2020 was driven by an increase in perpetual licensing due to lower perpetual sales during the pandemic in 2020.
Industry Commentary
For 2021, ACV growth was broad based across core industries. High-tech, aerospace and defense (A&D) and automotive, our three largest industries, experienced strong growth in 2021 as companies continued investing in simulation to reduce costs and development time. The high-tech industry growth was driven by 5G, increasingly complex electronics systems and chip designs, and high-performance computing demands spurred by remote work requirements. Despite the A&D industry continuing to feel impacts from the pandemic, demand for our core and new and emerging technology segments, including simulation data management, safety-critcal embedded controls and mission planning, contributed to growth in the industry. Our continued growth in the automotive industry illustrates the industry’s need for a complete multiphysics simulation portfolio to overcome complex engineering challenges, while electrification, autonomous technology and connectivity serve as strong tailwinds. Sustainability, engineering digitalization and electrification initiatives are driving growth in the industrial equipment and energy industries. We also saw robust growth in the healthcare space as in-silico medicine becomes more prevalent.
Geographic Trends
The following table presents our GAAP and non-GAAP geographic revenue variances using actual and constant currency rates during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
To drive growth, we continue to focus on a number of sales improvement activities across the geographic regions, including sales hiring, pipeline building, productivity initiatives and customer engagement activities.
Despite the overall strong performance in the broader Asia-Pacific region, continued trade restrictions between the U.S. and China have had an impact on, and in the future may further restrict, our ability to sell and distribute our products to certain customers. As a result, this as well as other potential trade restrictions with other countries could continue to have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition. Refer to additional details in "Risk Factors" under Part I. Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Acquisitions
We make targeted acquisitions in order to support our long-term strategic direction, accelerate innovation, provide increased capabilities to our existing products, supply new products and services, expand our customer base and enhance our distribution channels. Our recent acquisitions included the following:
For further information on our business combinations during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The results of operations discussed below are on a GAAP basis unless otherwise stated.
For purposes of the following discussion and analysis, the table below sets forth certain consolidated financial data for the years 2021 and 2020. The operating results of our acquisitions have been included in the results of operations since their respective acquisition dates.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue:
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 13.4% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, or 13.2% in constant currency. The growth rate was favorably impacted by our continued investments in our global sales, support and marketing organizations, the timing and duration of our multi-year lease contracts, strong perpetual license sales off a relatively lower 2020 compare, sales to our small- and medium-sized businesses, and our recent acquisitions. Lease license revenue increased 23.5%, or 24.9% in constant currency, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Perpetual license revenue, which is derived from new sales during the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 16.9%, or 16.3% in constant currency, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Service revenue increased 8.4%, or 7.4% in constant currency, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Annual maintenance contracts that were sold with new perpetual licenses, maintenance contracts for new perpetual licenses sold in previous years, maintenance renewals and the maintenance portion of lease license contracts collectively contributed to maintenance revenue growth of 6.6%, or 5.6% in constant currency.
With respect to revenue, on average for the year ended December 31, 2021, the U.S. Dollar was 0.4% weaker, when measured against our primary foreign currencies, than for the year ended December 31, 2020. The table below presents the net impacts of currency fluctuations on revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021. Amounts in brackets indicate a net adverse impact from currency fluctuations.
The impacts from currency fluctuations resulted in decreased operating income of $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
As a percentage of revenue, our international and domestic revenues, and our direct and indirect revenues, were as follows:
In valuing deferred revenue on the balance sheets of our recent acquisitions as of their respective acquisition dates, we applied the fair value provisions applicable to the accounting for business combinations, resulting in a reduction of deferred revenue as compared to the historical carrying amount. As a result, our post-acquisition revenue will be less than the sum of what would have otherwise been reported by us and each acquiree absent the acquisitions. The impacts on reported revenue were $24.8 million and $14.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The expected impacts on reported revenue are $3.4 million and $7.4 million for the quarter ending March 31, 2022 and the year ending December 31, 2022, respectively.
Cost of Sales and Operating Expenses:
The tables below reflect our operating results on both a GAAP and constant currency basis. Amounts included in the discussions that follow each table are provided in constant currency and are inclusive of costs related to our acquisitions. The impact of foreign exchange translation is discussed separately, where material.
Software Licenses: The increase in the cost of software licenses was primarily due to increased third-party royalties of $7.2 million.
Amortization: The increase in amortization expense was primarily due to the amortization of newly acquired intangible assets.
Maintenance and Service: The net increase in maintenance and service costs was primarily due to the following:
•Increased salaries and incentive compensation of $3.1 million.
•Increased costs related to foreign exchange translation of $2.3 million due to a weaker U.S. Dollar.
•Increased IT maintenance and software hosting costs of $1.6 million.
•Decreased third-party technical support of $1.8 million.
The improvement in gross profit was a result of the increase in revenue, partially offset by the increase in the cost of
sales.
Selling, General and Administrative: The net increase in selling, general and administrative costs was primarily due to the following:
•Increased salaries, incentive compensation and other headcount-related costs of $89.2 million.
•Increased stock-based compensation of $18.3 million.
•Increased consulting costs of $9.0 million.
•Increased IT maintenance and software hosting costs of $7.2 million.
•Increased costs related to foreign exchange translation of $6.1 million due to a weaker U.S. Dollar.
•Decreased bad debt expense of $5.4 million.
We anticipate that we will continue to make targeted investments in our global sales and marketing organizations and our global business infrastructure to enhance and support our revenue-generating activities.
Research and Development: The increase in research and development costs was primarily due to the following:
•Increased salaries, incentive compensation and other headcount-related costs of $31.6 million.
•Increased IT maintenance and software hosting costs of $5.5 million.
•Increased costs related to foreign exchange translation of $5.0 million due to a weaker U.S. Dollar.
•Increased stock-based compensation of $3.7 million.
Amortization: The net decrease in amortization expense was primarily due to a decrease in the amortization of customer lists due to assets that became fully amortized, which was partially offset by the amortization of newly acquired intangible assets.
We have traditionally invested significant resources in research and development activities and intend to continue to make investments in expanding the ease of use and capabilities of our broad portfolio of simulation software products.
Interest Income: Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.1 million as compared to $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest income decreased as a result of a lower interest rate environment and the related decrease in the average rate of return on invested cash balances.
Interest Expense: Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $12.4 million as compared to $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense increased as a result of interest incurred on debt financing obtained in connection with the acquisition of AGI in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by a lower interest rate environment.
Other Income, net: Our other income consisted of the following:
Income Tax Provision: Our income before income tax provision, income tax provision and effective tax rate were as follows:
The decrease in the effective tax rate from the prior year was primarily due to increased tax benefits of $7.9 million related to stock-based compensation deductions and $7.0 million related to foreign-derived intangible income (FDII) deductions. These benefits were partially offset by an increase in non-deductible compensation of $11.0 million.
When compared to the federal and state combined statutory rate for each respective period, the effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were favorably impacted by tax benefits from stock-based compensation, the FDII deduction, and research and development credits, partially offset by the impact of non-deductible compensation.
Net Income: Our net income, diluted earnings per share and weighted average shares used in computing diluted earnings per share were as follows:
Non-GAAP Results
We provide non-GAAP revenue, non-GAAP gross profit, non-GAAP gross profit margin, non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP operating profit margin, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP diluted earnings per share as supplemental measures to GAAP regarding our operational performance. These financial measures exclude the impact of certain items and, therefore, have not been calculated in accordance with GAAP. A detailed explanation and a reconciliation of each non-GAAP financial measure to its most comparable GAAP financial measure are included below.
1 Diluted weighted average shares were 88,102.
1 Diluted weighted average shares were 87,288.
We use non-GAAP financial measures (a) to evaluate our historical and prospective financial performance as well as our performance relative to our competitors, (b) to set internal sales targets and spending budgets, (c) to allocate resources, (d) to measure operational profitability and the accuracy of forecasting, (e) to assess financial discipline over operational expenditures and (f) as an important factor in determining variable compensation for management and employees. In addition, many financial analysts that follow us focus on and publish both historical results and future projections based on non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that it is in the best interest of our investors to provide this information to analysts so that they accurately report the non-GAAP financial information. Moreover, investors have historically requested, and we have historically reported, these non-GAAP financial measures as a means of providing consistent and comparable information with past reports of financial results.
While we believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful supplemental information to investors, there are limitations associated with the use of these non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, are not reported by all our competitors and may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures of our competitors due to potential differences in the exact method of calculation. We compensate for these limitations by using these non-GAAP financial measures as supplements to GAAP financial measures and by reviewing the reconciliations of the non-GAAP financial measures to their most comparable GAAP financial measures.
The adjustments to these non-GAAP financial measures, and the basis for such adjustments, are outlined below:
Acquisition accounting for deferred revenue. Historically, we have consummated acquisitions in order to support our strategic and other business objectives. In accordance with the fair value provisions applicable to the accounting for business combinations, acquired deferred revenue is often recorded on the opening balance sheet at an amount that is lower than the historical carrying value. Although this acquisition accounting requirement has no impact on our business or cash flow, it adversely impacts our reported GAAP revenue in the reporting periods following an acquisition. In order to provide investors with financial information that facilitates comparison of both historical and future results, we provide non-GAAP financial measures which exclude the impact of the acquisition accounting adjustment. We believe that this non-GAAP financial adjustment is useful to investors because it allows investors to (a) evaluate the effectiveness of the methodology and information used by us in our financial and operational decision-making, and (b) compare our past and future reports of financial results as the revenue reduction related to acquired deferred revenue will not recur when related lease licenses and software maintenance contracts are renewed in future periods.
Amortization of intangible assets from acquisitions. We incur amortization of intangible assets, included in our GAAP presentation of amortization expense, related to various acquisitions we have made. We exclude these expenses for the purpose of calculating non-GAAP gross profit, non-GAAP gross profit margin, non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP operating profit margin, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP diluted earnings per share when we evaluate our continuing operational performance because these costs are fixed at the time of an acquisition, are then amortized over a period of several years after the acquisition and generally cannot be changed or influenced by us after the acquisition. Accordingly, we do not consider these expenses for purposes of evaluating our performance during the applicable time period after the acquisition, and we exclude such expenses when making decisions to allocate resources. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors because they allow investors to (a) evaluate the effectiveness of the methodology and information used by us in our financial and operational decision-making, and (b) compare our past reports of financial results as we have historically reported these non-GAAP financial measures.
Stock-based compensation expense. We incur expense related to stock-based compensation included in our GAAP presentation of cost of maintenance and service; research and development expense; and selling, general and administrative expense. This non-GAAP adjustment also includes excess payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation. Stock-based compensation expense (benefit) incurred in connection with our deferred compensation plan held in a rabbi trust includes an offsetting benefit (charge) recorded in other income (expense). Although stock-based compensation is an expense and viewed as a form of compensation, we exclude these expenses for the purpose of calculating non-GAAP gross profit, non-GAAP gross profit margin, non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP operating profit margin, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP diluted earnings per share when we evaluate our continuing operational performance. We similarly exclude income (expense) related to assets held in a rabbi trust in connection with our deferred compensation plan. Specifically, we exclude stock-based compensation and income (expense) related to assets held in the deferred compensation plan rabbi trust during our annual budgeting process and our quarterly and annual assessments of our performance. The annual budgeting process is the primary mechanism whereby we allocate resources to various initiatives and operational requirements. Additionally, the annual review by our board of directors during which it compares our historical business model and profitability to the planned business model and profitability for the forthcoming year excludes the impact of stock-based compensation. In evaluating the performance of our senior management and department managers, charges related to stock-based compensation are excluded from expenditure and profitability results. In fact, we record stock-based compensation expense into a stand-alone cost center for which no single operational manager is responsible or accountable. In this way, we can review, on a period-to-period basis,
each manager's performance and assess financial discipline over operational expenditures without the effect of stock-based compensation. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors because they allow investors to (a) evaluate our operating results and the effectiveness of the methodology used by us to review our operating results, and (b) review historical comparability in our financial reporting as well as comparability with competitors' operating results.
Transaction expenses related to business combinations. We incur expenses for professional services rendered in connection with business combinations, which are included in our GAAP presentation of selling, general and administrative expense. These expenses are generally not tax-deductible. We exclude these acquisition-related transaction expenses, derived from announced acquisitions, for the purpose of calculating non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP operating profit margin, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP diluted earnings per share when we evaluate our continuing operational performance, as we generally would not have otherwise incurred these expenses in the periods presented as a part of our operations. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors because they allow investors to (a) evaluate our operating results and the effectiveness of the methodology used by us to review our operating results, and (b) review historical comparability in our financial reporting as well as comparability with competitors' operating results.
Non-GAAP tax provision. We utilize a normalized non-GAAP annual effective tax rate (AETR) to calculate non-GAAP measures. This methodology provides better consistency across interim reporting periods by eliminating the effects of non-recurring items and aligning the non-GAAP tax rate with our expected geographic earnings mix. To project this rate, we analyzed our historic and projected non-GAAP earnings mix by geography along with other factors such as our current tax structure, recurring tax credits and incentives, and expected tax positions. On an annual basis we will re-evaluate this rate for significant items that may materially affect our projections.
Non-GAAP financial measures are not in accordance with, or an alternative for, GAAP. Our non-GAAP financial measures are not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for comparable GAAP financial measures and should be read only in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We have provided a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures as listed below:
GAAP Reporting Measure Non-GAAP Reporting Measure
Revenue Non-GAAP Revenue
Gross Profit Non-GAAP Gross Profit
Gross Profit Margin Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin
Operating Income Non-GAAP Operating Income
Operating Profit Margin Non-GAAP Operating Profit Margin
Net Income Non-GAAP Net Income
Diluted Earnings Per Share Non-GAAP Diluted Earnings Per Share
Constant currency. In addition to the non-GAAP financial measures detailed above, we use constant currency results for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons by excluding the effects of foreign currency fluctuations on the reported results. To present this information, the 2021 results for entities whose functional currency is a currency other than the U.S. Dollar were converted to U.S. Dollars at rates that were in effect for the 2020 comparable period, rather than the actual exchange rates in effect for 2021. Constant currency growth rates are calculated by adjusting the 2021 reported amounts by the 2021 currency fluctuation impacts and comparing the adjusted amounts to the 2020 comparable period reported amounts. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors because they allow investors to (a) evaluate the effectiveness of the methodology and information used by us in our financial and operational decision-making, and (b) compare our reported results to our past reports of financial results without the effects of foreign currency fluctuations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Short-Term Investments
Cash and cash equivalents consist primarily of highly liquid investments such as money market funds and deposits held at major banks. Short-term investments consist primarily of deposits held by certain of our foreign subsidiaries with original maturities of three months to one year. The following table presents our foreign and domestic holdings of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments:
In general, it is our intention to permanently reinvest all earnings in excess of previously taxed amounts. Substantially all of the pre-2018 earnings of our non-U.S. subsidiaries were taxed through the transition tax and post-2018 current earnings are taxed as part of global intangible low-taxed income tax expense. These taxes increase our previously taxed earnings and allow for the repatriation of the majority of our foreign earnings without any residual U.S. federal tax. While we believe that the financial reporting bases may be greater than the tax bases of investments in foreign subsidiaries for any earnings in excess of previously taxed amounts, such amounts are considered permanently reinvested. The cumulative temporary difference related to such permanently reinvested earnings is $70.0 million and we would anticipate the tax effect on those earnings to be immaterial.
The amount of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments held by foreign subsidiaries is subject to translation adjustments caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates as of the end of each respective reporting period, the offset to which is recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss on our consolidated balance sheet.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased during the current fiscal year due to increased net income (net of non-cash operating adjustments) of $40.7 million partially offset by decreased net cash flows from operating assets and liabilities of $38.5 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased during the current fiscal year due primarily to decreased acquisition-related net cash outlays of $61.5 million and decreased capital expenditures of $12.4 million. We currently plan capital spending of $25.0 million to $35.0 million during fiscal year 2022 as compared to the $23.0 million that was spent in fiscal year 2021. The level of spending will depend on various factors, including the growth of the business and general economic conditions.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities increased during the current fiscal year due primarily to $375.0 million in proceeds from long-term debt obtained in fiscal year 2020 related to the AGI acquisition and increased restricted stock withholding taxes paid in lieu of issuing shares of $26.0 million, partially offset by decreased principal payments on long-term debt of $30.0 million and decreased stock repurchases of $26.4 million.
Other Cash Flow Information
As of December 31, 2021, the carrying value of our term loans was $753.6 million, with no principal payments due in the next twelve months. Borrowings under the term loans accrue interest at the Eurodollar rate plus an applicable margin or at the base rate, at our election. The base rate is the applicable margin plus the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.500%, (ii) the Bank of America prime rate and (iii) the Eurodollar rate plus 1.000%. The applicable margin for these borrowings is a percentage per annum based on the lower of (1) a pricing level determined by our then-current consolidated leverage ratio and (2) a pricing level determined by our debt ratings (if such debt ratings exist).
We previously entered into operating lease commitments, primarily for our domestic and international offices. The commitments related to these operating leases is $141.8 million, of which $25.9 million is due in the next twelve months.
We believe that existing cash and cash equivalent balances, together with cash generated from operations and access to the $500.0 million Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements through the next twelve months. Our cash requirements in the future may also be financed through additional equity or debt financings. However, future disruptions in the capital markets could make financing more challenging, and there can be no assurance that such financing can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms, or at all.
Under our stock repurchase program, we repurchased shares as follows:
As of December 31, 2021, 2.5 million shares remained available for repurchase under the program.
The authorized repurchase program does not have an expiration date, and the pace of the repurchase activity will depend on factors such as working capital needs, cash requirements for acquisitions, our stock price, and economic and market conditions. Our stock repurchases may be effected from time to time through open market purchases or pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan.
We continue to generate positive cash flows from operating activities and believe that the best uses of our excess cash are to invest in the business; acquire or make investments in complementary companies, products, services and technologies; and make payments on our outstanding debt balances. Any future acquisitions may be funded by available cash and investments, cash generated from operations, debt financing, or the issuance of additional securities. Additionally, we have in the past, and expect in the future, to repurchase stock in order to both offset dilution and return capital, in excess of our requirements, to stockholders with the goal of increasing stockholder value.
Contractual and Other Obligations
Our significant contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2021 are summarized below:
(1)Borrowings under the long-term debt accrue interest at the Eurodollar rate plus an applicable margin or at the base rate, at our election. The base rate is the applicable margin plus the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.500%, (ii) the Bank of America prime rate and (iii) the Eurodollar rate plus 1.000%. The applicable margin for these borrowings is a percentage per annum based on the lower of (1) a pricing level determined by our then-current consolidated leverage ratio and (2) a pricing level determined by our debt ratings (if such debt ratings exist). As the interest rate is variable, interest on the long-term debt is estimated using the interest rate as of December 31, 2021. For additional information, see Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)We previously entered into a lease agreement for 186,000 square feet of rentable space located in an office facility in Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, which serves as our headquarters. The term of the lease is 183 months, beginning on October 1, 2014 and expiring on December 31, 2029. We have a one-time right to terminate the lease on December 31, 2025 by providing the landlord with at least 18 months' prior written notice of such termination.
(3)Other operating leases primarily include lease commitments for our other domestic and international offices as well as certain operating equipment.
(4)Unconditional purchase obligations primarily include minimum royalty contracts, software licenses and support, and network services, which are unrecorded as of December 31, 2021. The unconditional purchase obligations are in addition to the current and long-term liabilities recorded on our December 31, 2021 consolidated balance sheet.
(5)We have $49.8 million of unrecognized tax benefits, including estimated interest and penalties, that have been recorded as liabilities in accordance with income tax accounting guidance for which we are uncertain as to if or when such amounts may be settled. As a result, such amounts are excluded from the table above.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we make assumptions, judgments and estimates that can have a significant impact on our financial position and results of operations. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are made based on our historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could materially differ from any of our estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The accounting policies, methods and estimates used to prepare our consolidated financial statements are described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The most critical accounting judgments and estimates that we made in preparing our consolidated financial statements involved:
•Revenue recognition;
•Valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations; and
•Income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
Description
Our revenue is derived principally from the licensing of computer software products and from related maintenance contracts. We enter into contracts that include combinations of products, maintenance and services, which are accounted for as separate performance obligations with differing revenue recognition patterns.
Judgments and Estimates
Our contracts with customers typically include promises to transfer licenses and services to a customer. Judgment is required to determine if the promises are separate performance obligations, and if so, to allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation. We use the estimated standalone selling price method to allocate the transaction price for each performance obligation. The estimated standalone selling price is determined using all information reasonably available to us, including market conditions and other observable inputs. The corresponding revenues are recognized as the related performance obligations are satisfied.
Our time-based lease (TBL) license contracts with customers are sold as a bundled arrangement that includes the rights to a term software license as well as post-contract support (PCS). Revenue is recognized up front at the commencement of the lease for the term software license and recognized ratably over the term of the contract for the PCS in the arrangement. Utilizing observable inputs, we determined that 50% of the estimated standalone selling price of the TBL is attributable to the term software license, while 50% is attributable to PCS. This determination involved judgment, particularly as it relates to the value relationship between our PCS and TBLs, the value relationship between PCS and our perpetual licenses and its linkage to the shortened term of a TBL, the average economic life of our software, renewal rates of our customers, and the price of the bundled arrangement in relation to the perpetual licensing approach.
Changes in these estimates could significantly impact the recognition of revenue in a given period.
Valuation of Assets Acquired and Liabilities Assumed in Business Combinations
Description
In accordance with business combination accounting, we allocate the purchase price of an acquired business to its identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date based upon their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of consideration transferred over the fair value of net identifiable assets acquired, if any, is recorded as goodwill. Intangible assets are recognized apart from goodwill whenever an acquired intangible asset arises from contractual or other legal rights, or whenever it is capable of being separated or divided from the acquired entity and sold, transferred, licensed, rented, or exchanged, either individually or in combination with a related contract, asset or liability.
Judgments and Estimates
Determining these fair values requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, particularly with respect to acquired intangible assets. We determined the fair value of our intangible assets using various valuation techniques, including the relief-from-royalty method and the multi-period excess earnings method. These models utilize certain unobservable inputs classified as Level 3 measurements as defined by ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. The determination of fair value requires considerable judgment and is sensitive to changes in underlying assumptions, estimates and market factors. Estimating fair value requires us to make assumptions and estimates regarding our future plans, as well as industry and economic conditions. These assumptions and estimates include, but are not limited to: royalty rate, discount rate and customer attrition rate. The fair values of the intangible assets will be amortized over their useful lives.
If actual results are materially different than the assumptions we used to determine fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed through a business combination, it is possible that adjustments to the carrying values of such assets and liabilities will have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. See Note 4 to to the consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our business acquisitions.
Income Taxes
Description
Our income tax expense reflects management's best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period of the enactment date.
Additionally, as part of our accounting for income taxes, tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return are recorded when such benefits meet a more-likely-than-not threshold. Otherwise, these tax benefits are recorded when a tax position has been effectively settled, which means that the statute of limitations has expired or the appropriate taxing authority has completed its examination even though the statute of limitations remains open.
Judgments and Estimates
We are subject to tax in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgements and estimates are required in the determination of consolidated income tax expense. We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. In making such determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. The assumptions about future taxable income require the use of significant judgement and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying business. In the event we determine that we will be able to realize deferred tax assets for which a valuation allowance was used to reduce their carrying value, the adjustment to the valuation allowance will be recorded as a reduction to the provision for income taxes in the period such determination is made.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. Significant judgment is required in the identification and measurement of uncertain tax positions. Our liability for unrecognized tax benefits contains uncertainties because we are required to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate the exposures associated with our various filing positions. We adjust the liabilities when our judgement changes as a result of new information not previously available.
Although we believe that the judgments and estimates discussed herein are reasonable, actual results could differ, and we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. To the extent actual results differ from estimated amounts recorded, such differences will impact the income tax provision in the period in which the determination is made.
Recent Accounting Guidance
For information regarding recent accounting guidance and its impact on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.