ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OR PLAN OF OPERATION.
The following discussion of our plan of operation, financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s condensed consolidated financial statements, and notes thereto, included elsewhere herein. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors including, but not limited to, those discussed in this Annual Report.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and those that require significant judgments and estimates.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates including the allowance for doubtful accounts, the salability and recoverability of inventory, income taxes and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We cannot predict what future laws and regulations might be passed that could have a material effect on our results of operations. We assess the impact of significant changes in laws and regulations on a regular basis and update the assumptions and estimates used to prepare our financial statements when we deem it necessary.
Principles of Consolidation:
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries (ANV and Sharx), after elimination of all intercompany accounts, transactions, and profits.
Basis of Presentation:
The consolidated financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and are expressed in United States dollars. The Company’s fiscal year end is June 30.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
For our rental revenue and commission revenue, we recognize revenue under the five steps in Topic 606, which are as follows: 1) identify the contract with the customer; 2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; 3) determine the transaction price; 4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and 5) recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied.
Rental Revenue
Rental revenue is derived from the Commercial Property lease in which quarterly payments are received pursuant to the property lease which is in effect until 2026. We recognize revenue when we have satisfied a performance obligation by transferring control over a product or delivering a service to a client. We measure revenue based upon the consideration set forth in an arrangement or contract with a client. We recognize revenue from these services when the services are completed. If we are paid in advance for these services, we record such payment as a contract liability until we complete the services. As of June 30, 2022, the Company recorded $2,929 of contract liabilities in connection to rental revenues.
The Company leases land to a customer. We, as a lessor, retain substantially all of the risks and benefits of ownership of the investment properties and account for our leases as operating leases. We accrue fixed lease income on a straight-line basis over the terms of the leases when we believe substantially all lease income, including the related straight-line rent receivable, is probable of collection. For our leases, we receive a fixed payment from the customer which is recognized as lease income on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease beginning with the adoption of ASC 842.
In April 2020, the FASB staff released guidance focused on treatment of concessions related to the effects of COVID-19 on the application of lease modification guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 842, “Leases.” The guidance provides a practical expedient to forgo the associated reassessments required by ASC 842 when changes to a lease result in similar or lower future consideration. We have elected to generally account for rent abatements as negative variable lease consideration in the period granted, or in the period we determine we expect to grant an abatement. Further abatements granted in the future will reduce lease income in the period we grant, or determine we expect to grant, an abatement. We have not agreed to any deferral or abatement arrangements with any of our customers.
The Company has elected to exclude short-term leases from the recognition requirements of ASC 842. A lease is short-term if, at the commencement date, it has a term of less than or equal to one year. Lease expense related to short-term leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Commission revenue
For our commission revenue, we recognize revenue under the five steps in Topic 606, which are as follows: 1) identify the contract with the customer; 2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; 3) determine the transaction price; 4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and 5) recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied.
The Company’s source of commission revenue is from the Company’s subsidiary Sharx in which quarterly payments are received when the customer pre-pays or pays upon the date products are drop shipped from the manufacturer pursuant to a non-exclusive distribution agreement. At such time the products are drop shipped, the Company’s performance obligation has been satisfied and revenue is recorded The Company has determined that it is an agent of the manufacturer and collects commission revenue at or before the delivery of product (See Note 3 for further details).
Property and Equipment:
Land is recognized at cost. Land is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Foreign Currency Translation:
Foreign currency transactions are translated applying the current rate method. Assets and liabilities are translated at current rates. Stockholders’ equity accounts are translated at the appropriate historical rates and revenue and expenses are translated at weighted average rates for the year.
Foreign Currency Transactions:
The Company applies the guidelines as set out in Section 830-20-35 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“Section 830-20-35”) for foreign currency transactions. Pursuant to Section 830-20-35 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, foreign currency transactions are transactions denominated in currencies other than U.S. Dollar, the Company’s reporting currency. Foreign currency transactions may produce receivables or payables that are fixed in terms of the amount of foreign currency that will be received or paid. A change in exchange rates between the reporting currency and the currency in which a transaction is denominated increases or decreases the expected amount of reporting currency cash flows upon settlement of the transaction. That increase or decrease in expected reporting currency cash flows is a foreign currency transaction gain or loss that generally shall be included in determining net income for the period in which the exchange rate changes. Likewise, a transaction gain or loss (measured from the transaction date or the most recent intervening balance sheet date, whichever is later) realized upon settlement of a foreign currency transaction generally shall be included in determining net income for the period in which the transaction is settled. The exceptions to this requirement for inclusion in net income of transaction gains and losses pertain to certain intercompany transactions and to transactions that are designated as, and effective as, economic hedges of net investments and foreign currency commitments. Pursuant to Section 830-20-25 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, the following shall apply to all foreign currency transactions of an enterprise and its investees: (a) at the date the transaction is recognized, each asset, liability, revenue, expense, gain, or loss arising from the transaction shall be measured and recorded in the functional currency of the recording entity by use of the exchange rate in effect at that date as defined in section 830-10-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification; and (b) at each balance sheet date, recorded balances that are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency or reporting currency of the recording entity shall be adjusted to reflect the current exchange rate.
The Company’s wholly owned subsidiary ANV uses the Danish Krone, DKK as its reporting currency as well as its functional currency.
The wholly owned subsidiary Sharx DK ApS uses the US Dollar as its reporting currency as well as its functional currency and from time to time has transactions in foreign currencies. The change in exchange rates between the U.S. Dollar, the Company’s reporting and functional currency and the foreign currency, the currency in which a transaction is denominated increases or decreases the expected amount of reporting currency cash flows upon settlement of the transaction. That increase or decrease in expected reporting currency cash flows is a foreign currency transaction gain or loss that generally is included in determining net income (loss) for the period in which the exchange rate changes.
Income Taxes:
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method of accounting. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is required when it is less likely than not that the Company will be able to realize all or a portion of its deferred tax assets. Because it is doubtful that the net operating losses of recent years will ever be used, a valuation allowance has been recognized equal to the tax benefit of net operating losses generated.
Earnings per Share:
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number of common shares available. Diluted earnings per share is computed similar to basic earnings per share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the potential common shares had been issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive. As of June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021 there were 10,000 and 10,000, potential dilutive shares that need to be considered as common share equivalents and because of the net income for June 30, 2022 and 2021, the effect of these potential common shares is dilutive.
Cash and Cash Equivalents:
For purposes of the statement of cash flows, the Company considers all highly-liquid investments purchased with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
The Company maintains its cash in bank deposit accounts which, at June 30, 2022 did not exceed federally insured limits. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts and believes that it is not exposed to any significant credit risk on such amounts.
Stock-Based Compensation:
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation. All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. Equity instruments issued to employees and the cost of the services received as consideration are measured and recognized based on the grant date fair value of the equity instruments issued and are recognized over the employees required service period, which is generally the vesting period.
Concentrations of Credit Risk:
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to major credit risk consist principally of a single subsidiary of Anton Nielsen Vojens ApS. ANV’s rent revenues are derived from one customer. The Company’s commission revenues are subject to concentration risk as the commission revenues are derived from one product.
New Accounting Pronouncements already adopted:
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740)-Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. ASU 2019-12 is intended to simplify accounting for income taxes. It removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. ASU 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and interim periods within those fiscal years, which is fiscal 2022 for us, with early adoption permitted. The new guidance was adopted on July 1, 2021.
New Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
Other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB did not or are not believed by management to have a material impact on the Company’s present or future financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF FISCAL YEAR 2022 COMPARED TO FISCAL YEAR 2021
REVENUES. Revenues from operations were $39,515 in 2022 compared to $41,421 in 2021. The decrease was attributable to no sales of cargo security products from the Company’s subsidiary Sharx in 2022 or 2021. The following table summarizes the Company’s revenue allocations:
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES. G&A expenses were $7,336 in 2022 compared to $8,646 in 2021. The expenses are attributable to the Company’s SEC compliance and accounting costs.
PROFESSIONAL EXPENSES. The professional expenses were $19,218 in 2022 compared to $16,100 in 2021. The expenses were attributable to the ordinary audit of $17,000 and $2,218 attributable to transfer agent fees for 2022, and 2021.
OTHER INCOME. Other income was $53,902 in 2022 compared to $0 in 2021 and mainly attributable to the gain on a tax refund.
NET INCOME. Net income attributed to common stockholders was $56,992 or $0.02 per share for 2022 as compared to $5,746 or $0.00 per share for 2021and mainly attributable to the gain on a tax settlement.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES. As of June 30, 2022 the Company had $94,216 of cash and cash equivalents and working capital deficit of $113,179 compared to June 30, 2021 the Company had $49,979 of cash and cash equivalents and working capital deficit of $145,907. The change in cash is primarily due to the ANV’S payment of debt and normal operations. The decrease in the working capital deficit is primarily related to the operations of the Subsidiary.
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2022 and 2021 was $89,592 and $37,714 respectively. The increase was primarily due to the gain on a tax settlement.
Net cash (used for) investing activities for 2022 and 2021 was $0 and $0 respectively.
Net cash (used for) financing activities for 2022 and 2021 was ($33,278) and ($33,504) respectively. Net cash used for financing activities for both periods is related to the repayment of debt and related party debt.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.