Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this registration statement. Certain statements contained in this registration statement, including statements regarding the anticipated development and expansion of our business, our intent, belief or current expectations, primarily with respect to the future operating performance of our company and the products and services we expect to offer and other statements contained herein regarding matters that are not historical facts, are “forward-looking” statements. Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains not only statements that are historical facts, but also forward-looking statements which involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Because forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements.
Business Overview
Through our scalable cloud-based platform architecture and infrastructure coupled with our commerce experiences development and delivery model, we intend to simplify and streamline digital financial services for corporations, small and midsized enterprises (“SMEs”) and consumers. We will accomplish this through innovative omnichannel payment and digital banking technologies that complement our core merchant services capabilities. We believe there is opportunity to generate significant revenue for the Company the near future by providing innovative commerce solutions and experiences that resonate with clients, their customers, and the market as a whole. Further, our soon to be launched modular platform will equip forward-thinking financial institutions, technology companies, and SMEs with operational efficiencies, such as automated financial controls and reconciliation in addition to manual administration.
Our Company’s merchant services solutions provide financial processing for businesses to accept cashless and/or contactless payments, such as credit cards, ACH, wireless payments, and more. Our patented, exclusively licensed, and proprietary merchant services software will offer, new integrated solutions for frictionless digital and mobile payment acceptance including acceptance of alternative payment methods (“APMs”). We are extending and enhancing these capabilities with software that solves for multi-use case, multi-channel, API-driven, account-based issuer processing for card, digital tokens, and payment transfer transactions. Our scalable business model allows for expansive white-labeling, SaaS, and embedded solutions that will drive the digital transformation of financial services and generate diverse revenue streams for our company.
The financial services industry is going through a period of intensive change driven by the advancement of technology, the adaptation to societal changes resulting from COVID-19, and the rapid rise of contactless transactions. End-users expect ease of use and an enhanced user experience in all their daily financial interactions. In this rapidly evolving digital marketplace, our prospective clients, such as merchants and independent software vendors (“ISVs”), have broad and frequently changing requirements to meet consumer expectations and operational efficiencies to maintain their competitive edge.
Providing basic payment acceptance and “lowest price” models is no longer the winning formula to support the market. These entities recognize that staying competitive in the digital age requires a partner with a platform and services capable of delivering flexibility and growth while streamlining operations to continually deliver increased revenue and profitability opportunities. Our pricing is extremely competitive, but we believe the value we create for financial institutions, technology companies, and SMEs through our technology, deployment model, services and consultative approach will create true differentiation from our competitors.
Our global financial services platform architecture and infrastructure is designed to be flexible and configurable to meet current and future market needs. This will empower our clients to take advantage of future platform development and new innovative digital financial solutions by leveraging off-the-shelf experiences and consuming our APIs. Additionally, by taking a holistic view of all aspects of our clients’ business, including risk, volume, user experience, integration capabilities and technical needs, we will create optimal and extensible financial technology solutions at a rapid pace.
Through exclusive licensing and partnership agreements to complement our patented technology capabilities, we believe we will become leaders in the embedded payment and digital banking sectors by supporting digital, tokenized, multi-channel, embedded API-driven transactions. We intend to accelerate this position through the integration of our merchant services and a secure text payment solution with extensive digital account-based and multi-channel issuer payment processing capabilities. We believe that this will enable us to provide our clients an end-to-end payment acceptance and digital banking solution powering straight-through processing and embedded payment opportunities in the B2B space. We expect to support clients through the development of custom and off-the-shelf experiences by delivering these solutions through public APIs and Webhooks.
A key to the company’s success and market penetration is the continued development of enterprise-grade, patent protected software for SMS text payments via a mobile device. Our patented technology manages text messaging for processing payments, notification, response, authentication, marketing, advertising, information queries and reports. Once an account is established through a multi-currency digital wallet, neither internet connectivity nor a specific application is required to process payments between merchants and end-users. These features will be particularly beneficial for unbanked and under banked individuals in developing or emerging markets where access to the internet on a mobile device and modern banking institutions may not be readily available. In addition, our software platform will extend merchants’ marketplace capabilities by creating new avenues and channels to request and receive frictionless, digital payments and engaging end-users by utilizing a familiar, convenient, and widely adopted technology.
We believe our technologies will greatly increase the adoption of mobile payments and alternate banking solutions in sectors that must quickly adapt and migrate towards new technologies that facilitate convenient and safe contactless payments. To survive and succeed in this environment, businesses need to adopt new technologies to engage, communicate and process payments with their customers from a supplier that widely supports innovation and adaptation as the industry evolves. By embracing technological advancement in the payment and banking industries, we are well-positioned to meet the growing needs of existing and prospective clients and intend for our current and future products to be at the forefront of solving these accelerated market needs.
We were founded in 1998 and changed our name to AppTech Corp. in 2009. In 2013, we merged with Transcendent One, Inc., whereby Transcendent One, Inc. and its management took controlling ownership of the Company. From this point forward, we have operated as a merchant services provider, continuing the business conducted by Transcendent One, Inc. In 2017, we acquired certain assets from GlobalTel Media, Inc., which included patented, enterprise-grade software for advanced text messaging. In addition to the software and associated databases, the acquisition included four patents and additional intellectual property for mobile payments. On December 23, 2021, we changed our name to AppTech Payment Corp and re-domiciled to Delaware. We are headquartered in Carlsbad, CA. and uplisted to NASDAQ in January 2022. Our stock trades under the symbol “APCX” and our warrants under the symbol “APCXW”.
Financial Operations Overview
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our statements of operations as well as factors that impact those items.
Revenues
Our Revenues. We derive our revenue by providing financial processing services to businesses.
Expenses
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue includes costs directly attributable to processing and other services the company provides. These also include related costs such as residual payments to our business development partners, which are based on a percentage of the net revenue generated from client referrals.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses include professional services, rent and utilities, and other operating costs.
Research and development. Research and development costs include costs of acquiring patents and other unproven technologies, contractor fees and other costs associated with the development of the SMS short code texting platform, contract and outside services.
Interest expense, net. Our interest expense consists of interest on our outstanding indebtedness and amortization of debt issuance costs.
Results of Operations
This section includes a summary of our historical results of operations, followed by detailed comparisons of our results for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have derived this data from our annual financial statements included elsewhere in this registration statement.
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table presents our historical results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue
Revenue increased to $353,824 from $329,500, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was principally driven by the Company boarding more accounts in FY21 versus FY20, and an increase in merchant processing.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased to $149,449 from $140,372, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by the increase in revenue.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased to $8,399,382 from $3,749,456, or 124%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by the increase of some one-time stock compensation expense from employment contracts.
Excess fair value of equity issuance over assets received
On October 1, 2020, the Company entered into a strategic partnership with Infinios Financial Services B.S.C (“Infinios”). The partnership was not consummated until February 19, 2021. As part of the deal, Infinios received 15% or 1,895,948 post-split shares of the Company’s common stock on a fully diluted basis. The Company valued the common stock issuance at $67,543,182 based upon the closing market price on the effective date (February 19, 2021). In addition, Management capitalized cash payments and equity issuances granted to Infinios and Innovations Realized, LLC (a third party hired to help with the platform integration) over the course of fiscal year 2021. Management carefully analyzed the value of the licenses and services to be performed. Any value in excess of the capitalized asset was out right expensed.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased to $169,034 from $49,250, or 243%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to additional development performed by in-house employees related to the platform.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net increased to $3,110,717 from $342,321, or 809%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by interest charges on debt conversions and debt forbearance agreements.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
Change in fair value of derivative liability decreased to ($25,581) from $71,764 or (136%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by the market fluctuation of the derivative liability.
Other income (expenses)
Other income (expense) increased to $1,210,719 from $82,530, or 1,368%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by the Company writing off old payables totaling ($946,262), debt forgiveness of ($174,945), and writing off the remaining balance of the merchant equity program ($88,603) for which the statute of limitations had expired.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company successfully completed its capital raise and uplisting onto NASDAQ (herein referred to its “Offering”) on January 7, 2022. As part of the Offering, the Company executed a 9.5 to 1 reverse split of its common stock. In addition, the Offering sold 3,614,458 units of our common stock (a unit consisted of one share of common stock and a warrant to purchase one share of common stock) at $4.15 per unit. In addition, 542,168 warrants were granted. The Offering provided net proceeds of approximately $13.353 million. The Company’s current cash position is significant enough to support the daily operations for a period in excess of one year from the date of filing this 10-K. All shares and share prices within this 10-K have been adjusted to reflect the stock split.
Since we derive our revenues principally from processing of purchases from our merchant services clients, a downturn in economic activity, such as that associated with the current corona virus pandemic could reduce the volume of purchases we process, and thus our revenues. In addition, such a downturn could cause our merchant customers to cease operations permanently decreasing our payment processing unless new customers were found. We may also face additional difficulty in raising capital during an economic downturn.
Cash Flows	
The following table presents a summary of cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the following comparative periods.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $1,233,163 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was principally driven by the new employment and consulting agreements.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Net cash used by investing activities increased by $1,190,708 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was principally driven by expenditures for capitalized prepaid software development and license.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $2,341,062 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was principally driven by increased proceeds from assigning our rights to stock repurchase option agreements to third parties.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates including those related to revenue recognition, goodwill and intangible assets, derivative financial instruments, and equity-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical accounting policies are those that we consider the most critical to understanding our financial condition and results of operations. The accounting policies we believe to be most critical to understanding our financial condition and results of operations are discussed below. As of December 31, 2021, there have been no significant changes to our critical accounting estimates nor to our recently issued accounting pronouncements, except as described in Note 2 to our financial statements.
Software Development Costs
The Company capitalizes software development costs in developing internal use software when capitalizing requirements have been met. Costs prior to meeting the capitalization requirements are expensed as incurred. Equity and options granted are capitalized as part of the software development costs.
Smaller Reporting Company
As a smaller reporting company, as defined in Item(f)(1) of Regulation S-K, we may choose to prepare our disclosures relying on scaled disclosure requirements for smaller reporting companies in Regulation S-K and in Article 8 of Regulation S-X.
The scaled disclosure requirements for smaller reporting companies permit us (i) to include less extensive narrative disclosure than required of other reporting companies, particularly in the description of executive compensation and (ii) to provide audited financial statements for two fiscal years, in contrast to other reporting companies, which must provide audited financial statements for three years.
We may lose our status as a smaller reporting company on the last day of the fiscal year in which (i) our public float exceeds $250 million or (ii) if we have more than $100 million in annual revenues and (a) have no public float or (b) have a public float or more than $700 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
As of December 31, 2021, there have been no significant changes to our recently issued accounting pronouncements, except as described in Note 2 to our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that would have been established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K) or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in those types of relationships. We enter into guarantees in the ordinary course of business related to the guarantee of our own performance.
Equity-based Compensation
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. FASB ASC Topic 718 requires companies to measure compensation cost for stock-based employee compensation at the fair market value on the grant date and recognize the expense over the employee’s requisite service period. The Company recognizes in the statement of operations the grant-date fair market value of stock options and other equity-based compensation issued to employees and non-employees.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, 69,531 of common stock were issued to several consultants and employees in connection with business development, and professional and employment services rendered valued at $810,446.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, 21,491 shares of common stock were issued to the board of directors. The shares were earned over the term of the directors. The Company valued the stock issuance, earned as of December 31, 2021, at $114,742.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, 422,315 shares of common stock were issued to several consultants in connection with business development and professional services rendered valued at $2,631,899.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, 15,350 shares of common stock were issued to the board of directors. The shares were earned over the term of the directors. The Company valued the stock issuance at $81,958.
Related Parties
See Item 13 for a full discussion of related parties.