ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis includes certain forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should review the Risk Factors section of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by such forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Information” at the beginning of this Form 10-K.
Introduction
We are a biotechnology company developing and commercializing technologies to produce and detect deoxyribonucleic acid (“DNA”). Using the polymerase chain reaction (“PCR”) to enable both the production and detection of DNA, we operate in three primary business markets: (i) the manufacture of synthetic DNA for use in nucleic acid-based therapeutics (“Therapeutic DNA Production Services”); (ii) the detection of DNA in molecular diagnostics testing services (“MDx Testing Services”); and (iii) the manufacture and detection of DNA for industrial supply chain security services (“DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services”).
Our growth strategy is to primarily focus our resources on the further development, commercialization, and customer adoption of our Therapeutic DNA Production Services, including the expansion of our contract development and manufacturing operation (“CDMO”) for the manufacture of synthetic DNA for use in nucleic acid-based therapies and the development of our own product candidates in veterinary health
Therapeutic DNA Production Services
Through our LinearRx, Inc. (“LRx”) subsidiary we are developing and commercializing the linearDNA (“linearDNA”) platform. The linearDNA platform enables the rapid, efficient, and large-scale cell-free manufacture of high-fidelity DNA sequences for use in nucleic acid-based therapeutics. The linearDNA platform enzymatically produces a linear form of DNA we call ‘linearDNA’ that is an alternative to plasmid-based DNA manufacturing technologies that have supplied the DNA used in biotherapeutics for the past 40 years.
We believe our enzymatic linearDNA platform has numerous advantages over existing cell-based plasmid DNA manufacturing platforms. Plasmid-based DNA manufacturing is based on the complex, costly and time-consuming biological process of amplifying DNA in living cells. Once amplified, the DNA must be separated from the living cells and other process contaminants via multiple rounds of purification, adding further complexity and costs. Unlike plasmid-based DNA manufacturing, the linearDNA platform does not require living cells and instead amplifies DNA via the enzymatic process of PCR. The linearDNA platform is simple, with only four ingredient inputs, and can rapidly produce very large quantities of DNA without the need for complex purification steps.
We believe the key advantages of the linearDNA platform include:
● Speed - Production of linearDNA can be measured in terms of hours, not days and weeks as is the case with plasmid-based DNA manufacturing platforms.
● Scalability - linearDNA production takes place on efficient bench-top instruments, allowing for rapid scalability in a minimal footprint.
● Purity - DNA produced via PCR is pure, resulting in only large quantities of only the target DNA sequence. Unwanted DNA sequences such as plasmid backbone and antibiotic resistance genes, inherent to plasmid DNA, are not present in linearDNA.
● Simplicity - The production of linearDNA is streamlined relative to plasmid-based DNA production. linearDNA requires only four primary ingredients, does not require living cells or complex fermentation systems and does not require multiple rounds of purification.
● Flexibility - DNA produced via the linearDNA platform can be easily chemically modified to suit specific customer applications. In addition, the linearDNA platform can produce a wide range of complex DNA sequences that are difficult to produce via plasmid-based DNA production platforms. These complex sequences include inverted terminal repeats (ITRs) and polyadenylation sequences (poly (A) tail) important to gene therapy and messenger RNA (“mRNA”) therapies, respectively.
Preclinical studies have shown that linearDNA is substitutable for plasmid DNA in numerous nucleic acid-based therapies, including:
● therapeutic and prophylactic DNA vaccines;
● DNA templates for in vitro transcription to produce ribonucleic acid (“RNA”), including mRNA; and
● adoptive cell therapy manufacturing.
Further, we believe that linearDNA is also substitutable for plasmid DNA in the following nucleic acid-based therapies:
● viral vector manufacturing for in vivo and ex vivo gene editing;
● Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (“CRISPR”)-mediated homology-directed repair (“HDR”); and
● non-viral gene therapy.
As of the third quarter of calendar 2022, there were 3,694 gene, cell and RNA therapies in development from preclinical through pre-registration stages, almost all of which use DNA in their manufacturing process. (Source: ASGCT Gene, Cell & RNA Therapy Landscape: Q3 2022 Quarterly Report). Due to what we believe are the linearDNA platform’s numerous advantages over legacy plasmid-based DNA manufacturing platforms, we believe this large number of therapies under development represents a substantial market opportunity for linearDNA to supplant plasmid DNA in the manufacture of nucleic acid-based therapies.
Our linearDNA is currently manufactured pursuant to Good Laboratory Practices (“GLP”) that we believe are sufficient for pre-clinical discovery and development of nucleic acid-based therapies. In addition, for indirect clinical use of linearDNA (i.e., where linearDNA is a starting material but is not incorporated into the final therapeutic product, as is the case with the production of mRNA or certain viral vectors), we believe that high-quality grade GLP linearDNA is sufficient for clinical and commercial stage customers of our Therapeutic DNA Production Services. For the direct clinical use of our linearDNA (i.e., nucleic acid-based therapies where our linearDNA is incorporated into the final therapeutic product, as in the production of DNA vaccines, adoptive cell therapies and certain gene therapies) we believe clinical and commercial stage customers of our Therapeutic DNA Production Services will generally require our manufacturing facilities to meet current Good Manufacturing Practices (“cGMP”). We currently do not have any manufacturing facilities that meet cGMP. We will need to develop and maintain manufacturing facilities that meet cGMP to support customers that wish to use our linearDNA for direct clinical use and for indirect clinical use customers who request linearDNA manufactured under cGMP. In the longer term, we believe that the development and maintenance of a cGMP manufacturing facility for linearDNA will benefit the entirety of our Therapeutic DNA Production Services business, in both direct and indirect clinical applications.
Our business strategy for the linearDNA platform is (i) to utilize our current GLP linearDNA production capacity to secure CDMO contracts to supply linearDNA to pre-clinical therapy developers, as well as clinical and commercial therapy developers and manufacturers that are pursuing therapeutics that require the indirect clinical use of linearDNA; and (ii) upon our development of cGMP linearDNA production facilities, to secure CDMO contracts with clinical stage therapy developers and commercial manufactures to supply linearDNA for direct clinical use.
In addition, we plan to leverage our Therapeutic DNA Production Services and deep knowledge of PCR to develop and monetize, ourselves or with strategic partners, one or more linearDNA-based therapeutic or prophylactic vaccines for the veterinary health market. Currently, we have in-licensed a therapeutic DNA vaccine candidate against canine lymphoma, which accounts for up to 24% of all cancers in canines. Our lymphoma vaccine candidate was licensed from Takis S.R.L and EvviVax, S.R.L. for exclusive use by the Company in association with our linearDNA platform, and is subject to certain commercialization milestones. We currently seek to commercialize our canine lymphoma vaccine in conjunction with lipid nanoparticle (“LNP”) encapsulation to facilitate IM administration. We have recently demonstrated in vitro and in vivo (mice studies) expression of generic reporter proteins via linearDNA
encapsulated by LNPs. For the in vivo study, successful expression of the LNP-encapsulated linearDNA was administered and achieved via IM injection. We believe the linearDNA platform provides a substantial advantage to the development and monetization of a therapeutic DNA vaccine against canine lymphoma.
MDx Testing Services
Through Applied DNA Clinical Labs, LLC (“ADCL”), our clinical laboratory subsidiary, we leverage our expertise in DNA detection via PCR to provide and develop clinical molecular diagnostics (“MDx”) testing services. ADCL is a New York State Department of Health (“NYSDOH”) Clinical Laboratory Evaluation Program (“CLEP”) permitted, Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (“CLIA”)-certified laboratory which is currently permitted for virology. In providing MDx testing services, ADCL employs its own or third-party molecular diagnostic tests.
Under our MDx testing services, ADCL currently provides COVID-19 testing for large populations marketed under our safeCircleTM trademark. Leveraging ADCL’s customizable high-throughput robotically-pooled testing workflow and the Cleared4 digital health platform owned and operated by Cleared4 Inc. (the “Cleared4 Platform”), our safeCircle testing service is an adaptable turnkey large population COVID-19 testing solution that provides for all aspects of COVID-19 testing, including test scheduling, sample collection and automated results reporting. Our safeCircle testing service utilizes high-sensitivity robotically-pooled real-time PCR (“RT-PCR”) testing to help mitigate virus spread by quickly identifying COVID-19 infections within a community, school, or workplace. Our safeCircle COVID-19 testing is performed using either the Company’s internally developed Linea 2.0 RT-PCR Assay, a NYSDOH conditionally approved laboratory developed test (“LDT”) or third-party emergency use authorization (“EUA”)-authorized RT-PCR COVID-19 assays. Our safeCircle testing service also incorporates the Cleared4 Platform to enable large-scale digital test scheduling, in-field sample collection and registration, and results reporting. By leveraging the combination of our robotically-pooled workflows and the Cleared4 Platform, our safeCircle testing services typically return testing results within 24 to 48 hours. We currently provide safeCircle testing services to higher education institutions, private clients, and businesses located in New York State.
ADCL has also developed PCR-based MDx testing services for the Monkeypox virus, which are currently approved by NYSDOH. These services are designed to run on the same high-throughput platform utilized by our COVID-19 testing services and provides ADCL with a substantial testing throughput
In addition to our infectious disease testing services, we are currently validating pharmacogenetics (“PGx”) testing services. Our PGx testing services will utilize a 120-target PGx panel test to evaluate the unique genotype of a specific patient to help guide individual drug therapy decisions. Our PGx testing services are designed to interrogate DNA targets on over 35 genes and provide genotyping information relevant to certain cardiac, mental health and pain management drug therapies. We believe the economics of complex MDx testing services such as PGx are more favorable to the Company as compared to high volume, low complexity MDx tests such as COVID-19 testing. Our PGx testing services will require NYSDOH approval prior to initiating our patient testing services. If approved, we plan to commercialize our PGx testing services by offering PGx clinical reference laboratory testing services to other clinical laboratories and healthcare facilities nationwide.
Going forward, our business strategy for ADCL is to leverage our deep knowledge of PCR to develop and commercialize high complexity, high value and differentiated MDx testing services that will be offered to other clinical laboratories and healthcare facilities as clinical reference laboratory testing services. We believe operating as a clinical reference laboratory has several advantages when compared to operating as a typical clinical non-reference laboratory, including:
● the ability to leverage our deep expertise in PCR to develop and perform high-value esoteric MDx testing services not performed by conventional clinical non-reference laboratories;
● reduced sample acquisition costs;
● reduced marketing costs; and
● a national customer base that may lead to a larger total addressable market.
The clinical reference laboratory services market is forecasted to have incremental growth of $26.0B between 2020 and 2025 with a 6.71% compound annual growth rate (“CAGR”). We believe that the rapidly increasing number of specialized MDx tests for early disease detection, disease prognosis, disease risk, companion diagnostics and personalized medicine will drive an increase in the demand for highly specialized MDx clinical reference laboratory services.
DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services
By leveraging our expertise in both the manufacture and detection of DNA via PCR, our DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services allow our customers to use non-biologic DNA tags manufactured on our linearDNA platform to mark objects in a unique manner and then identify these objects by detecting the absence or presence of the DNA tag. We believe our DNA tags are not economically feasible nor practical to replicate, and that our disruptive tracking platform offers broad commercial relevance across many industry verticals. The Company’s core DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services, which are marketed collectively as a platform under the trademark CertainT®, include:
● SigNature® Molecular Tags, which are short non-biologic DNA taggants produced by the Company’s linearDNA platform, provide a methodology to authenticate goods within large and complex supply chains for materials such as cotton, leather, pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals and other products.
● SigNify® IF portable DNA readers and SigNify consumable reagent test kits provide definitive real-time authentication of the Company’s DNA tags in the field, providing a front-line solution for supply chain integrity backed with forensic-level molecular tag authentication. The Company’s software platform enables customers to track materials throughout a supply chain or product life.
● fiberTyping®, which uses PCR-based DNA detection to determine a cotton cultivar, and other product genotyping services that utilize PCR-based DNA detection to detect a product’s naturally occurring DNA sequences for the purposes of product provenance authentication and supply chain security.
Our DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services are fully developed, highly scalable, and currently used in several commercial applications. To date, our largest commercial application for our DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services is in the tracking and provenance authentication of cotton. Cotton home textile products utilizing our DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services are available in national retail chains including Costco® and Bed Bath & Beyond®.
We believe that the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act (“UFLPA”), signed into law on December 23, 2021, may be helpful to increase demand for our DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services. The UFLPA establishes a rebuttable presumption that any goods mined, produced, or manufactured wholly or in part in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (“XUAR”) of the People’s Republic of China are not entitled to entry to the United States. The presumption applies unless the importer of record has complied with specified conditions and, by clear and convincing evidence, shown that the goods were not produced using forced labor. On June 17, 2022, an implementation strategy for the UFLPA was published that listed DNA tagging as evidence that importers may present to potentially prove that a good did not originate in XUAR or did not benefit from forced labor. Approximately 20% of the world’s cotton garments contain cotton that originated in the XUAR.
Our business plan is to leverage growing consumer and governmental awareness for product traceability and the newly enacted UFLPA to expand our existing partnerships and seek new partnerships for our DNA Tagging and Security Products and Services with a focus on cotton and synthetic fibers.
General
Historically, the substantial portion of our revenues has been generated from sales of our SigNature® and SigNature® T molecular tags, our principal supply chain security and product authentication solutions. However, most of our near-term growth in revenues has been derived from our validated COVID-19 pooled testing, and our COVID-19 Surveillance Testing, which are part of our MDx testing services business. We also expect future growth in revenues to be derived from our Therapeutic DNA Production Services and our MDx testing services. To a lesser extent, we expect to grow revenues from the sale of SigNature® molecular tags, SigNature® T molecular tags, SigNify® and CertainT® offerings as we work with companies and governments to secure supply chains for various types of
products and product labeling throughout the world. We have continued to incur expenses in expanding our business to meet current and anticipated future demand. We have limited sources of liquidity.
Comparison of the Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2022 to the Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2021
Revenues
Product revenues
For the twelve-month periods ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, we generated $1,882,804 and $3,295,849 in revenues from product sales, respectively. Product revenue decreased by $1,413,045 or 43% for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022 as compared to the prior fiscal year. Revenues decreased by $1,323,610 in sales of our MDx test kits and supplies, of which $1,266,895 was attributable to sales pursuant to our contract with Stony Brook University Hospital. The decrease also relates to a decrease of approximately $163,000 in the textiles market for the shipment of DNA concentrate used by customers to protect the supply chain.
Service revenues
For the twelve-month periods ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, we generated $759,138 and $937,735 in service revenues, respectively. Service revenue decreased by $178,597 or 19% for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022 as compared to the prior fiscal year. The decrease in service revenues is related to a decrease of approximately $258,000 for research and development projects in our Therapeutic DNA production segment.
Clinical laboratory service revenues
For the twelve-month periods ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, we generated $15,526,735 and $4,794,154 in revenues from clinical laboratory testing services, respectively. Clinical laboratory service revenue increased by $10,732,581 or 224% for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022 as compared to the prior fiscal year. The increase in revenue is primarily due to a full twelve months of our contract with the City University of New York which resulted in an increase of $9,319,884 year over year.
Costs and Expenses
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022 increased by $570,734 or 13% from $4,482,906 for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2021 to $5,053,640 for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022. The gross profit percentage was 28% and 50% for the twelve-month periods ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The decline in gross profit percentage was the result of a significant portion of our clinical laboratory revenue coming from our screening testing contracts where we also provide and staff the testing centers, as these contracts have higher costs associated with them as compared to our surveillance testing contracts. To a lesser extent, the decline is due to product sales mix, as sales during the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2021 included MDx kit sales, as well as DNA concentrate to protect a cotton supply chain, which are at a higher gross margin as compared to the products sold during the current fiscal year.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022 increased by $2,251,988 or 18% to $15,097,360 from $12,845,372 in the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2021. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $615,000 relating to officer stock option grants that vested immediately, as well as to the annual non-employee board of director grants that vest one-year from the date of grant. The remainder of the increase relates to an increase in insurance expense of approximately $413,000, primarily related to an increase in our Directors and Officers insurance policy premiums and payroll of approximately $809,000. The increase in total payroll is primarily due to an increase of $500,000 for a bonus accrual for the CEO, in accordance with his employment agreement, and was also due to the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2021 having a reversal of an accrual of approximately $300,000 for an accrued bonus that was forgiven by the CEO. To a lesser extent, the increase is due to an increase of approximately $240,000 in bad debt expense for the twelve-month period ended at September 30, 2022 to fully reserve for an outstanding customer balance that was deemed to be uncollectible.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $238,391 or 6% to $3,926,043 from $4,164,434 in the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2021. This decrease is primarily due to decreased purchases relating to our clinical laboratory build out as well as for research projects related to genetic sequencing and isotopic research analysis projects during the period ended September 30, 2022.
Impairment losses
Impairment losses for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2021 was $821,741. This relates to the impairment of intellectual property, customer lists and goodwill relating to a 2015 asset purchase.
Interest income, net
Interest income, net for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, decreased to $7,200 from $13,675 in the same period of 2021.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net for the twelve-month periods ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, was $47,305 and $8,756, respectively.
Loss on extinguishment of convertible notes payable
Loss on extinguishment of convertible notes payable of $1,774,662 for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2021 relates to the repayment of the July 2019 Notes. The loss on extinguishment represents the difference between the fair value of the July 2019 Notes, including the fair value of the Replacement Warrants issued, on the repayment date compared to its carrying value.
Transaction cost allocated to warrant liabilities
Transaction cost allocated to warrant liabilities for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022 was $1,668,112. These transaction costs represent the portion of the closing costs from both the February and August 2022 financing transactions that was allocated to the warrants issued in those transactions.
Unrealized gain on change in fair value of the Common Warrants
Unrealized gain on change in fair value of Common Warrants for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022, of $17,999,521 relates to the change in fair value of the Common Warrants issued as part of the February and August 2022 Offerings (see Note H of the accompanying consolidated financial statements). The gain on change in fair value represents the difference between the fair value of the Common Warrants on the issuance date compared to the fair value as of September 30, 2022. The primary driver of this change is the decline in our stock price during the period.
Gain on extinguishment of notes payable
Gain on extinguishment of notes payable for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2021 of $839,945 relates to the full forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan. The gain on extinguishment represents the difference between the fair value of the PPP loan on the forgiveness date compared to their carrying value plus accrued interest.
Loss on issuance of warrants
The loss on issuance of warrants of $10,591,600 for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022 relates to the August 2022 financing transaction and is the result of the fair value of the warrants being greater than the cash received from the financing.
Net Loss
Net loss decreased $6,008,380, or 42% to $8,270,059 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to $14,278,439 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, due to the factors noted above.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note C, “Recent Accounting Standards,” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of accounting standards which may impact our consolidated financial statements in future reporting periods.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs consist of our working capital requirements and research and development expenditure funding. As of September 30, 2022, we had working capital of $15,757,821. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, we used cash in operating activities of $8,976,706 consisting primarily of our loss of $8,270,059 net with non-cash adjustments of $1,290,480 in depreciation and amortization charges, $2,518,665 in stock-based compensation expense, $1,668,112 in public offering costs incurred, $10,591,600 in loss on issuance of warrants, $17,999,521 in unrealized gain on change in fair value of common warrants, and $269,451 of bad debt expense. Additionally, we had a net increase in operating assets of $258,488 and a net decrease in operating liabilities of $1,213,054. Cash used in investing activities was $489,553, for the purchase of property and equipment. Cash provided by financing activities was $18,126,596, which included net proceeds from public offerings of $14,426,521, and warrant exercises of $3,700,075.
We have recurring net losses. We have incurred a net loss of $8,270,059 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022. Our current capital resources include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and inventories. Historically, we have financed our operations principally from the sale of equity and equity-linked securities. Through September 30, 2022, we have dedicated most of our financial resources to commercialization of our MDx Testing Services, specifically our COVID-19 Testing Services, as well as to research and development efforts focused on the development of our Therapeutic DNA Productions Services, as well as, advancing our intellectual property, and general and administrative activities.
As discussed in Note H of the accompanying consolidated financial statements, on August 8, 2022, we closed on a public offering of 3,000,000 shares of Common Stock and warrants, at a purchase price of $4.00 per share. The net proceeds, after deducting the placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses were approximately $10.7 million. Also, we received $3.7 million in proceeds from the exercise of 900,000 Series B Warrants.
We have alleviated the substantial doubt of a going concern through the cash received from the August 2022 public offering and the warrant exercises, discussed above, as well as collection of our accounts receivable. We estimate that we will have sufficient cash and cash equivalents to fund operations for the next twelve months from the date of filing of this annual report.
We may require additional funds to complete the continued development of our products, services, product manufacturing, and to fund expected additional losses from operations until revenues are sufficient to cover our operating expenses. If revenues are not sufficient to cover our operating expenses, and if we are not successful in obtaining the necessary additional financing, we will most likely be forced to reduce operations.
We expect capital expenditures to be less than $3,000,000 in fiscal 2023. Our primary investments are expected to be in laboratory equipment related to our Therapeutic DNA Production segment’s research and development activities.
Substantially all of the real property used in our business is leased under operating lease agreements.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Financial Reporting Release No. 60, published by the SEC, recommends that all companies include a discussion of critical accounting policies used in the preparation of their financial statements. While all these significant accounting policies impact our financial condition and results of operations, we view certain of these policies as critical. Policies determined to be critical are those policies that have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements and require management to use a greater degree of judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
We believe that given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any other reasonable judgments or estimate methodologies would cause a material effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity for the periods presented in this report.
The accounting policies identified as critical are as follows:
● Revenue recognition; and
● Equity based compensation.
● Warrant Liabilities
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with Accounting Principles Generally Accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain reported amounts and disclosures. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. The most significant estimates include revenue recognition, recoverability of long-lived assets, including the values assigned to property and equipment, fair value calculations for warrants, contingencies, and management’s anticipated liquidity. Management reviews its estimates on a regular basis and the effects of any material revisions are reflected in the consolidated financial statements in the period they are deemed necessary. Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We follow Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued accounting standard updates which clarify the principles for recognizing revenue arising from contracts with customers (“ASC 606” or “Topic 606”).
The Company measures revenue at the amounts that reflect the consideration to which it is expected to be entitled in exchange for transferring control of goods and services to customers. The Company recognizes revenue either at the point in time or over the period of time that performance obligations to customers are satisfied. The Company’s contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations (e.g. taggants, maintenance, authentication services, research and development services, etc.). For such arrangements, the Company allocates revenues to each performance obligation based on their relative standalone selling price.
Due to the short-term nature of the Company’s contracts with customers, it has elected to apply the practical expedients under Topic 606 to: (1) expense as incurred, incremental costs of obtaining a contract and (2) not adjust the consideration for the effects of a significant financing component for contracts with an original expected duration of one year or less.
Product Revenues and Authentication Services
The Company’s PCR-produced linear DNA product revenues are accounted for/recognized in accordance with contracts with customers. The Company recognizes revenue upon satisfying its promises to transfer goods or services to customers under the terms of its contracts. These performance obligations are satisfied at the point in time the Company transfers control of the goods to the customer, which in nearly all cases is when title to and risk of loss of the goods transfer to the customer. The timing of transfer of title and risk of loss is dictated by customary or explicitly stated contract terms. The Company invoices customers upon shipment, and its collection terms range, on average, from 30 to 60 days.
Authentication Services
The Company recognizes revenue for authentication services upon satisfying its promises to provide services to customers under the terms of its contracts. These performance obligations are satisfied at the point in time the Company services are complete, which in nearly all cases is when the authentication report is released to the customer.
Clinical Laboratory Testing Services
The Company records revenue for its clinical laboratory testing service contracts, which includes its COVID-19 Testing Services, upon satisfying its promise to provide services to customers under the terms of its contracts. These performance obligations are satisfied at the point in time that Company services are complete, which in nearly all cases is when the testing results are released to the customer. For those customers with a fixed monthly fee, the revenue is recognized over-time as the services are provided.
Research and Development Services
The Company records revenue for its research and development contracts using the over-time revenue recognition model. Revenue is primarily measured using the cost-to-cost method, which the Company believes best depicts the transfer of control to the customer. Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of actual costs incurred to the total estimated costs expected upon satisfying the identified performance obligation.
Revenues are recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. For contracts where the total costs cannot be estimated, revenues are recognized for the actual costs incurred during a period until the remaining costs to complete a contract can be estimated. The Company has elected not to disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for contracts with an original expected duration of one year or less.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company evaluated the Common Warrants and the Series A and Series B Warrants (collectively the “Warrants”) in accordance with ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” and ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” and concluded that due to the terms of the warrant agreements, the instrument does not qualify for equity treatment. As such, the Warrants were recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet and measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the consolidated statement of operations in the period of change.
Recent Debt and Equity Financing Transactions
Fiscal 2022
Registered Direct Public Offering
On February 24, 2022, we closed a registered direct offering (the “Offering”) in which, pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement dated February 21, 2022, by and between the Company and an institutional investor, the Company issued and sold 748,200 shares of the Company’s Common Stock (“Share”) and 748,200 pre-funded warrants (“Pre-Funded Warrants”) to purchase shares of the Company’s Common Stock. The Pre-Funded Warrants have an exercise price of $0.0001 per share and were immediately exercisable and can be exercised at any time after their original issuance until such Pre-Funded Warrants are exercised in full. Each Share was sold at an offering price of $2.80 and each Pre-Funded Warrant was sold at an offering price of $2.7999. Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, in a concurrent private placement (together with the Registered Direct Offering, the “Offerings”), the Company issued unregistered warrants (“Common Warrants”) to purchase up to 1,496,400 shares of Common Stock. Each Common Warrant has an exercise price of $2.84 per share, is exercisable six months from the date of issuance and will expire five years from the initial exercise date on August 24, 2027. The gross proceeds of the offering, before deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses, were approximately $4.2 million. On June 9, 2022, all of the 748,200 Pre-Funded Warrants were exercised.
After deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other expenses related to the offering, the aggregate net proceeds were approximately $3.7 million.
Subject to limited exceptions, a holder of a Common Warrant will not have the right to exercise any portion of its Common Warrant if the holder, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own in excess of 4.99% (or, at the election of the holder, 9.99%) of the number of shares of Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to such exercise (the “Beneficial Ownership Limitation”); provided, however, that upon 61 days’ prior notice to us, the holder may increase the Beneficial Ownership Limitation, provided that in no event shall the Beneficial Ownership Limitation exceed 9.99%.
The exercise price and number of the shares of Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of a Common Warrant will be subject to adjustment in the event of any stock dividends and splits, reverse stock split, recapitalization, reorganization or similar transaction, as described in the Warrant Agreement. The Common Warrants are recorded as a liability in the consolidated balance sheet and were recorded at fair value and will be marked to market at each period end. The fair value of the Common Warrants upon issuance was $3,350,400. The fair value of the warrants as of September 30, 2022 was $1,477,000, which resulted in a gain in the change in fair value of Common Warrants of $1,873,400 for the twelve-month periods ended September 30, 2022. Additionally, the Company allocated $391,335 of transaction costs to the warrant liabilities which is included in the consolidated statement of operations for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022.
As a result of this financing, the exercise price of the 458,813 remaining warrants issued during November 2019, 159,000 warrants issued during October 2020 and 100,000 warrants issued during December 2020 was all reduced to an exercise price of $2.80 per share in accordance with the adjustment provision contained in their respective warrant agreements. The incremental change in fair value of these warrants as a result of the triggering event was $110,105 and is recorded as a deemed dividend in the consolidated statement of operations for the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2022.
Public Offering
On August 8, 2022, we closed on a public offering of 3,000,000 shares of our common stock (or common stock equivalents in lieu thereof), together with Series A warrants to purchase up to 3,000,000 shares of our common stock and Series B warrants to purchase up to 3,000,000 shares of our common stock at a combined offering price to the public of $4.00 per share (or $3.9999 per common stock equivalent with an exercise price of $0.0001) and associated warrants, priced at a premium to market under Nasdaq rules. The Series A warrants have an exercise price of $4.00 per share, are exercisable immediately upon issuance, and expire five years following the date of issuance. The Series B warrants have an exercise price of $4.00 per share, are exercisable immediately upon issuance, and expire thirteen months following the date of issuance. The net proceeds to us from the offering, were approximately $10.7 million, after deducting the placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses payable by us.
Warrant Exercises
During August 2022, 925,000 of the Series B warrants were exercised for total net proceeds of $3,700,000.
Fiscal 2021
Entry into Warrant Exercise Agreement
On October 7, 2020, we entered into Warrant Exercise Agreements (each, a “Warrant Exercise Agreement”) with Dillon Hill Capital, LLC and its affiliate, Dillon Hill Investment Company LLC (together, the “Investors”), whereby 318,000 of our 2019 Warrants were exercised. The 2019 Warrants were issued as part of the Company’s November 15, 2019 underwritten public offering. The gross proceeds to the Company from this partial exercise of the 2019 Warrants was $1,669,500.
In consideration of this partial exercise of the 2019 Warrants and of the consent to repayment of the Notes, as described below, the Company agreed to issue, in addition to the 318,000 shares of common stock issued upon exercise of the 2019 Warrants (the “Warrant Shares”), 159,000 replacement warrants (the “Replacement Warrants”) to the Investors, which is an amount equal to one-half the amount of the 2019 Warrants exercised pursuant to the Warrant Exercise Agreements. The Replacement Warrants have an exercise price of $7.54, the closing price on The Nasdaq Capital Market of the Company’s common stock on October 7, 2020. In addition, until January 5, 2021, if the Investors exercised additional 2019 Warrants, the Company agreed to issue to the applicable Investor additional Replacement Warrants in an amount equal to one-half the amount of such exercised 2019 Warrants with each such Replacement Warrant having an exercise price equal to the closing price on The Nasdaq Capital Market of the Company’s common stock on such date that the related 2019 Warrants are exercised. No additional warrants were exercised.
Each Replacement Warrant will be exercisable beginning on the date of issuance thereof and ending on the five year anniversary of such date. The exercise price and number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the Replacement Warrants will be subject to adjustment in the event of any stock dividend, split, recapitalization, reorganization or similar transaction, as described in the Replacement Warrant. Subject to limited exceptions, a holder of a Replacement Warrant will not have the right to exercise any portion of its Replacement Warrant if the holder, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own in excess of 9.99% of the number of shares
of common stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to such exercise (the “Beneficial Ownership Limitation”); provided that upon 61 days’ prior notice to the Company, the holder may elect to increase or decrease the Beneficial Ownership Limitation, although in no event may the Beneficial Ownership Limitation exceed 9.99%. Each Replacement Warrant includes an adjustment provision that, subject to certain exceptions, reduces its exercise price if the Company issues common stock or common stock equivalents at a price lower than the then-current exercise price of such Replacement Warrant, subject to a minimum exercise price of 21% of such Replacement Warrant’s initial exercise price per share. Under certain limited circumstances, including that the daily volume weighted average price of the common stock for each of 20 consecutive trading days has exceeded three times the exercise price of such Replacement Warrant, the Company may call for cancellation of all or any portion of such Replacement Warrant for which a notice of exercise has not yet been delivered for consideration equal to $0.001 per Warrant Share.
The Replacement Warrants will not be registered nor listed on any exchange but are the subject of registration rights agreements (each, a “Registration Rights Agreement”), entered into with each Investor concurrently with the respective Warrant Exercise Agreement, pursuant to which the Company agreed to file a registration statement by January 20, 2021, with respect to the common stock underlying the Replacement Warrants. If at the time of exercise of the Replacement Warrants there is no effective registration statement registering, or the prospectus contained therein is not available for the issuance of the Warrant Shares to the applicable Investor, then such Replacement Warrant may also be exercised, in whole or in part, at such time by means of a “cashless exercise” in which the Investor will be entitled to receive a number of Warrant Shares as determined by the terms of the Replacement Warrant. A registration statement was filed and went effective on February 2, 2021.
The private placement of the Replacement Warrants was completed in reliance upon the exemption from registration provided for by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and by Rule 506 of Regulation D promulgated under the Securities Act. Each Investor represented to the Company in its Warrant Exercise Agreement that it is an “accredited investor” as that term is defined in Rule 501 of Regulation D.
On each of December 9 and 10, 2020, the Investors exercised 100,000 of their 2019 Warrants, for an aggregate exercise of 200,000 of their 2019 Warrants, resulting in total net proceeds to the Company of approximately $1.1 million. As a result of these exercises, we issued to the Investors an aggregate of 100,000 additional replacement warrants, which are substantially similar to the Replacement Warrants described above except that 50,000 of the newly-issued replacement warrants have an exercise price of $6.57 and 50,000 of such replacement warrants have an exercise price of $6.46.
Repayment of secured convertible notes
On October 9, 2020, the Company entered into a letter agreement (the “Letter Agreement”) with Dillon Hill Capital, LLC (the “Noteholder”) as sole holder of the secured convertible notes (the “Notes”) for the repayment in full of the Notes, in an aggregate amount of $1,665,581 (the “Payoff Amount”), representing the outstanding principal amount of the Notes plus accrued but unpaid interest through the scheduled maturity of the Notes. The Company paid the Payoff Amount to the Noteholder on October 9, 2020. Pursuant to the Letter Agreement, upon the Noteholder’s receipt of the Payoff Amount, the Notes and any other related documents and instruments automatically terminated. Moreover, all of the obligations and liabilities of the Company and its affiliates under the Notes, the Purchase Agreement, and the Security Agreements, and any other related documents and instruments, were automatically satisfied in full, and all related liens, mortgages or other security interests were automatically released.
Registered Direct Public Offering
On January 13, 2021, we closed on a registered direct public offering (the “Offering) of 1,810,000 shares (the “Shares”) of our common stock, pursuant to (i) the securities purchase agreement, dated January 10, 2021, by and between the Company and certain institutional investors(the “Purchasers”) whereby we agreed to issue and sell the Shares directly to the Purchasers at a price of $8.30 per share of Common Stock and (ii) the placement agency agreement, dated January 10, 2021, by and between the Company and Roth Capital Partners, LLC (the “Placement Agent”). Net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, and other offering expenses, were approximately $13.8 million.
Product Research and Development
We anticipate spending approximately $4,000,000 for product research and development activities during the next twelve months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
The effect of inflation on our revenue and operating results was not significant during the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021.