ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion includes both historical information and forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risk, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from management’s expectations and those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, but not limited to, the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and societal and governmental responses as well as those discussed in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have omitted discussion of 2019 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020. “Apollo,” Orbera®, OverStitch®, X-Tack®, the Apollo logo and other trademarks, service marks and trade names of Apollo are registered marks of Apollo Endosurgery, Inc. in the U.S. and other jurisdictions.
Overview
We are a medical technology company primarily focused on the development of next-generation, less invasive medical devices to advance gastrointestinal therapeutic endoscopy. Our Endoscopy product portfolio consists of the OverStitch® Endoscopic Suturing System, the OverStitch Sx® Endoscopic Suturing System, X-Tack® Endoscopic HeliX Tacking System (collectively “ESS”) and ORBERA® Intragastric Balloon (“IGB”). Our products are used by gastroenterologists and bariatric surgeons in a variety of settings to treat multiple gastrointestinal conditions including closure of acute perforations and chronic fistulas; tissue closure after the removal of abnormal lesions in the esophagus, stomach or colon (also known as endoscopic submucosal dissections, endoscopic mucosal resections and endoscopic full thickness resections); treatment of swallowing disorders (peroral endoscopic myotomy); and esophageal stent fixation and obesity. We have offices in the United Kingdom and Italy that oversee commercial activities outside the U.S. (“OUS”) and a products manufacturing facility in Costa Rica. All other activities are managed and operated from facilities in Austin, Texas.
Since its market introduction in 2008, over 75,000 OverStitch units have been sold for procedures worldwide. We estimate that approximately 60% of OverStitch uses in the United States were for advanced gastrointestinal therapies. The other uses were for endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty, or ESG, approximately 25%, and bariatric revision, approximately 15%. Outside the United States, we estimate that the majority of OverStitch uses, approximately 65%, were for ESG. The other uses outside the United States were for bariatric revision, approximately 20%, and for advanced gastrointestinal therapies, approximately 15%.
Recent research suggests that there may be a significant untapped market for applying the OverStitch Sx® Endoscopic Suturing System, or OverStitch, to obesity treatments, including endoscopic revisions of bariatric surgeries. In the aggregate, over 200 published investigator-initiated clinical trials, involving over 6,500 ESG procedures and conducted by a variety of physicians around the world, have consistently demonstrated clinically significant excess body weight loss (in excess of 50%) and low complication rates (0.8%). In another recently conducted randomized controlled trial, participants we assigned to either an ESG procedure or an ESG procedure plus taking the weight loss drug semaglutide. Patients in the ESG-only arm demonstrated an 18.7% total body weight loss at 12 months and patients undergoing ESG and taking semaglutide had an average of 25.2% total body weight loss. We believe these results demonstrate the potential for a meaningfully expanded market opportunity for obesity treatment given the currently limited use in the United States of OverStitch for ESG and bariatric revision, as well as the ability for ESG to be performed in individuals with lower body mass indices, or BMI, thereby making the option available to more people.
To address this opportunity, in September 2021, we submitted a De Novo classification request to the FDA seeking FDA 510(k) classification and clearance for the Apollo ESG and Apollo REVISE systems, which consist of the OverStitch Endoscopic Suturing System and related components (such as tissue helix, sutures, cinches). Apollo ESG is intended for use in the ESG procedure for weight loss and Apollo REVISE is intended for use in revision of bariatric surgery procedures. Pending FDA approval of the Apollo ESG and Apollo REVISE devices, we expect to begin education and marketing programs to expand visibility of the ESG procedures and thereby increase the use of OverStitch.
Recent Financing Transactions
In October 2021, we completed a public offering of our common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of $74.9 million.
In December 2021, we entered into a term loan facility agreement with Innovatus Capital Partners, LLC (“Innovatus”) to borrow up to $100.0 million (the “Term Loans”). We made an initial draw of $35.0 million, which we used to repay our previous senior secured credit agreement in full, including interest. We are eligible to draw an additional $40.0 million between July 1, 2023 and December 31, 2024, upon the achievement of certain minimum revenue thresholds. We are also eligible to draw an additional $25.0 million to finance certain approved acquisitions between June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2024. The Term Loans mature on December 21, 2027, with principal payments beginning February 1, 2027, and bear interest at the greater of Wall Street Journal Prime Rate (3.25% at December 31, 2021) plus 4.0%.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
Beginning in early March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures imposed to contain this pandemic disrupted our business, financial condition, and results of operations. The United States and other countries implemented a variety of public health interventions to reduce the risk of disease transmission and conserve healthcare resources for addressing the community health needs of COVID-19. This resulted in an unprecedented decline in global healthcare resources available for procedures that use our products. Our sales results in the months of March and April 2020 declined commensurate with the global decline in elective procedures and reduced patient access to treatments by shelter in place and social distancing rules, which resulted in cancellation or postponement of procedures that use our products. Beginning in May 2020, our sales began to recover primarily as certain public health interventions implemented by various countries to reduce COVID-19 transmission risks were eased and procedures that use our products increased. Demand for our products and our business has continued to recover since that time though there can be no assurance that this recovery will continue or that current demand levels will be sustained. In particular, new variants or outbreaks of the virus, including the Omicron variant, have caused health systems and other healthcare providers in our markets to restrict or limit procedures using our devices or have caused reductions in or cancellations of planned procedures, which have harmed and may continue to harm our sales and growth. Despite growing availability of COVID-19 vaccines, the COVID-19 pandemic, including emerging variant strains of the virus, remains active and continues to represent uncertainty concerning our sales outlook and risk to our business operations, including supply chain disruptions. Business challenges and periodic disruption resulting from COVID-19 will likely continue for the duration of the pandemic, which is uncertain. We cannot assure you that our current recovery will be indicative of future results or that we will not experience future sales or business disruptions due to COVID-19, including emerging variants or new outbreaks, which could be significant. See Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-Our business will be adversely affected by the effects of the recent COVID-19 outbreak.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenues
Our principal source of revenues are sales of our endoscopy products. The majority of our sales come from direct markets where sales are made to the final end customers, typically healthcare providers and institutions. In other markets, we sell our products to distributors who resell our products to end users. Revenues between periods will be impacted by several factors, including the continuing COVID-19 pandemic, physician procedures and therapy preferences, patient procedures and therapy preferences, buying patterns of distributors, other market trends, the stability of the average sales price we realize on products and changes in foreign exchange rates used to translate foreign currency denominated sales into U.S. dollars.
Other revenue includes amounts recognized for our digital aftercare support program, manufacturing services, and freight charged to customers.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for purchased products consist of the actual purchase price from manufacturers plus an allocation of our internal manufacturing overhead cost. Cost of sales for products we manufacture include raw materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead. Raw materials used in our manufacturing activity are generally not subject to substantial commodity price volatility, and most of our manufacturing costs are incurred in U.S. dollars. Cost of sales also includes royalties, shipping, excess and obsolete inventory charges, inspection and related costs incurred in making our products available for sale or use. In periods of reduced production volume, unabsorbed manufacturing overhead costs are charged to expense when incurred.
Manufacturing overhead as a percentage of revenue between periods can fluctuate as a result of manufacturing rates and the degree to which manufacturing overhead is allocated to production during the period. We expect to continue to improve gross margins as we complete certain identified gross margin improvement projects and improve capacity utilization of our manufacturing facility.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense primarily consists of salaries, commissions, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel employed in sales, marketing and medical education. In addition, our sales and marketing expense includes costs associated with physician training, industry events, advertising and other promotional activities.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense primarily consists of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel employed in corporate management, finance, legal, compliance, information technology and human resources. General and administrative expense also includes facility costs, insurance, audit fees, legal fees, bad debt expense and costs to develop and maintain our intellectual property portfolio.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense includes product development, clinical trial costs, quality and regulatory compliance, consulting services, outside prototyping services, outside research activities, materials, and other costs associated with development of our products. Research and development expense also includes salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel dedicated to these activities. Research and development expense may fluctuate between periods depending on the activity associated with our various product development and clinical obligations.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Definite-lived intangible assets primarily consist of customer relationships, product technology, trade names, patents, trademarks and capitalized software. Intangible assets are amortized over the asset’s estimated useful life.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which management has prepared in accordance with existing U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. Management evaluates estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Estimates relate to aspects of our revenue recognition, valuation of intangible assets, long-lived assets and goodwill, going concern assessment, stock-based compensation, allowance for doubtful accounts, and inventory valuation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that management believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The critical accounting policies addressed below reflect our most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our principal source of revenues is from the sale of our products to hospitals, physician practices and distributors. We utilize a network of employee sales representatives in the U.S. and a combination of employee sales representatives, independent agents and distributors in OUS markets. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in an exchange for those goods. Generally, these conditions are met upon product shipment. Customers generally have the right to return or exchange products purchased from us for up to thirty days from the date of product shipment. Distributors, who resell the products to their customers, take title to products and assume all risks of ownership at the time of shipment and are obligated to pay within specified terms regardless of when, if ever, they sell their products. At the end of each period, we determine the extent to which our revenues need to be reduced to account for expected rebates, returns and exchanges. We classify any shipping and handling cost billed to customers as revenue and the related expenses as cost of sales.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventory costs include raw materials, inbound freight charges, warehousing costs, labor, and overhead expenses related to the Company’s manufacturing and processing facilities. The allocation of overhead costs requires significant estimates including the capitalization of related overhead costs and the utilization and efficiency of such cost inputs. Charges for excess and obsolete inventory are based on specific identification of excess and obsolete inventory items and an analysis of inventory items approaching expiration date. We evaluate the carrying value of inventory in relation to the estimated forecast of product demand. A significant decrease in demand could result in an increase in the amount of excess inventory quantities on hand. When quantities on hand exceed estimated sales forecasts, we record estimated excess and obsolescence charges to cost of sales. Our inventories are stated using the weighted average cost approach, which approximates actual costs.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Product sales by product group and geographic market for the periods shown were as follows:
Total revenues in 2021 were $63.0 million, compared to $42.0 million in 2020, an increase of 49.8% due to improved demand for all of our products, as the impact of the initial outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic began to dissipate, and the launch of our X-Tack product in the U.S. in 2021. Total U.S. sales increased $11.7 million, or 52.7%, in 2021 and total OUS sales increased $9.2 million, or 46.6%, in 2021 due to continued improvement in demand for our ESS products, recovery in elective procedures for our IGB products, and increased demand in our international distributor markets.
Direct market product sales accounted for approximately 79.6% of total product sales in 2021 compared to 83.4% in 2020.
Non-GAAP Product Sales Percentage Change in Constant Currency
To supplement our financial results, we provide a non-GAAP financial measure, product sales percentage change in constant currency, which removes the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates that affect the comparability and trend of our product sales. Product sales percentage change in constant currency is calculated by translating current foreign currency sales using last year’s exchange rate. This supplemental measure of our performance is not required by, and is not determined in accordance with GAAP.
Non-GAAP product sales percentage changes in constant currency for the year ended December 31, 2021 were as follows:
We believe the non-GAAP financial measure included herein is helpful in understanding our current financial performance. We use this supplemental non-GAAP financial measure internally to understand, manage and evaluate our business, and make operating decisions. We believe that making non-GAAP financial information available to investors, in addition to GAAP financial information, may facilitate more consistent comparisons between our performance over time with the performance of other companies in the medical device industry, which may use similar financial measures to supplement their GAAP financial information. However, our non-GAAP financial measure is not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the comparable GAAP metric.
Cost of Sales
Cost of product sales for the periods shown were as follows:
Gross Margin
Gross margin was 55.5% for 2021 compared to 52.9% for 2020. The increase in gross margin as a percentage of revenue was primarily due to higher product sales and improved overhead absorption in 2021 compared to 2020, which included unabsorbed overhead costs charged to cost of sales in 2020 when we reduced our manufacturing activities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expense. Sales and marketing expense increased $7.0 million in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to higher compensation and marketing spend in 2021 compared to 2020 when cost efficiency programs were implemented as a response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in future periods as we continue to invest in our sales channel and marketing programs to invest in sales growth.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense increased $7.4 million in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $4.1 million resulting from leadership changes during 2021 as well as higher compensation and professional service fees compared to 2020 when cost efficiency programs were implemented in response to the pandemic. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods as we invest in our business infrastructure.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expense increased $1.9 million in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to higher compensation in 2021 compared to 2020 when cost efficiency programs were implemented in response to the pandemic. We expect research and development expenses to increase in future periods as we continue to hire additional engineering and development talent and invest in our product pipeline and clinical initiatives.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets remained unchanged in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Loss from Operations.
Loss from operations in 2021 was $19.2 million compared to $15.8 million in 2020, attributed to a $16.1 million increase in operating expenses, offset in part by a $12.7 million increase in gross margin.
Other Expenses
Interest Expense, net. Net interest expense increased $3.1 million in 2021 primarily due to the extinguishment of our term loan with Solar in December 2021, including prepayment and final fees, as well as the write off of related deferred financing costs.
Gain on Forgiveness of PPP Loan. The PPP loan, including interest, was forgiven in June 2021.
Other (Income) Expense. Other (income) expense primarily consists of realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains or losses on short-term intercompany loans denominated in the U.S. dollars payable by our foreign subsidiaries. Fluctuations in currency exchange rates resulted in an unrealized gain of $0.4 million in 2021 compared to the unrealized loss of $1.2 million in 2020.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense related to foreign income taxes on income generated in our OUS tax jurisdictions was $0.2 million in 2021 compared to $0.1 million in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have experienced operating losses since inception and have an accumulated deficit of $297.5 million as of December 31, 2021. To date, we have funded our operating losses and acquisitions through equity offerings and the issuance of debt instruments. Our ability to fund future operations and meet debt covenant requirements will depend upon our level of future revenue and operating cash flow and our ability to access future draws on our existing credit facility, or additional funding through either equity offerings, issuances of debt instruments or both.
In October 2021, we issued shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering for aggregate gross proceeds of $74.9 million, which increased our cash by $69.8 million after factoring in share issuance costs of $5.1 million.
In December 2021, we entered into a term loan facility agreement with Innovatus Capital Partners, LLC (“Innovatus”) to borrow up to $100.0 million (the “Term Loans”) and drew the Term A Loan of $35.0 million. We are eligible to draw the Term B Loan of $15.0 million between July 1, 2023 and December 31, 2023 and the Term C Loan of $25.0 million between July 1, 2024 and December 31, 2024, in each case upon the achievement of certain minimum revenue thresholds. We are eligible to draw the Term D Loan of $25.0 million to finance certain approved acquisitions between June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2024. The Term Loans mature on December 21, 2027, with principal payments beginning February 1, 2027, and bear interest at the greater of the Wall Street Journal Prime Rate or 3.25%, plus 4.0%. Principal payments are due on a straight-line basis after the interest-only period concludes. An additional 4.0% of the outstanding amount will be due at the end of the loan term. Prior to December 21, 2025, Innovatus will have the right to make a one-time election to convert up to 10.0% of the outstanding aggregate principal amount of the term loans into shares of common stock of the Company at a price per share equal to $11.50. The Term Loans include customary affirmative covenants and negative covenants. Additionally, it contains a minimum liquidity covenant, tested on a maintenance basis, and a minimum revenue covenant tested quarterly commencing the earlier of December 31, 2023 or the funding date of the Term B loan. We used $35.0 million of the proceeds of the Term A Loan to repay our previous senior secured credit agreement in full, including interest, prepayment and final fees.
Management believes our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash from operations, additional term loans available upon certain thresholds under the Term Loans and access to financing sources will be sufficient to meet covenant, liquidity and capital requirements for the next twelve months and beyond. Management periodically evaluates our liquidity requirements, alternative uses of capital, capital needs and available resources. Any future capital requirements will depend on many factors including market acceptance of our products, the costs of our research and development activities, the cost and timing of additional regulatory clearance and approvals, the cost and timing of identified gross margin improvement projects, the cost and timing of clinical programs, the ability to maintain covenant compliance with our lending facility, and the costs of sales, marketing, and manufacturing activities. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. As a result of this process, we have in the past, and may in the future, explore alternatives to finance our business plan, including, but not limited to, sales of common stock, preferred stock, convertible securities or debt financings, reduction of planned expenditures, or other sources, although there can be no assurances that such additional funding could be obtained. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law providing certain economic aid packages for qualified entities. In April 2020, we were granted a loan of $2.8 million under the PPP established under the CARES Act under the Small Business Administration’s (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) established under the CARES Act. In June 2021, we received forgiveness for the full amount of the $2.9 million loan, inclusive of interest, from the SBA.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities of $14.5 million for 2021 was primarily the result of a net loss of $24.7 million plus non-cash items of $9.5 million primarily related to gain on forgiveness of PPP loan, depreciation, amortization, non-cash interest, and stock-based compensation. Additionally, cash used by operating assets and liabilities of $0.7 million primarily related to accounts receivable due to the increase in revenues, increase in inventory purchases, and the increase in certain prepaid expenses which was partially offset by changes in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Cash used in operating activities of $20.8 million for 2020 was primarily the result of a net loss of $22.6 million plus non-cash items of $9.3 million primarily related to depreciation, amortization, non-cash interest, foreign currency on intercompany payables, and stock-based compensation. Additionally, cash used by operating assets and liabilities was mainly for accounts payable and accrued expenses of $7.1 million primarily related to clinical study payments and raw material purchases.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities in both 2021 and 2020 was related to installment payments received from the sale of the Surgical product line partially offset by investments in property and equipment and in our intellectual property portfolio.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $67.6 million for 2021 primarily related to net proceeds received from the issuance of common stock in October 2021 of $69.8 million, proceeds from option exercises of $2.5 million, partially offset by the prepayment and final fees of $3.2 million and the payment of deferred financing costs of $1.5 million for the Term Loan executed in December 2021.
Cash provided by financing activities of $25.6 million for 2020 primarily related to proceeds received from the issuance of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase common stock in July 2020 of $23.3 million and the PPP Loan granted in April 2020 of $2.8 million.
Contractual and Other Obligations
Innovatus Term Loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had $35.0 million outstanding principal amount drawn under Term Loan A. See Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Solar Capital Exit Fee. We remain obligated to pay $1.9 million upon the earlier to occur of (i) certain exit or change in control events, or (ii) our achievement of trailing twelve-month revenue of $100.0 million.
Operating Leases. Our operating lease commitments related primarily to our office space. As of December 31, 2021, we had fixed lease payment obligations of $2.6 million, with $0.9 million expected to be paid within 12 months and the remainder thereafter. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2(r) to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of recently enacted accounting pronouncements.