ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “Brookline Capital Acquisition Corp.,” “Brookline,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Brookline Capital Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on May 27, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies. We have identified Apexigen as our initial business combination target, and expect to schedule a special meeting of stockholders to approve the business combination later this year. Upon consummation of the business combination with Apexigen, we expect to change our name and be known as Apexigen Inc.
Our Sponsor is Brookline Capital Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”), an affiliate of Brookline Capital Markets, a division of Arcadia Securities, LLC (“Brookline”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 28, 2021. On February 2, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 5,750,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 750,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $57.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $1.3 million.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 247,000 private placement units (each, a “Private Placement Unit” and collectively, the “Private Placement Units”) at a price of $10.00 per unit to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $2.5 million (Note 4).
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, approximately $58.1 million ($10.10 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) in the United States maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, as trustee, and will be invested only in U.S “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of its Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. Our initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the amount of taxes payable on the income earned on the Trust Account) at the time we sign a definitive agreement in connection with the initial Business Combination. However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
The Company’s IPO prospectus and charter provided that the Company initially had until May 2, 2022 (the date which was 15 months after the consummation of the IPO) to complete a Business Combination. The Board currently believes that there will not be sufficient time before May 2, 2022, to complete a Business Combination. On March 29, 2022, the Company mailed its proxy statement with respect to a special meeting of the Company’s stockholders of record as of March 21, 2022 to be held on April 26, 2022 for purposes of considering and voting upon a proposal to amend the Company’s charter to extend the date by which the Company must consummate a Business Combination from May 2, 2022 (the date which is 15 months from the closing date of the IPO on a monthly basis up to November 2, 2022 (the date which is 21 months from the closing date of the IPO) (such period, the “Combination Period
”). The proposal is more fully described in the Company’s proxy statement filed with the SEC on March 28, 2022. The sole purpose of the Extension Amendment is to provide the Company more time to complete a Business Combination, which our Board believes is in the best interests of our stockholders.
On March 17, 2022, the Company and Apexigen entered into the BCA pursuant to which the Company and Apexigen would combine, with the former equityholders of both entities holding equity in the Surviving Company and with Apexigen’s existing equityholders owning a majority of the equity in the Surviving Company. It is expected that there will be a substantial rollover of equity by the existing equityholders of Apexigen. Under the BCA, the transaction values Apexigen at $205.0 million on a net-equity
basis, net of exercise proceeds for Apexigen’s pre-closing
options and warrants. As a result of the transaction, the combined company is expected to receive approximately $73.1 million in gross proceeds funded by approximately $58.1 million in cash held in the Company’s trust account (assuming no shareholders exercise their redemption rights at closing) and $15.0 million from a fully committed PIPE consisting of units of shares and half a warrant for one share being sold at $10.00 per unit. The PIPE includes participation from healthcare institutional and individual investors. In addition, concurrent with the execution of the BCA, the Company, Apexigen and Lincoln Park have entered into a committed investment agreement under which the Surviving Company would have the right to direct Lincoln Park to purchase up to an aggregate of $50 million of common stock of the Surviving Company over a 24-month
period. For more information regarding the BCA and related transactions, see Note 11 (Subsequent Events) to the Financial Statements and the Form 8-K
filed by the Company with the SEC on March 18, 2022.
The Company’s IPO prospectus and charter provided that the Company initially had until May 2, 2022 (the date which was 15 months after the consummation of the IPO) to complete a Business Combination. The Board currently believes that there will not be sufficient time before May 2, 2022, to complete a Business Combination. The sole purpose of the Extension Amendment is to provide the Company more time to complete a Business Combination, which our Board believes is in the best interests of our stockholders.
The completion of the proposed Business Combination with Apexigen is subject to the satisfaction of the conditions set forth in the BCA, including (i) completion of any required stock exchange and regulatory review, (ii) approval of the transaction by the Company’s and Apexigen’s stockholders and (iii) receipt by Apexigen of any required third-party approvals. Accordingly, no assurances can be made that the proposed transaction will be consummated on the terms or timeframe currently contemplated, or at all. The Board believes that it is in the best interests of our stockholders to provide the Company more time to complete a Business Combination and to consummate a Business Combination. The Company intends to hold another stockholder meeting prior to the Extended Date in order to seek stockholder approval of a potential Business Combination.
If we are unable to consummate a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purposes of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including any interest earned on the Trust Account not previously released to us to pay its tax obligations and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses, divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any),
subject to applicable law, and; (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire if we fail to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $217,000 in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $126,000 (not taking into account approximately $82,000 in tax obligations that may be paid using investment income earned in the Trust Account).
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to pay for certain offering costs in exchange for the issuance of 1,437,500 shares of common stock (the “Founder Shares”), a loan under of approximately $116,000 under a promissory note from our Sponsor (the “Note”), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note on February 2, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an Initial Business Combination, our officers, directors and initial stockholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us Company Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Until the consummation of a Business Combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination. We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate, May 2, 2022. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for an Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of investment income from the Trust Account. We will continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
Additionally, we recognize non-cash
gains and losses within other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our derivative liabilities at each reporting period.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a loss of approximately $484,000, which consisted of approximately $411,000 of general and administrative expenses, $110,000 of administrative expenses-related party, approximately $82,000 of franchise tax expense, and approximately $1,000 of offering costs allocated to private warrants, partially offset by non-operating
income of approximately $110,000 for changes in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $10,000 of net gain from investments held in the Trust Account.
For the period from May 27, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a loss of approximately $2,000 consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the effective date of the prospectus, the Company agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to the Company. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
We incurred $110,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party in the accompanying statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Representative Shares, Private Placement Units and units that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and in each case holders of their component securities, as applicable) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. These holders are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that the Company registered such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. However, the holders of the Representative Shares may not exercise demand and “piggyback” registration rights after five (5) and seven (7) years after the effective date of the registration statement for our Initial Public Offering and may not exercise demand rights on more than one occasion. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of the final prospectus included in the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 750,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On February 2, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.15 per unit, or $862,500 in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments is comprised solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are classified as trading securities. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in net gain from investments held in the Trust Account in the accompanying statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Derivative warrant liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (the “Public Warrants”) are classified as equity. The Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the Private Placement Warrants as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants are measured using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Common stock subject to possible redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Public Shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, 5,750,000 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption were presented at their redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Under ASC 480, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering (including the sale of the Over-Allotment Units), we recognized the remeasurement from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of shares of the common stock subject to possible redemption resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital.
Net income (loss) per common share
Income and losses are shared pro rata between the outstanding redeemable and non-redeemable
common shares. Net income (loss) per share of common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
We have not considered the effect of the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 2,998,500 shares of the Company’s common stock in the calculation of diluted net income (loss) per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Remeasurement associated with the common stock subject to possible redemption is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standard Update (the “ASU”) No. 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We early adopted the ASU on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements
(auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.