Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provides information we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows for the periods presented. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based upon our current expectations, including with respect to our future revenues and operating results. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in such forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. We operate on a calendar year basis. Thus, references to 2021, for example, refer to Appgate’s year ended December 31, 2021. Capitalized terms used in this section and not defined herein have the respective meanings given to such terms elsewhere in this Annual Report. Numbers and percentages presented throughout this discussion and analysis may not always add up to equivalent totals and/or to 100% due to rounding.
Overview of Our Business
We believe we are defining a new category of Zero Trust access for enterprises and governments. Our Zero Trust platform is designed to protect against increasingly damaging breaches through innovative, identity-centric, context-aware solutions. Our pure-play focus on Zero Trust has enabled us to deliver the highest ranked current Zero Trust Network Access offering as determined by the Forrester New Wave™: Zero Trust Network Access, Q3 2021.
This new Zero Trust paradigm is needed today because enterprises are undergoing digital transformation as they seek to automate operations, generate new revenue streams, transition business models and deliver a seamless customer experience. Simultaneously, the number and sophistication of cyberattacks have increased dramatically, as has their costs and frequency. This combination of more vulnerable networks and more malicious activity has created a cybersecurity crisis, changing the threat landscape organizations face. As a result, enterprises require security access solutions that proactively ensure the right user has authorized access to the right resources at the right time.
We believe that our Zero Trust solutions secure an enterprise’s exponentially increased attack surface, which occurs as a result of their digital transformation journey. We also offer digital threat protection and risk-based authentication tools to identify and eliminate attacks before they occur, across social media, phishing attacks, bogus websites, and malicious mobile apps.
We sell our solutions primarily through a recurring revenue license model or subscription, and we employ a ‘land and expand’ strategy to generate incremental revenue through the addition of new users and the sale of additional products. Our annual recurring revenue (“ARR”) was $31.1 million and $22.5 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We believe the success of our strategy is validated by our strong dollar-based net retention rates, which describe our ability to retain and grow the ARR generated from our existing subscription customers. Our dollar-based net retention rates were 114% and 105% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our number of customers generating over $100,000 ARR increased 50% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, driven by elevated C-suite and board level dialogue and customer prioritization of a Zero Trust posture. See “- Key Business Metrics” for additional information regarding ARR and dollar-based net retention rate.
We have achieved significant growth in recent periods, with our revenue increasing from $33.7 million for 2020 to $45.3 million for 2021, an increase of 34%. We continue to invest in growing our business and, as a result, we incurred net losses from continuing operations before income taxes of $132.1 million and $49.7 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Factors Affecting Our Business
Merger with Newtown Lane
On October 12, 2021, Legacy Appgate successfully completed its merger with a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of Newtown Lane. Upon closing of the Merger, Newtown Lane changed its name to Appgate, Inc., and our common stock is now quoted on the OTC Markets under the symbol “APGT.” The Merger has been accounted for as a reverse capitalization, and the historical financial statements contained in this Annual Report are those of: (1) except for the equity, which was retroactively restated following applicable accounting guidance, Legacy Appgate with respect to all periods prior to consummation of the Merger, and (2) those of us, inclusive of Newtown Lane for the period subsequent to the Merger. We incurred $3.1 million in transaction costs during 2021 in connection with the Merger.
Risks and Uncertainties due to COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and disrupt normal activities in many segments of the U.S. and global economies even as COVID-19 vaccines have been and continue to be administered. Much uncertainty still surrounds the pandemic, including new variants of COVID-19, its duration and ultimate overall impact on our operations. Our management continues to carefully evaluate potential outcomes and has plans to mitigate related risks. While the COVID-19 pandemic did not have a material impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations for 2021 and 2020, management took measures during such periods to minimize the risks from the pandemic. Those measures were aimed at safeguarding us, and the health, safety and wellbeing of our employees and customers.
Public Company Costs
Following the consummation of the Merger, we became a public company, which will require hiring of additional staff and implementation of processes and procedures to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur substantial additional annual expenses for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external costs for investor relations, accounting, audit, legal, corporate secretary and other functions.
Formation and Cyxtera Spin-Off
Prior to December 31, 2019, Legacy Appgate was wholly owned by Cyxtera. On December 31, 2019, Cyxtera consummated several transactions (the “Cyxtera Spin-Off”), following which Legacy Appgate became a stand-alone entity. The transactions separated Cyxtera’s data center business from Legacy Appgate’s cybersecurity business. Upon consummation of the Cyxtera Spin-Off, Legacy Appgate and Cyxtera Management, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Cyxtera (the “Management Company”) entered into a transition services agreement (the “Transition Services Agreement”), pursuant to which the Management Company provided certain transition services to Legacy Appgate, and Legacy Appgate provided certain transition services to the Management Company. The term under the Transition Services Agreement commenced on January 1, 2020 and ended on June 30, 2021. Substantially all of the obligations under the Transition Services Agreement ceased on December 31, 2020.
During 2021 and 2020, the Management Company charged Legacy Appgate $0.1 million and $4.2 million, respectively, for services rendered under the Transition Services Agreement. Such costs are included in general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statements of operations.
During 2021 and 2020, Legacy Appgate charged the Management Company $0.1 million and $0.3 million, respectively, for services provided to the Management Company and its affiliates by Legacy Appgate under the Transition Services Agreement. Income for these services is included in other expense, net in our consolidated statements of operations.
On February 8, 2021, Legacy Appgate made a payment of $1.0 million to Cyxtera as settlement in full of trade balances with Cyxtera and its subsidiaries and other amounts due to / from under the Intercompany Master Services Agreement (as defined below) and the Transition Services Agreement, which trade balances and other amounts totaled $2.6 million. Because the Management Company was an affiliate under common control with Legacy Appgate at the time of repayment, the settlement of these amounts was recognized as a capital contribution of $1.6 million.
Promissory Notes
On March 31, 2019, Legacy Appgate issued promissory notes to each of Cyxtera and the Management Company (together, the “Promissory Notes”), which had a combined initial aggregate principal amount of $95.2 million and provided for additional borrowings during the term of the Promissory Notes for additional amounts not to exceed approximately $52.5 million in the aggregate. Interest accrued on the unpaid principal balance of the Promissory Notes at a rate per annum equal to 3% and was payable upon the maturity of the Promissory Notes. Each Promissory Note had an initial maturity date of March 30, 2020, which was extended until March 30, 2021 by amendments entered into effective as of March 30, 2020.
The aggregate outstanding principal and interest under the Promissory Notes was $153.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
On February 8, 2021, Legacy Appgate repaid Cyxtera $20.6 million, representing the entirety of the then outstanding principal and interest under the Promissory Note issued to Cyxtera, and Legacy Appgate made a partial repayment of $99.0
million to the Management Company on the then outstanding principal and interest of $133.6 million under the Promissory Note issued to the Management Company. On that same date, the Management Company issued Legacy Appgate a payoff letter, extinguishing the balance remaining unpaid following such repayment. Because Cyxtera was Legacy Appgate’s direct parent at the time of issuance of the Promissory Notes and an affiliate under common control with Legacy Appgate at the time of repayment, Legacy Appgate accounted for the note extinguishment of $34.6 million as a capital contribution in 2021.
Sale of Brainspace
On September 30, 2020, Legacy Appgate adopted a plan for the sale of Brainspace Corporation (“Brainspace”), a formerly wholly owned subsidiary of Legacy Appgate, which met the criteria for discontinued operations under ASC Topic 205-20, Presentation of Financial Statements - Discontinued Operations - see Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements for discontinued operations disclosures included elsewhere in this Annual Report. On December 17, 2020, Legacy Appgate entered into a securities purchase agreement with respect to the sale of 100% of the outstanding equity interests of Brainspace for cash consideration of $125.0 million, and the sale transaction closed on January 20, 2021. Brainspace offered a comprehensive and advanced data analytics platform for investigations, eDiscovery, intelligence mining, and compliance. Unless otherwise stated, all discussion of Legacy Appgate’s results of operations included in this discussion and analysis focus on continuing operations and exclude the discontinued Brainspace operations.
Key Business Metrics
Our management reviews a number of key performance indicators, each as described below, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Annual Recurring Revenue
ARR is a performance indicator that management believes provides more visibility into the growth of our revenue generated by recurring business. Our management believes ARR is a key metric to measure our business because it is driven by our ability to acquire new subscription customers and to maintain and expand our relationship with existing subscription customers. ARR also mitigates fluctuations due to seasonality, contract term, sales mix, and revenue recognition timing resulting from revenue recognition methodologies under GAAP. We define ARR as the annualized value of SaaS, subscription, and term-based license and maintenance contracts from our recurring software products in effect at the end of a given period. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue as it is an operating measure and is not intended to be combined with or to replace GAAP revenue or deferred revenue, as they can be impacted by contract start and end dates and renewal rates. ARR is not intended to be a replacement or forecast of revenue or deferred revenue.
The table below sets forth our ARR as of the end of the years indicated below (in thousands):
Total Customers and Number of Customers with ARR above $100,000
Our management believes that our ability to increase our number of customers is an indicator of our market penetration, the growth of our business, and our potential future business opportunities. Over time, larger customers have constituted a greater share of our total revenue, which has contributed to an increase in ARR. Our management believes there are significant upsell and cross-sell opportunities within our customer base by expanding the number of use cases. Historically, we have consistently increased our number of customers and customers with ARR above $100,000 and expect this trend to continue as a result of the growing demand for our cybersecurity solutions. Our management defines a customer as a
distinct organization that has entered into a distinct agreement to access our software products for which the term has not ended or with which we are negotiating a renewal contract or the purchase of our professional services.
The below table sets forth our total customers and customers with ARR above $100,000 as of the end of the years indicated below:
In 2021, we stopped offering our Compliance Sheriff product, which accounted for less than 5% of our total revenue for 2021, and did not renew 46 Compliance Sheriff-only customers in 2021. As a result, our increase in customer count from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 reflected in this Annual Report is not indicative of our customer growth given our one-time voluntary sunsetting of our Compliance Sheriff product and its respective customers.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
Our management believes that our ability to retain and grow the ARR generated from our existing subscription customers is an indicator of the long-term value of our subscription customer relationships and future business opportunities. We track our performance in this area by measuring our dollar-based net retention rate, which reflects customer renewals, expansion, contraction, and customer attrition within our ARR base. We calculate dollar-based net retention rate by dividing the numerator by the denominator as set forth below:
• Denominator: As of the end of a reporting period, ARR as of the last day of the comparable reporting period in the prior year.
• Numerator: ARR for that same cohort of customers as of the end of the reporting period in the current year, including any expansion and net of any contraction and customer attrition over the trailing 12 months, excluding ARR from new subscription customers in the current period.
Our dollar-based net retention rate was 114% and 105% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We recognize revenue under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
We primarily sell our software through on-premise term-based license agreements, perpetual license agreements and SaaS subscriptions, which allow our customers to use our SaaS services without taking possession of the software. Our products offer substantially the same functionality whether our customers receive them through a perpetual license, a term-based license or a SaaS arrangement. Our agreements with customers for software licenses may include maintenance contracts and may also include professional services contracts. Maintenance revenues consist of fees for providing unspecified software updates and technical support for our products for a specified term, which is typically one to three years. We offer a portfolio of professional services and extended support contract options to assist our customers with integration, optimization, training and ongoing advanced technical support. We also generate revenue from threat advisory services, including penetration testing, application assessments, vulnerability analysis, reverse engineering, architecture review and source code review.
Subscription. Our term-based license arrangements that do not contain variable consideration include both upfront revenue recognition when the distinct license is made available to the customer as well as revenue recognized ratably over the contract period for support and maintenance based on the stand-ready nature of these elements. Revenue on our SaaS arrangements that do not contain variable consideration, is recognized ratably over the contract period as we satisfy the performance obligation, beginning on the date the service is made available to our customers.
Subscription revenue represented approximately 81% and 72% of our revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect that a majority of our revenue will continue to be from subscriptions for the foreseeable future, and we expect that subscription revenue as a percentage of total revenue will increase over time. Changes in period-over-period subscription revenue growth are primarily impacted by the following factors:
• the type of new and renewed subscriptions (i.e., term-based or SaaS); and
• the duration of new and renewed term-based subscriptions.
While the number of new and increased subscriptions during a period impacts our subscription revenue growth, the type and duration of those subscriptions have a significantly greater impact on the amount and timing of revenue recognized in a period. Subscription revenue from the software license components of term-based licenses is generally recognized at the beginning of the subscription term, while subscription revenue from SaaS and support and maintenance is generally recognized ratably over the subscription term. As a result, our revenue may fluctuate due to the timing and type of the software license components of term-based licensing transactions. In addition, keeping other factors constant, when the percentage of subscription term-based licenses to total subscriptions sold or renewed in a period increases relative to the prior period, revenue growth will generally increase. Conversely, when the percentage of subscription SaaS and support and maintenance to total subscriptions sold or renewed in a period increases, revenue growth will generally decrease, as compared to a prior period. Additionally, a multi-year subscription term-based license will generally result in greater revenue recognition up front relative to a one-year subscription term-based license. Therefore, keeping other factors constant, revenue growth will generally also trend higher in a period where the percentage of multi-year subscription term-based licenses to total subscription term-based licenses increases.
Perpetual licenses. Our perpetual license arrangements generally include both upfront revenue recognition when the distinct license is made available to the customer as well as revenue recognized ratably over the contract period for support and maintenance based on the stand-ready nature of these elements. Revenue related to support and maintenance is included as part of subscription revenue.
For 2021 and 2020, approximately 5% and 8%, respectively, of our revenue was from perpetual licenses.
Services and other. Our services-related performance obligations predominantly relate to the provision of consulting and threat advisory services, and to a lesser extent, training and software installation. Software installation services are distinct from subscriptions and do not result in significant customization of the software. Our services are generally priced on a time and materials basis, which is generally invoiced monthly and for which revenue is recognized as the services are performed. Revenue from our training services and sponsorship fees is recognized on the date the services are complete. Over time, we expect services revenue to remain relatively stable as a percentage of total revenue.
For 2021 and 2020, approximately 15% and 20%, respectively, of our revenue was from services and other.
Concentrations. The following table summarizes revenue by country and main geography in which we operate, including in the United States and Canada (“US&C”), Latin America (“LATAM”), Europe, the Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”), and Asia Pacific (“APAC”), based on the billing address of customers (including, for the avoidance of doubt, resellers and managed service providers) who have contracted with us (in thousands).
(a) Only the United States, Colombia and Ecuador represented 10% or more of our total revenue in either period presented.
No single customer (including, for the avoidance of doubt, resellers and managed service providers) accounted for 10% or more of our total revenue in either period presented.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of employee compensation costs for employees associated with supporting our licensing arrangements and service arrangements, certain third-party expenses and the amortization of developed technology assets. Employee compensation and related costs include cash compensation and benefits to employees, equity-based compensation, costs of third-party contractors and associated overhead costs. Third-party expenses consist of cloud infrastructure costs, other expenses directly associated with our customer support, including in limited instances equipment purchased for resale. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit, or revenue less cost of revenue, and gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of revenue, have been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the timing of our acquisition of new customers and renewals of and follow-on sales to existing customers, the average sales price of our services, mix of services offered in our solutions, including new product introductions, the extent to which we expand our customer support and operations and the extent to which we can increase the efficiency of our technology and infrastructure through technological improvements. We currently expect gross profit to increase in absolute dollars and gross margin to increase slightly over the long term, although our gross profit and gross margin could fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of all the above factors.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, equity-based compensation expense and, with respect to sales and marketing expenses, sales commissions that are recognized as expenses. Operating expenses also include overhead costs for facilities, IT, depreciation expense and amortization expense.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, including salaries, bonuses and benefits for our sales and marketing employees, sales commissions that are recognized as expenses over the period of benefit, equity-based compensation expense, marketing and channel programs, travel and entertainment expenses, expenses for conferences and events and allocated overhead costs. We capitalize our sales commissions and associated payroll taxes and recognize them as expenses over the estimated period of benefit. The amount recognized in our sales and
marketing expenses reflects the amortization of cost previously deferred as attributable to each period presented in our consolidated financial statements, as described in Note 1 - Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Advertising expenses are charged to sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statements of operations as incurred.
We intend to continue to significantly invest in our sales and marketing organization to drive additional revenue, further penetrate the market and expand our global customer base. As a result, we expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars and to be our largest operating expense category for the foreseeable future. In particular, we plan to continue to invest in growing and training our sales force, broadening our brand awareness and expanding and deepening our channel partner relationships. However, we currently expect sales and marketing expenses to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development costs to develop software to be sold, leased or marketed are expensed as incurred up to the point of technological feasibility for the related software product. We have not capitalized development costs for software to be sold, leased or marketed to date, as the software development process is essentially completed concurrent with the establishment of technological feasibility. As such, these costs are expensed as incurred and recognized in research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations.
Software developed for internal use, with no substantive plans to market such software at the time of development, is capitalized and included in property and equipment, net in the consolidated balance sheets. Costs incurred during the preliminary planning and evaluation and post implementation stages of the project are expensed as incurred. Costs incurred during the application development stage of the project are capitalized.
Our research and development expenses support our efforts to add new features to our existing offerings and to ensure the reliability, availability and scalability of our solutions. Our research and development teams employ software engineers in the design and the related development, testing, certification and support of our solutions. Accordingly, the majority of our research and development expenses result from employee-related costs, including salaries, bonuses and benefits and costs associated with technology tools used by our engineers.
We intend to continue to make significant investments in research and development to extend the features of our existing offerings and technology capabilities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs, including salaries and bonuses, equity-based compensation expense and employee benefit costs for our finance, legal, human resources and administrative personnel, as well as professional fees for external legal services, accounting and other related consulting services. Litigation-related expenses, if any, include professional fees and related costs incurred by us in defending or settling significant claims that our management deem not to be in the ordinary course of our business and, if applicable, accruals related to estimated losses in connection with these claims. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, as we incur increased compliance costs and other related costs necessary to operate as a public company. However, we currently expect our general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term, although our general and administrative expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Transaction Costs
In connection with the Merger, we incurred transaction costs of $3.1 million during 2021.
Depreciation and Amortization
Acquired intangible assets consist of identifiable intangible assets, including trademarks and tradenames and customer relationships resulting from business combinations. Acquired finite-lived intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Amortization expense for trademarks and
tradenames and customer relationships is recorded primarily within depreciation and amortization in the consolidated statements of operations.
Change in Fair Value of Embedded Derivative Liability
We have recognized an embedded derivative liability associated to the Convertible Senior Notes. The embedded derivative is recognized at fair value and is subsequently remeasured at its estimated fair value on a recurring basis at the end of each reporting period, with changes in estimated fair value recognized as change in fair value of embedded derivative liability in our consolidated statements of operations.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest incurred on our obligations under the Convertible Senior Notes and through February 8, 2021, obligations of Legacy Appgate under the Promissory Notes. See “-Promissory Notes” above and “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Income Tax
Through December 31, 2019, the operations of Legacy Appgate were included in the consolidated U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income tax returns filed by Cyxtera, where applicable.
Our income taxes, as presented in the consolidated financial statements, may not be indicative of the income taxes we will generate in the future. In jurisdictions where Legacy Appgate was included in the tax returns filed by Cyxtera, any income taxes payable/receivable resulting from the related income tax provisions have been reflected in the balance sheets of each separate entity’s provision.
Benefit (provision) for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes related to U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods presented (in thousands). The period-to-period comparisons of our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future. The results of operations data have been derived from our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Revenue
Revenue from continuing operations were as follows for 2021 and 2020:
Revenue increased by $11.6 million, or 34%, during 2021 compared to 2020. The overall increase in revenue was primarily attributable to a net increase in our customer count from 615 customers at December 31, 2020 to 652 customers at December 31, 2021 combined with an increase in sales of multi-year subscription term-based licenses as further explained below.
Subscription revenue accounted for 81% and 72% of our total revenue in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Subscription revenue increased $12.5 million, or 52%, in 2021 when compared to 2020. This increase in subscription revenue was driven by $6.5 million in revenue from sales to new customers and $6.0 million in revenue from sales to existing customers. Approximately $4.8 million, or 74%, of the revenue from new customers was from multi-year subscription term-based licenses, with the remaining $1.7 million, or 26%, from one-year subscription term-based licenses. In turn, approximately $4.2 million, or 70%, of the revenue from existing customers was from one-year subscription term-based licenses, and $1.8 million, or 30%, from multi-year subscription term-based licenses. Our net-dollar retention rate was 114% at December 31, 2021, evidenced by the increase in existing customer revenue.
Perpetual licenses revenue accounted for 5% and 8% of our revenue in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Services and other revenue accounted for 15% and 20% of our revenue in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Services and other revenue decreased $0.2 million, or 3%, in 2021 when compared to 2020. This decrease in services and other revenue was primarily the result of an overall decrease in service hours billed to customers during 2021 when compared to 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Total cost of revenue from continuing operations decreased by $1.1 million, or 5%, during 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in total cost of revenue was primarily the result of lower amortization expense of $1.6 million due to a portion of Legacy Appgate’s developed technology becoming fully amortized during 2021, partially offset by an increase of $0.5 million in other cost of revenue, principally from higher subscription and hosting services in 2021.
Gross Profit
Gross profit totaled $24.7 million for 2021, an increase of $12.7 million, or 106%, as compared to 2020. This increase was the result of the factors described above under “Revenue” and “Cost of Revenue”.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses from continuing operations increased by $18.6 million, or 33%, for 2021 as compared to 2020. The factors that contributed to the increase in operating expenses are detailed below.
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $12.0 million, or 48%, for 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was primarily the result of an increase in personnel costs from higher headcount in 2021 on both the sales and marketing teams, and to a lesser extent, costs incurred in connection with the Merger and related initiatives. Sales and marketing headcount increased by 71 positions from 2020 to 2021.
Research and development increased $0.9 million, or 10%, for 2021 as compared to 2020, as a result of an increase in personnel costs in 2021.
General and administrative expenses increased by $2.4 million, or 15%, for 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was the result of an increase of approximately $1.8 million in personnel costs from higher headcount in 2021, higher professional services fees of approximately $1.6 million primarily incurred in connection with the Merger and related initiatives, and higher insurance costs of approximately $0.9 million related to our new D&O insurance policy. General and administrative headcount increased by 19 positions from 2020 to 2021. These increases were partially offset by lower facilities costs of approximately $1.6 million and lower bad debt of approximately $0.5 million. As described in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, during 2020, we incurred $1.6 million in lease costs under the Transition Services Agreement with Cyxtera. The improvement in bad debt during 2021 was the result of improved collection efforts after separation from Cyxtera.
Transaction costs recognized in connection with the Merger totaled $3.1 million in 2021. These costs were primarily related to a success fee arrangement with DBO Partners LLC for $2.1 million, which was contingent on the successful completion of the Merger. We settled this fee, together with other transaction and closing costs upon consummation of the Merger.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $0.2 million for 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization was primarily due to depreciation and amortization on purchases of property and equipment during 2020 and 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Embedded Derivative Liability
During 2021, we recognized a loss of $78.5 million in connection with the embedded derivative associated with the conversion feature under the Convertible Senior Notes.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased by $0.9 million for 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease in interest expense, net was primarily attributable to the change in the mix of our debt during 2021. During 2020, interest expense consisted of interest incurred under the Promissory Notes. The average outstanding balance of the Promissory Notes during 2020 was $137.4 million. As described above, the Promissory Notes were repaid in part with the balance extinguished, in each case on February 8, 2021. On February 9, 2021, Legacy Appgate issued the Initial Convertible Senior Notes, which are described below, and in connection with the closing of the Merger on October 12, 2021, issued the Additional Convertible Senior Notes.
Other Expenses, Net
Other expenses, net decreased by $1.1 million for 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily from a loss recognized in 2020 on disposal of fixed assets of $1.7 million following the separation from Cyxtera, which was partially offset by $0.3 million income received by Legacy Appgate under the Transition Services Agreement in 2020. In addition, we experienced approximately $0.3 million in higher foreign currency losses in 2021 when compared to 2020.
Income Tax Expense
Our effective tax rate for 2021 and 2020 was (1.8)% and (3.8)%, respectively. The effective tax rate for 2021 differs from the U.S. Federal income tax rate of 21% primarily due to changes in the valuation allowance, the change in the fair value of our embedded derivative liability that is not tax deductible, state taxes, and foreign withholding taxes. The effective tax rate for 2020 differs from the U.S. Federal income tax rate of 21% primarily due to changes in the valuation allowance, state taxes, and foreign taxes.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance.
These non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure determined in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin are supplemental measures of operating performance that are not determined in accordance with GAAP and do not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to gross profit and gross margin, the most directly comparable financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP. We define non-GAAP gross profit as gross profit, adjusted to add back non-cash equity-based compensation expense and developed technology amortization expense and define non-GAAP gross margin as non-GAAP gross profit as a percentage of revenue.
We use non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin are useful measures to our management and to our investors because they provide consistency and comparability with past financial performance and between periods, as the metrics generally eliminate the effects of the variability of amortization expense of intangibles and non-cash equity-based compensation expense from period to period, which may fluctuate for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance. We believe that the use of these measures enables our management to more effectively evaluate our performance period-over-period and relative to our competitors, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results. Non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin should not be considered as a replacement for gross profit and gross margin, as determined in accordance with GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability.
A reconciliation of our non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin to gross profit and gross margin, the most directly comparable financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP, for 2021 and 2020, is as follows (in thousands):
Non-GAAP Loss from Operations and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
We define non-GAAP loss from operations as GAAP loss from continuing operations excluding amortization expense of acquired intangible assets, non-cash equity-based compensation expense, and transaction costs. We define non-GAAP operating margin as non-GAAP loss from continuing operations as a percentage of revenue.
A reconciliation of our non-GAAP loss from operations and non-GAAP operating margin to loss from continuing operations and operating margin, the most directly comparable financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP, for 2021 and 2020, is as follows (in thousands):
Free Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow Margin
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities of continuing operations less cash used for purchases of property and equipment and repayment of finance leases. We believe that free cash flow is a useful indicator of liquidity that provides information to management and investors, even if negative, as it provides useful information about the amount of cash generated (or consumed) by our operating activities that is available (or not available) to be used for other strategic initiatives. For example, if free cash flow is negative, we may need to access cash reserves or other sources of capital to invest in strategic initiatives. While we believe that free cash flow is useful in evaluating our business, free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that has limitations as an analytical tool, and free cash flow should not be considered as an alternative to, or substitute for, net cash provided by (used in) operating activities in accordance with GAAP. The utility of free cash flow as a measure of our liquidity is limited as it does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for any given period and does not reflect our future contractual commitments. In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate free cash flow differently or not at all, which reduces the usefulness of free cash flow as a tool for comparing our results to those of other companies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $26.0 million. Historically, Legacy Appgate’s principal source of liquidity was borrowing availability under the Promissory Notes and cash generated from Legacy Appgate’s operations. As discussed above, on February 8, 2021, Legacy Appgate repaid Cyxtera the full amount of the Promissory Note issued to Cyxtera and made a partial repayment on the then accumulated principal and interest under the Promissory Note issued to the Management Company. On that same date, the Management Company issued a payoff letter to Legacy Appgate extinguishing the balance remaining unpaid of $34.6 million following such repayment. The payoff letter resulted in the full settlement and extinguishment of the Promissory Note held by the Management Company.
We have generated significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit and consolidated statements of cash flows. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. Currently, our principal sources of liquidity are the proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Senior Notes and cash generated from our operations, which have enabled us to make continued investments to support the growth of our business. We expect that proceeds from the Convertible Senior Notes and cash generated from our operations, as well as our borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility, will provide sufficient cash to fund working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. We may also issue up to an additional $25.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Senior Notes at the election of the holders of the Convertible Senior Notes, subject to our consent, in one or more closings, which may occur on or prior to the earlier of (i) seventy-five (75) days after the Company closes a registered offering of equity securities in an aggregate amount of no less than $40.0 million and (ii) October 31, 2022; however, we cannot provide any assurance that the holders of the Convertible Senior Notes will elect to effect any such closings, or that we will consent to any such election.
We have based our estimates as to how long we expect we will be able to fund our operations on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. In the long-term, we may be required to obtain additional financing to fund our current planned operations, which may consist of, at Magnetar’s election and our consent, issuing the additional $25.0 million of Convertible Senior Notes, entering into the Revolving Credit Facility or an alternative financing arrangement, which may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed may have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, we had $75.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Senior Notes outstanding. As of December 31, 2020, Legacy Appgate had $153.8 million due under the Promissory Notes. As discussed above, the Promissory Notes were fully settled and extinguished on February 8, 2021.
Convertible Senior Notes
On February 9, 2021, Legacy Appgate issued the Initial Convertible Senior Notes to various funds managed by Magnetar. In connection with the closing of the Merger, Legacy Appgate issued the Additional Convertible Senior Notes. The Convertible Senior Notes are subject to the terms and conditions of the Note Issuance Agreement and Note Purchase Agreement.
We received net proceeds of $72.8 million from the issuance of the Convertible Senior Notes, after deducting fees and expenses of $2.2 million. We recorded these fees and expenses as debt issuance costs that will be amortized over the term of the Convertible Senior Notes.
The Convertible Senior Notes are senior, unsecured obligations of Legacy Appgate, and the payment of the principal and interest is unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally by Legacy Appgate’s U.S. subsidiaries and, as of the closing of the Merger, also by the Company. The Convertible Senior Notes mature on February 9, 2024, unless earlier converted, redeemed, or repurchased. The Note Issuance Agreement under which the Convertible Senior Notes were issued was amended effective February 9, 2022 to, among other things, provide that Magnetar may elect, with our consent, to invest up to an additional $25.0 million in aggregate principal amount of such notes, in one or more closings, on or prior to the earlier of (i) seventy-five (75) days after the Company closes a registered offering of equity securities in an aggregate amount of no less than $40.0 million and (ii) October 31, 2022.
Interest on the Convertible Senior Notes is payable either entirely in cash or entirely in kind (“PIK Interest”), or a combination of cash and PIK Interest at Appgate’s discretion. The Convertible Senior Notes bear interest at the annual rate of 5% with respect to interest payments made in cash and 5.50% with respect to PIK Interest, with interest payable semi-annually on February 1 and August 1 of each year, commencing on August 1, 2021. Additional notes (“PIK Notes”) issuable in respect of PIK Interest would have the same terms and conditions as the Convertible Senior Notes. The Note Issuance Agreement includes certain affirmative and financial covenants we are required to satisfy. We were in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2021 and expect to remain in compliance with such covenants for at least the next 12 months.
Promissory Notes
On March 31, 2019, Legacy Appgate issued the Promissory Notes to each of Cyxtera and the Management Company. The outstanding principal and interest under the Promissory Notes was $153.8 million as of December 31, 2020. As discussed above and in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, on February 8, 2021, Legacy Appgate repaid Cyxtera the full amount on the then outstanding principal and interest of $20.6 million under the Promissory Note issued to Cyxtera and made a partial repayment of $99.0 million to the Management Company on the then outstanding principal and interest of $133.6 million under the Promissory Note issued to the Management Company. On that same date, the Management Company issued a payoff letter to Legacy Appgate extinguishing the balance remaining unpaid following such repayment. Because Cyxtera was Legacy Appgate’s direct parent at the time of issuance of the Promissory Notes and an affiliate under common control with Legacy Appgate at the time of repayment, we recognized the note extinguishment of $34.6 million as a capital contribution in 2021.
Revolving Credit Facility
On March 29, 2022, Legacy Appgate and SIS Holdings entered into the Revolving Credit Facility Commitment Letter, pursuant to which SIS Holdings agreed to provide to Legacy Appgate, subject to the satisfaction of the terms and conditions contained therein, the Revolving Credit Facility in an aggregate principal amount of $50.0 million. This indebtedness would be contractually subordinated to the Convertible Senior Notes. SIS Holdings’ commitment to provide the Revolving Credit Facility will expire, and, if entered into, the Revolving Credit Facility will mature, on the earlier to occur of (a) June 30, 2023 and (b) the closing a registered offering of equity securities of the Company in an aggregate amount of not less than $50.0 million. Interest will accrue on amounts drawn under the Revolving Credit Facility at rate of 10.0% per annum, payable in cash on the maturity date.
Entry into the Revolving Credit Facility will be subject to customary closing conditions, including the execution and delivery of appropriate definitive documentation related to the Revolving Credit Facility, including customary terms, covenants and conditions, and there can be no assurance that such closing conditions will be satisfied or that the Revolving Credit Facility will be entered into prior to the expiration of SIS Holdings’ commitment or at all.
Other Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In addition to our debt obligations under the Convertible Senior Notes and, if entered into and drawn, the Revolving Credit Facility, and lease obligations under several operating lease arrangements, Appgate has other contractual commitments. Refer to Note 10 - Leases and Note 11 - Convertible Senior Notes, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information on maturities. Refer to Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information regarding cash amounts committed under other contractual obligations.
Cash Flow
Cash Flows for 2021 and 2020. The following table sets forth our historical cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from customers for sales of licenses and services. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for employee-related expenditures, marketing expenses and third-party hosting costs.
Net cash used in operating activities during 2021 was $52.1 million, which resulted from a net loss of $74.5 million, adjusted for the gain on the sale of Brainspace of $60.0 million, non-cash charges of $95.4 million and net cash outflow of $13.8 million from changes in assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of a $78.5 million change in the fair value of our embedded derivative liability, $9.9 million of depreciation and amortization, $3.5 million in equity-based compensation, and $3.2 million of amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs. The net cash outflow from changes in assets and liabilities was primarily due to more cash used in working capital, primarily driven by higher headcount in 2021 as discussed above under “Results of Operations,” and higher costs associated to the Merger and related initiatives, increases in contract assets and deferred contract acquisition costs, and a decrease in deferred revenue, partially offset by increased collections.
Net cash used in operating activities during 2020 was $17.2 million, which resulted from a net loss of $50.4 million, adjusted for the net income from discontinued operations, net of tax of $1.1 million, non-cash charges of $18.8 million and net cash inflow of $6.2 million from changes in assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $11.4 million of depreciation and amortization, $4.2 million in equity-based compensation, $1.8 million of amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, and $1.7 million of loss on disposal of assets. The net cash inflow from changes in
assets and liabilities was primarily due to more cash due to affiliates and changes in working capital primarily increased accounts payable and lower collections following the Cyxtera Spin-Off, combined with increases in deferred contract acquisition costs and deferred revenue.
Investing Activities
During 2021, our investing activities provided cash of $124.1 million as compared to cash used in investing activities of $1.1 million during 2020. The change in cash flows from investing activities during 2021 when compared to 2020 was primarily due to receipt of $125.0 million in net proceeds received from the sale of Brainspace in January 2021.
Financing Activities
During 2021, we used $48.4 million of cash in financing activities as compared to cash provided by financing activities of $19.4 million during 2020. Cash used in financing activities during 2021 was primarily due to the repayment of $119.6 million to Cyxtera and/or the Management Company in February 2021 as settlement and extinguishment of the Promissory Notes. Also, during 2021, we received gross proceeds of $75.0 million from the issuance of the Convertible Senior Notes. Cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was from cash advances received under the Promissory Notes.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the following critical accounting policies and estimates: revenue from contracts with customers, accounting for income taxes, and accounting for goodwill and intangible assets. These critical accounting policies are addressed below. In addition, we have other key accounting policies and estimates that are described in Note 1 - Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue under ASC 606. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
We primarily sell our software through on-premise term-based license agreements, perpetual license agreements and SaaS subscriptions, which allow our customers to use our SaaS services without taking possession of the software. Our products offer substantially the same functionality whether our customers receive them through a perpetual, or term-based license or a SaaS arrangement. Our agreements with customers for software licenses may include maintenance contracts and may also include professional services contracts. Maintenance revenues consist of fees for providing unspecified software updates and technical support for our products for a specified term, which is typically one to three years. We offer a portfolio of professional services and extended support contract options to assist our customers with integration, optimization, training and ongoing advanced technical support. We also generate revenue from threat advisory services, including penetration testing, application assessments, vulnerability analysis, reverse engineering, architecture review and source code review.
If a contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. For contracts that contain multiple distinct performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”). We determine the transaction price with reference to the SSP of the various performance obligations inherent within a contract. The SSP is determined based on the prices at which we separately sell these products, assuming the majority of these fall within a pricing range. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when we do not sell the software license separately, we derive the SSP
utilizing market conditions and other factors, including customer type, market conditions and pricing objectives, historical sales data, and negotiated discounts from price lists, if any, that can require significant judgement.
Derivatives
We have concluded that the conversion feature under the Convertible Senior Notes requires bifurcation from the debt host agreement in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize a derivative liability at fair value for this instrument in our consolidated balance sheet and adjust the carrying value of the liability to fair value at each reporting period until the conversion feature underlying the instrument is exercised, redeemed, cancelled or expires. The changes in fair value are recorded as other expense in our consolidated statement of operations. The derivative is valued using Level 3 inputs which are highly subjective and require a high degree of judgment. Refer to Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for disclosures regarding those significant unobservable inputs and how a change in those significant unobservable inputs to a different amount might produce a significantly higher or lower derivative value at the reporting date.
Income Taxes
Through December 31, 2019, the operations of Legacy Appgate were included in the consolidated U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income tax returns, filed by Cyxtera, where applicable.
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred income taxes are recognized by applying the enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance to amounts that are more likely than not to be realized. In addition, certain Federal and state NOL carryforward assets are reduced by a valuation allowance and/or may be limited by Internal Revenue Code Section 382.
Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets, including Acquired Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the fair value of purchase consideration in a business combination over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill amounts are not amortized, but rather tested for impairment at least annually or more often if circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Upon the Cyxtera Spin-Off, Legacy Appgate’s opening carve-out consolidated financial statements included the goodwill balances carried over from Cyxtera in connection with Cyxtera’s acquisition of the entities that formed Legacy Appgate, less impairments. We perform annual impairment tests of goodwill on October 1st of each year or whenever an indicator of impairment exists. We did not record any impairment of goodwill in 2021 or 2020.
Acquired intangible assets consist of identifiable intangible assets, including developed technology, trademarks and tradenames, and customer relationships, resulting from business combinations. Acquired finite-lived intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Amortization expense of trademarks and tradenames, and customer relationships is recorded primarily within depreciation and amortization in our consolidated statements of operations. Amortization expense of developed technology is recorded within cost of revenue in our consolidated statements of operations.
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and acquired intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amounts may not be recoverable. We measure the recoverability of these assets by comparing the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows that these assets are expected to generate. If the total of the future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount of an asset, we record an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value. We did not record any impairment of long-lived assets in 2021 or 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are described in Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.