Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of novel therapeutic compounds to treat diseases with high unmet needs through the inhibition of the complement system, which is an integral component of the immune system, at the level of C3, the central protein in the complement cascade. We believe that this approach can result in broad inhibition of the principal pathways of the complement system and has the potential to effectively control a broad array of complement-dependent autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
In May 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, approved EMPAVELI (pegcetacoplan), the first targeted C3 therapy and our first approved product, for the treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, or PNH. EMPAVELI is approved for use in adults with PNH and can be used by patients who are either treatment-naïve or who are switching from C5 inhibitors eculizumab or ravulizumab. We believe that EMPAVELI has the potential to elevate the standard of care in PNH and are seeking to establish EMPAVELI as the preferred first-line treatment for patients. In the United States, there are approximately 1,500 patients with PNH currently being treated with C5 inhibitors and another 150 patients who are expected to be newly diagnosed each year. Between our launch of EMPAVELI in May 2021 through December 31, 2021, we generated $15.1 million in net product revenue from sales of EMPAVELI.
In December 2021, the European Commission, or the EC, approved Aspaveli (pegcetacoplan) for the treatment of adults with PNH who are anemic after treatment with a C5 inhibitor for at least three months. In January 2022, systemic pegcetacoplan was also approved for the treatment of PNH in Saudi Arabia and Australia. Systemic pegcetacoplan is currently marketed under the trade name EMPAVELI™ in the United States, Saudi Arabia and Australia and Aspaveli® in the European Union. Under our collaboration and license agreement with Swedish Orphan Biovitrum AB (Publ), or Sobi, Sobi has global co-development and exclusive ex-U.S. commercialization rights for systemic pegcetacoplan and intends to initiate the commercial launch of Aspaveli in jurisdictions outside of the United States during the first quarter of 2022. We have commercialization rights for systemic pegcetacoplan in the United States.
We also are leveraging our expertise in targeting C3 to advance intravitreal pegcetacoplan as the first potential treatment for geographic atrophy, or GA, secondary to age-related macular degeneration, or AMD. Intravitreal pegcetacoplan has the potential to be a breakthrough for patients with GA, a disease that affects approximately one million people in the U.S. and five million people worldwide. Based on the results of our Phase 3 (DERBY and OAKS) and Phase 2 (FILLY) clinical trials of intravitreal pegcetacoplan, we intend to submit a new drug application, or NDA, to the FDA in the second quarter of 2022 with a request for six-month priority review. We also plan to submit a market authorization application, or MAA, to the European Medicines Agency, or the EMA, in the second half of 2022. We have exclusive, worldwide commercialization rights for intravitreal pegcetacoplan.
We believe that inhibition of the complement system by targeting C3 may enable a broad range of therapeutic approaches, and that pegcetacoplan has the potential to address the limitations of existing treatment options or provide a treatment option in indications where there currently are none. Under our collaboration with Sobi, we are co-developing systemic pegcetacoplan for cold agglutinin disease, or CAD, and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation-associated thrombotic microangiopathy, or HSCT-TMA, in hematology; C3 glomerulopathy, or C3G, and immune complex membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, or IC-MPGN, in nephrology; and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, in neurology.
We are also evaluating the administration of systemic pegcetacoplan as an approach to enabling adeno-associated virus, or AAV, vector administration for gene therapies. We believe complement inhibition may yield three important benefits when used in combination with AAV-delivered gene therapies: increasing the safety of AAV-delivered gene therapies, decreasing the required AAV dose needed to achieve a therapeutic effect, and allowing for dosing in patients who have pre-existing antibodies. In collaboration with commercial and academic researchers, we are advancing pre-clinical studies to assess the impact of complement inhibition on AAV-delivered gene therapies and expect to report pre-clinical data in the first half of 2022.
Lastly, we are developing other product candidates with other routes of administration and plan to conduct clinical trials of these product candidates, including the combination of EMPAVELI and a small interfering RNA, or siRNA, which may offer the potential to reduce the treatment frequency of EMPAVELI by reducing the production of C3 proteins in the liver. Furthermore, we are
collaborating with Beam Therapeutics, Inc., or Beam, on up to six research programs focused on C3 and other complement targets in the eye, liver and brain, using Beam’s proprietary base editing technology to discover new treatments for complement-driven diseases.
Since our commencement of operations in May 2010, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to developing our proprietary technology, developing product candidates, undertaking preclinical studies and conducting clinical trials for pegcetacoplan, building our intellectual property portfolio, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, preparing for and executing the commercial launch of our products and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through $1.2 billion in net proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, including our initial public offering, or IPO, $535.8 million in net proceeds from the private offerings of Convertible Notes, a $250.0 million upfront payment and $25.0 million as development reimbursement payments from Sobi each pursuant to the Sobi collaboration agreement, $112.6 million in proceeds from the private placement of shares of our convertible preferred stock prior to our IPO, $140.0 million under the SFJ agreement, $20.0 million in proceeds from borrowings under a term loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank, and $7.0 million in proceeds from our issuance and sale of a promissory note. We have repaid the term loan facility and the promissory note in full. We exchanged $327.2 million of aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes for shares of our common stock during 2021. During the quarter ended September 30, 2021, the Convertible Notes were convertible at the option of the holders, and certain holders of the Convertible Notes converted approximately $0.7 million of aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes into an aggregate of 18,775 shares. The shares were issued in October 2021.
Since the launch of EMPAVELI in May 2021 through December 31, 2021, we generated $15.1 million of net product revenue from sales of EMPAVELI. We have incurred significant annual net operating losses in each year since our inception and expect to continue to incur net operating losses for at least this year and next year. Our net losses were $746.4 million, $344.9 million and $304.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.7 billion. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We anticipate that our expenses will increase significantly particularly as we continue to incur significant commercialization expenses related to building sales, marketing, medical affairs, manufacturing, distribution and other commercial infrastructure associated with the commercialization of EMPAVELI for the treatment of PNH. We are incurring significant expenses for the commercialization and further development of intravitreal pegcetacoplan. In addition, we expect our expenses to increase if and as we continue to develop and conduct our ongoing and planned clinical trials of pegcetacoplan and our other product candidates; initiate and continue research and preclinical and clinical development efforts for any future product candidates; seek to identify and develop additional product candidates for complement-dependent diseases; seek regulatory and marketing approvals for our product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, if any; establish sales, marketing, distribution and other commercial infrastructure to commercialize any additional products for which we may obtain marketing approval; require the manufacture of larger quantities of product candidates for clinical development and, potentially, commercialization; maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; hire and retain additional personnel, such as clinical, quality control, regulatory and scientific personnel; add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and add equipment and physical infrastructure to support our research and development programs and commercialization.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $700.6 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, along with cash anticipated to be generated from sales of EMPAVELI and the first regulatory milestone payment and committed development reimbursement payments from Sobi, as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to enable us to fund our current operations at least into the second quarter of 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
We temporarily closed our facilities in March 2020 in respect to the COVID-19 pandemic. We have since reopened our facilities on a limited basis, subject to compliance with strict safety guidelines, but most of our employees continue to work remotely. We do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact upon our operations, including sales of EMPAVELI, our ongoing clinical trials (except for the delay of the clinical trials in patients with ALS) and the manufacture and supply of our product candidates.
SFJ Agreement
On February 28, 2019, we entered into a development funding agreement, which we refer to as the SFJ agreement, with SFJ Pharmaceuticals Group, or SFJ, under which SFJ agreed to provide funding to us to support the development of systemic pegcetacoplan for the treatment of patients with PNH. Pursuant to the agreement, SFJ paid us $60.0 million following the signing of the agreement and agreed to pay us up to an additional $60.0 million in the aggregate in three equal installments upon the achievement of specified development milestones with respect to our Phase 3 program for pegcetacoplan in PNH and subject to our having cash resources at the time sufficient to fund at least 10 months of our operations.
On June 7, 2019, we amended the SFJ agreement, which we refer to as the SFJ amendment. Under the SFJ amendment, SFJ agreed to make an additional $20.0 million funding payment to us to support the development of systemic pegcetacoplan for the treatment of patients with PNH.
On June 27, 2019, we received $40.0 million from SFJ, consisting of $20.0 million as the first installment of the additional $60.0 million upon the achievement of a milestone and the $20.0 million payable under the SFJ amendment.
In September 2019, we received $20.0 million from SFJ, as the second installment of the additional $60.0 million due to the achievement of a milestone and in January 2020 received the remaining $20.0 million installment of the additional $60.0 million upon the announcement of the results of the PEGASUS phase 3 trial.
Under the SFJ agreement, following regulatory approvals by the FDA and the EMA for the use of systemic pegcetacoplan as a treatment for PNH, we paid SFJ initial payments of $4.0 million in 2021 and $5.0 million in 2022, respectively, and we are obligated to pay SFJ an additional $451.0 million in the aggregate in six additional annual payments with the majority of the payments being made from the third anniversary to the sixth anniversary of regulatory approval.
Convertible Notes
In September 2019, we issued and sold $220.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.5% convertible senior notes due 2026, or the 2019 Convertible Notes, in a private offering. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2019 Convertible Notes were approximately $212.9 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable. We used $28.4 million of the net proceeds from the offering to pay the cost of the capped call transactions in September 2019 described below.
In May 2020, we issued and sold an additional $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.5% convertible senior notes due 2026, or the 2020 Convertible Notes, in a private offering. The aggregate purchase price of the 2020 Convertible Notes was $328.9 million, which amount included accrued interest from March 15, 2020 to, but not including, May 12, 2020. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2020 Convertible Notes were approximately $322.9 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us. We used $43.1 million of the net proceeds from the offering to pay the cost of the capped call transactions in May 2020 described below. The 2020 Convertible Notes were issued as additional notes under the Indenture and form a single series with, and have the same terms as, the 2019 Convertible Notes, but have a different issue date, issue price, CUSIP number and different restrictions on transfer. We refer to the 2019 Convertible Notes and the 2020 Convertible Notes together as the Convertible Notes.
The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of our common stock at an initial conversion rate of 25.3405 shares per $1,000 principal amount of notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $39.4625 per share of common stock). The conversion rate is subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. In addition, following certain events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we will increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its Convertible Notes in connection with such corporate event or a notice of redemption, as the case may be, in certain circumstances as provided in the indenture governing the Convertible Notes, or the Indenture.
Prior to March 15, 2026, the Convertible Notes are convertible only under the following circumstances:
•
during any calendar quarter, if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day;
•
during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes for each such trading day was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day;
•
if we call any or all of the Convertible Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the redemption date; or
•
upon the occurrence of corporate events specified in the Indenture.
On and after March 15, 2026 until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date of the Convertible Notes, holders may convert the Convertible Notes at any time. Upon conversion of the Convertible Notes, we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at our election.
Prior to September 20, 2023, we may not redeem the Convertible Notes. We may redeem for cash all or a portion of the Convertible Notes, at our option, on or after September 20, 2023 if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least
130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive), including the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide a notice of redemption, during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption. The redemption price will be equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date.
If we undergo a “fundamental change,” as defined in the Indenture, prior to maturity, subject to certain conditions, holders may require us to repurchase for cash all or any portion of their Convertible Notes at a fundamental change repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
The Indenture contains customary terms and covenants, including that upon certain events of default occurring and continuing, either the Trustee or the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the outstanding Convertible Notes may declare 100% of the principal of, and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on, all the Convertible Notes to be due and payable.
In January 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements with certain holders of our 2019 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately $126.1 million in aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 3,906,869 shares of our common stock. The exchange transactions closed in January 2021. We also issued 69,491 shares for settlement of issuance costs paid to our financial advisor for services performed in connection with the exchanges.
In July 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements to modify the conversion terms with certain holders of the 2020 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately $201.1 million in aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes and 2020 Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 5,992,217 shares of common stock. The exchange transactions closed in July 2021. We also issued 78,419 shares for settlement of issuance costs paid to our financial advisor for services performed in connection with the exchanges.
During the quarter ended September 30, 2021, the Convertible Notes were convertible at the option of the holders, and certain holders of the Convertible Notes converted approximately $0.7 million of aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes into an aggregate of 18,775 shares. The shares were issued in October 2021.
Capped Call Transactions
In September 2019 and May 2020, concurrently with the pricing of the 2019 Convertible Notes and 2020 Convertible Notes, respectively, we entered into capped call transactions with two counterparties. The capped call transactions are expected generally to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of Convertible Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted Convertible Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, is greater than the strike price of the capped call transactions, which is initially $39.4625, the conversion price of the Convertible Notes, and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of such Convertible Notes. If, however, the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, exceeds the cap price of the capped call transactions, there would nevertheless be dilution and/or there would not be an offset of such potential cash payments, in each case, to the extent that such market price exceeds the cap price of the capped call transactions.
Collaboration Agreement with Sobi
On October 27, 2020, we entered into the collaboration agreement with Sobi, concerning the development and commercialization of pegcetacoplan and specified other structurally and functionally similar compstatin analogues or derivatives for use systemically or for local non-ophthalmological administration, collectively referred to as the licensed products. See “Business-Collaboration and License Agreement with Sobi” for a description of the key terms of our collaboration agreement with Sobi. We granted Sobi an exclusive (subject to certain rights retained by us), sublicensable license of certain patent rights and know-how to develop and commercialize licensed products in all countries outside of the United States. We retained the right to commercialize licensed products in the United States, and, subject to specified limitations, to develop licensed products worldwide for commercialization in the United States. Under the agreement, Sobi made an upfront payment of $250.0 million in November 2020, and agreed to pay up to an aggregate of $915.0 million upon the achievement of specified one-time regulatory and commercial milestone events, including a $50.0 million milestone which would be payable following the first regulatory and reimbursement approval of systemic pegcetacoplan in any major European country, and to reimburse us for up to $80.0 million in development costs. In January 2021 we received a $25.0 million development reimbursement payment from Sobi and in January 2022 we received a $20.0 million development reimbursement payment. We expect to receive the balance annually in installments over the next two years, subject to certain conditions.
European Commission approval of systemic pegcetacoplan for the treatment of PNH was received in December 2021. If systemic pegcetacoplan receives reimbursement approval in any major European country, Sobi will be required to make a milestone payment of $50.0 million to us. We considered the reimbursement approval to be probable at December 31, 2021, and have recorded revenue for the milestone payment of $50.0 million. We expect to fully achieve the milestone and receive payment from Sobi in the first half of 2022. We are also entitled to receive tiered, double-digit royalties (ranging from high teens to high twenties) on sales of licensed products outside of the United States, subject to customary deductions and third-party payment obligations, until the latest to occur of: (i) expiration of the last-to-expire of specified licensed patent rights; (ii) expiration of regulatory exclusivity; and (iii) ten (10) years after the first commercial sale of the applicable licensed product, in each case on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis. We remain responsible for our license fee obligations (including royalty obligations) to the University of Pennsylvania and for our payment obligations to SFJ Pharmaceuticals.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have not generated significant revenue from product sales. As a result of the commercial launch of EMPAVELI in the United States in May 2021, we commenced sales of EMPAVELI in May 2021. Our revenues consist of product sales of EMPAVELI and revenues derived from our collaboration arrangement with Sobi. See Note 13, License and Collaboration Agreements, included in Item 15 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for more information related to the Sobi Collaboration and License Agreement.
We account for contracts with our customers in accordance with Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Pursuant to ASC 606, for arrangements or transactions between arrangement participants determined to be within the scope of the contracts with customers guidance, we perform the following five steps to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfil our obligations: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
Revenue is recognized when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring a promised good or service to a customer. An asset is transferred when, or as, the customer obtains control of that asset. For performance obligations that are satisfied over time, we recognize revenue using an input or output measure of progress that best depicts the satisfaction of the relevant performance obligation.
Product Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenues from net product sales were generated in the United States following the FDA’s approval for marketing of EMPAVELI for the treatment of PNH in May 2021. We sell EMPAVELI principally through arrangements with specialty pharmacies, or SPs, and specialty distributors, or SDs, who are our customers. The customers subsequently resell the product to patients and health care providers. We apply the ASC 606 five step process discussed above to the contracts with SPs and SDs. We provide limited right of return to the customers in cases of shipping error or product defect, including inactive or non-moving products due to market conditions. Product revenues are recognized when the customers take control of the product, which typically occurs upon delivery to the customers.
We recognize revenue from product sales at the net sales price which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established and reflects each of these as a reduction to the revenue. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be constrained. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from estimates, we may need to adjust our estimates, which would affect net revenue in the period of adjustment. The following are our significant categories of sales discounts and allowances:
Distribution Fees: Distribution fees include distribution service fees paid to SPs and SDs based on a contractually fixed percentage of the wholesale acquisition cost (WAC), fees for data, and prompt payment discounts. We do not receive a distinct good or service in exchange for the payment. Distribution fees are recorded as an offset to revenue based on contractual terms at the time revenue from the sale is recognized.
Chargebacks: Chargebacks are discounts and fees related to contracts with various third-party payers including pharmacy benefit managers, private healthcare insurers and government healthcare programs that purchase from SDs at a discounted price. SDs charge back to us the difference between the price initially paid by SDs and the discounted price paid to SDs by these entities. We issue credit notes for the chargeback which are applied to future sales.
Product Returns: Consistent with industry practice, we offer SPs and SDs limited product return rights for damages, shipment errors, and expiring or defective products; provided that the return is within a specified period around the product expiration date as set forth in the applicable individual distribution agreement. We do not allow product returns for product that has been dispensed to a patient. As we receive inventory reports from SPs and SDs, we have visibility into the inventory distribution channel, enabling us to make a reasonable estimate of future potential product returns based on this on-hand channel inventory data and sell-through data obtained from SPs and SDs. In arriving at our estimate for product returns we also consider historical product returns (to the extent available), the underlying product demand, and industry data specific to the specialty pharmaceutical distribution industry.
Licensing and Collaboration Revenue
We enter into licensing agreements from time to time in which we receive upfront payments, milestone payments and royalties. In 2020 we entered into a collaboration agreement with Sobi for the development and commercialization of systemic pegcetacoplan, described below, and two license agreements with third parties to use APL-9 in certain research projects.
We analyze our license and collaboration arrangements pursuant to FASB ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangement Guidance and Considerations to assess whether such arrangements, or transactions between arrangement participants, involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities or are more akin to a vendor-customer relationship. In making this evaluation, we consider whether the activities of the collaboration are considered to be distinct and deemed to be within the scope of the collaborative arrangement guidance and those that are more reflective of a vendor-customer relationship and, therefore, within the scope of the revenue with contracts with customers guidance. This assessment is performed throughout the life of the arrangement based on changes in the responsibilities of all parties in the arrangement.
For elements of collaboration arrangements that are not accounted for pursuant to the revenue from contracts with customers guidance, an appropriate recognition method is determined and applied consistently, generally by analogy to the revenue from contracts with customers guidance. Amounts related to transactions with a counterparty in a collaborative arrangement that is not a customer are presented as collaboration revenue and on a separate line item from revenue recognized from contracts with customers, if any, in our consolidated statements of operations.
We recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), the Company performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract, determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Pursuant to ASC 606, we recorded the $250.0 million non-refundable upfront payment in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as the payment was associated with the transfer of the good or services in the form of the license to Sobi. The $80.0 million reimbursement for research and development activities does not constitute a customer/vendor relationship and thus is not in the scope of ASC 606. As ASC 808 does not include recognition guidance, we established an accounting policy to recognize the payments under the reimbursement as a receivable on the balance sheet in an amount that is probable to be reimbursed based upon expense incurred by us, with a contra-research and development expense recognized in the statement of operations. See Note 13, License and Collaboration Agreements, included in Item 15 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for more information related to the Sobi Collaboration and License Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•
employee-related expenses including salaries, bonuses, benefits and share-based compensation expense related to individuals performing research and development activities;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations, or CROs, that conduct clinical trials and research and development activities on our behalf, and contract manufacturing organizations that manufacture quantities of drug supplies for both our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
the cost of consultants, including share-based compensation expense; and
•
various other expenses incident to the management of our preclinical studies and clinical trials.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed. We have not provided program costs since inception because historically we have not tracked or recorded our research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. Accordingly, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of these product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from pegcetacoplan or any other potential product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing therapeutics, including the uncertainties of:
•
establishing an appropriate safety profile in preclinical studies;
•
successful enrollment in, and completion of clinical trials;
•
receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•
establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•
obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
•
launching commercial sales of the products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
•
an acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our product candidate development programs progress. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses including salaries, bonuses, benefits and share-based compensation. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued research and development activities, potential commercialization of our product candidates and costs of operating as a public company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Product Revenues
As of December 31, 2021, our revenues from net product sales were generated in the United States following the FDA’s approval for marketing of EMPAVELI for the treatment of PNH in May 2021. We sell EMPAVELI principally through arrangements with SPs and SDs who are our customers. The customers subsequently resell the product to patients and health care providers.
We account for contracts with its customers in accordance with ASC 606. Pursuant to ASC 606, for arrangements or transactions between arrangement participants determined to be within the scope of the contracts with customers guidance, we perform the following five steps to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
Revenue is recognized when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring a promised good or service to a customer. An asset is transferred when, or as, the customer obtains control of that asset. For performance obligations that are satisfied over time, we recognize revenue using an input or output measure of progress that best depicts the satisfaction of the relevant performance obligation.
We recognize revenue from product sales at the net sales price which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established and reflects each of these as a reduction to the revenue. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be constrained. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from estimates, we may need to adjust its estimates, which would affect net revenue in the period of adjustment. The following are our significant categories of sales discounts and allowances:
Distribution Fees: Distribution fees include distribution service fees paid to SPs and SDs based on a contractually fixed percentage of the wholesale acquisition cost (WAC), fees for data, and prompt payment discounts. We do not receive a distinct good or service in exchange for the payment.
Distribution fees are recorded as an offset to revenue based on contractual terms at the time revenue from the sale is recognized.
Chargebacks: Chargebacks are discounts and fees relate to contracts with various third-party payers including pharmacy benefit managers, private healthcare insurers and government healthcare programs that purchase from SDs at a discounted price. SDs charge back to us the difference between the price initially paid by SDs and the discounted price paid to SDs by these entities. We issue credit notes for the chargeback which are applied to future sales.
Product Returns: Consistent with industry practice, we offer SPs and SDs limited product return rights for damages, shipment errors, and expiring product; provided that the return is within a specified period around the product expiration date as set forth in the
applicable individual distribution agreement. We do not allow product returns for product that has been dispensed to a patient. As we receive inventory reports from SPs and SDs and has visibility into the inventory distribution channel, it is able to make a reasonable estimate of future potential product returns based on this on-hand channel inventory data and sell-through data obtained from SPs and SDs. In arriving at our estimate for product returns, we also consider historical product returns, the underlying product demand, and industry data specific to the specialty pharmaceutical distribution industry.
Licensing Revenue
On October 27, 2020, we entered into the collaboration agreement with Sobi concerning the development and commercialization of pegcetacoplan and specified other compstatin analogues or derivatives for use systemically or for local non-ophthalmic administration, collectively referred to as the Licensed Products. See “Business-Collaboration and License Agreement with Sobi” for a description of the key terms of our collaboration agreement with Sobi.
We have determined that the collaboration agreement is within the scope of FASB ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“ASC 808”) as a contractual arrangement that involves a joint operating activity whereby both parties are (i) active participants in the activity and (ii) exposed to certain significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of the activity. ASC Topic 808 does not address measurement or recognition matters but allows for analogizing to ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers
(“ASC 606”). Pursuant to ASC 606, we performed the following five steps: (i) identified the contract with a customer; (ii) identified the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determined the transaction price; (iv) allocated the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognized revenue when the entity satisfied a performance obligation.
We identified the following material promises under the Sobi Agreement: (1) licenses to develop and commercialize pegcetacoplan, or Licenses to IP, and (2) performance of research and development services. We determined the promises to be distinct because Sobi can benefit from each of the license and the development services on their own or with readily available services. We could have provided the license without any development services and Sobi would have been able to benefit from it by obtaining development services from another provider as the Licensed Products are at a more mature stage in their life cycle.
Under the collaboration agreement, Sobi agreed to pay us:
i)
a fixed amount of $250.0 million in an upfront payment in November 2020;
ii)
a fixed amount of an additional $80.0 million in development reimbursements, payable yearly in four tranches in amounts determined based upon actual expenses incurred by us;
iii)
up to an aggregate of $915.0 million upon the achievement of specified one-time regulatory and commercial milestone events; and
iv)
tiered, double-digit royalties, ranging from high teens to high twenties, on sales of Licensed Products outside of the United States, subject to customary deductions and third-party payment obligations.
At inception of the collaboration agreement, we considered the $250.0 million non-refundable payment and the $80.0 million fixed proceeds. We also evaluated whether Sobi is a customer for either of the distinct promises in the agreement. Under the Licenses to IP, we determined that Sobi is a customer as the know-how provided and the rights granted by us to Sobi are outputs of our business activities for which we will receive consideration. With respect to research and development activity, management determined that there is no vendor relationship as performing research and development activities for others is not a part of our ongoing central operations. Based upon the evaluation of the relative fair values, we allocated the purchase price of $250.0 million and the related milestones and royalties to the license of IP and $80.0 million to performance of research and development activities.
The milestone and royalty payments are subject to activities outside our control. Per ASC 606, we consider this to be a customer/ vendor relationship; therefore, we will include the regulatory milestone payments in the total transaction price when it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue would not occur in a future period. We will recognize commercial milestone and royalty revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur or (ii) when the performance obligation to which the commercial milestone or royalty has been allocated has been satisfied. In case of commercial milestone or royalty payments, we will recognize revenue in the same period that the sales are completed for which we are contractually entitled to the milestone or percentage-based royalty payment. To date, we have not recognized any commercial milestone or royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements. Management will periodically assess the elements of the contract and re-evaluate revenue recognition as necessary.
Pursuant to ASC 606, the $250.0 million non-refundable upfront payment is recognized as revenue as this is the amount allocated to the license. The $80.0 million reimbursement for research and development activities does not constitute a customer/vendor relationship and, thus, is not in the scope of ASC 606. As ASC 808 does not include recognition guidance we have established an accounting policy to recognize the payments under the reimbursement as a receivable on the balance sheet in an amount that is to be reimbursed based upon expense incurred by us, with a contra- research and development expense recognized in the statement of operations, over time as the expenses are incurred. See Note 13, License and Collaboration Agreements, included in Item 15 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for more information related to the Sobi Collaboration and License Agreement.
Cost of Research Collaboration Arrangement
We analyze research collaboration arrangements pursuant to ASC 808 to assess whether such arrangements, or transactions between arrangement participants, involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities. If each party is actively participating in this activity and exposed to significant risks and rewards related to the activity, each party’s costs will be accounted for under ASC 808.
Since ASC 808 does not provide recognition guidance, we refer to the guidance under ASC 730 to arrangements involving our payments to third parties. ASC 730 requires us to recognize research and developments costs as expense as incurred since there is no alternative use. See Note 13, License and Collaboration Agreements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 15 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Inventory
Inventory is recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined on a first-in, first-out basis. Inventory costs include third-party contract manufacturing, third-party packaging services, and freight. We primarily use actual costs to determine the cost basis for our inventory. We periodically review our inventories to identify obsolete, slow moving, excess or otherwise unsaleable items. The determination of whether inventory costs will be realizable requires estimates by management. We did not have any obsolete inventory as of December 31, 2021.
Prior to regulatory approval of our product candidates, we expense costs associated with the manufacture of our product candidates to research and development expense unless we are reasonably certain such costs have future commercial use and net realizable value. When we believe regulatory approval and subsequent commercialization of our product candidates is probable, and we also expect future economic benefit from the sales of the product candidates to be realized, we will then capitalize the costs of production as inventory.
Prior to receiving FDA approval for EMPAVELI on May 14, 2021, we included in research and development expense the costs associated with the manufacture of EMPAVELI inventory to be sold upon commercialization. As a result, the manufacturing costs related to the EMPAVELI inventory build-up incurred before FDA approval were already expensed in a prior period and are therefore excluded from the cost of goods sold as of December 31, 2021.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by CROs and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to CROs and CMOs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs and CMOs. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our CROs and CMOs will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting expense amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Convertible Notes
On September 16, 2019, we completed a private offering of the 2019 Convertible Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $220.0 million. On May 12, 2020, we issued the 2020 Convertible Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $300.0 million.
The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of our common stock at an initial conversion rate of 25.3405 shares per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes, equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $39.4625 per share of common stock. The conversion rate is subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. In addition, following certain events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we are required to increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its notes in connection with such corporate event or a notice of redemption, as the case may be, in certain circumstances as provided in the Indenture. The Convertible Notes will also be subject to redemption at our option, on or after September 20, 2023, if certain conditions are met. The redemption price is equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date.
Effective January 1, 2021, we early adopted ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) which reduces complexity in applying GAAP to certain financial instruments with characteristics of liability and equity. The ASU removes the guidance that requires entities to account for beneficial conversion features and cash conversion features in equity, separately from the host convertible debt or preferred stock. The ASU further revises the guidance to require entities to calculate diluted earnings per share for convertible instruments by using the if-converted method. In addition, we must presume share settlement for purposes of calculating diluted earnings per share when an instrument may be settled in cash or shares. The impact of the adoption
of the statement increased net debt outstanding and decreased net equity by $149.7 million as of January 1, 2021. Of the $149.7 million decrease to net equity, $16.0 million was recorded to retained earnings.
In January 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements with certain holders of the 2019 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately $126.1 million in aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 3,906,869 shares of common stock. The exchange transactions closed in January 2021. We also issued 69,491 shares for settlement of issuance costs paid to our financial advisor for services performed in connection with the exchanges.
In July 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements to modify the conversion terms with certain holders of the 2020 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately $201.1 million in aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes and 2020 Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 5,992,217 shares of common stock. The exchange transactions closed in July 2021. We also issued 78,419 shares for settlement of issuance costs paid to our financial advisor for services performed in connection with the exchanges.
In September 2021, the Convertible Notes were convertible at the option of the holders, and certain holders of the Convertible Notes converted approximately $0.7 million of aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes into an aggregate of 18,775 shares. The shares were issued in October 2021.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we hold the $327.2 million principal of exchanged notes and such notes have not been cancelled. Approximately $192.0 million is outstanding and held by third parties as of December 31, 2021.
Capped Call Transactions
On September 11, 2019, and May 6, 2020, concurrently with the pricing of the 2019 Convertible Notes and 2020 Convertible Notes, respectively, we entered into capped call transactions with two counterparties. The capped call transactions are expected generally to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, is greater than the strike price of the capped call transactions, which is initially $39.4625 (the conversion price of the Convertible Notes) and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of such notes. If, however, the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, exceeds the cap price of the capped call transactions, which is initially $63.14 per share, there would nevertheless be dilution and/or there would not be an offset of such potential cash payments, in each case, to the extent that such market price exceeds the cap price of the capped call transactions.
Pursuant to ASC 815-40 Derivatives and Hedging, we determined that the capped call transactions should be classified as equity instruments and the capped call premiums paid in the amount of $43.1 million was recorded as a reduction to additional paid-in capital as of December 31, 2020 for the Convertible Notes. See Note 8, Long-term Debt, included in Item 15 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for more information related to the capped call transactions.
Development Derivative Liability and Development Liability
Prior to obtaining Regulatory Approval, we presented the SFJ agreement as a derivative liability, which was recorded at fair value and remeasured each quarter with the change in fair value recognized in earnings.
The SFJ agreement was presented as a derivative liability on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. The liability was initially recorded at the value of the $60.0 million of aggregate cash received pursuant to the contractual terms, which was determined to have been fairly valued as a Level 3 derivative. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we received an additional $20.0 million and $60.0 million, respectively, as we met certain milestones. The SFJ agreement was remeasured quarterly as a level 3 derivative, with the total change in fair value for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $103.0 million and $14.8 million, respectively, recorded in loss from remeasurement of development derivative liability on the consolidated income statement.
The derivative was valued using a scenario-based discounted cash flow method, whereby each scenario made assumptions about the probability and timing of cash flows, and such cash flows are present valued using a risk-adjusted discount rate. The analysis was calibrated such that the value of the derivative as of the date of the SFJ agreement was consistent with an arm’s-length transaction. Key inputs to the level 3 fair value model included (i) the probability and timing of achieving stated development goals to receive the next tranches of funding, (ii) the probability and timing of achieving FDA and EMA approval, (iii) SFJ’s cost of borrowing (8.0%), and (iv) our cost of borrowing (12.65%).
SFJ’s implied cost of borrowing was 8.0% and our implied cost of borrowing was 12.65% as of December 31, 2020. These implied costs of borrowing were determined assuming the SFJ agreement was initially executed with arm’s-length terms. If the SFJ agreement was instead not determined to be an arm’s-length transaction, then implied discount rates could differ.
On May 14, 2021, we obtained regulatory approval of EMPAVELI in the United States from the FDA. On December 15, 2021, we obtained regulatory approval in the European Union from the EMA. Following the FDA and EMA approvals, we have a fixed payment schedule to pay SFJ the initial payment and subsequent annual payments as outlined in the SFJ agreement.
Prior to the EMA approval, the SFJ agreement was presented as a derivative liability on the consolidated balance sheet and, as such, was recorded at fair value and remeasured each quarter. The total change in fair value of $97.7 million and $103.0 million were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, in loss from remeasurement of development derivative liability in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The remeasurement of the development derivative liability resulted in a remeasured fair value of $257.9 million as of December 31, 2020 on the consolidated balance sheet. At December 31, 2020, $4.2 million of the $257.9 million of the development derivative liability fair market value was included in current liabilities.
Following the EMA approval, we are obligated to make payments following pre-determined fixed payment schedules as set forth in the SFJ agreement and SFJ amendment to pay SFJ the initial and subsequent annual payments totaling $456.0 million as of December 31, 2021 (excluding the $4.0 million initial payment for FDA approval made in June 2021) with the initial payment for EMA approval of $5.0 million due January 2022, which we paid in January 2022, and final annual payment due December 2027. As the variability of the future payments derived from the underlying contingency (i.e., EMA approval and FDA approval) no longer exist, we remeasured the development derivative liability on December 15, 2021 and reclassified it from development derivative liability to development liability, with subsequent accounting to follow an effective interest accretion schedule to the fixed payment amounts. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the loss from remeasurement of the development derivative liability was recorded through December 15, 2021, when it was determined that the SFJ agreement was no longer a derivative.
From December 15, 2021 and thereafter until the final annual payment is due in December 2027, the development liability will be accreted from its initial carrying amount to the total payment amount using the effective interest rate method under ASC 835 over the remaining life of the SFJ agreement. The difference between the carrying amount and the total payment amount is presented as discount to the development liability. The accretion is recorded as interest expense in the consolidated income statement.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the dollar increase or decrease and percentage change in those items:
Product Revenue, Net
We recognized $15.1 million of net product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 from sales of EMPAVELI in the United States. EMPAVELI was approved by the FDA in May 2021, and therefore we did not have any net product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Licensing and Other Revenue
Licensing revenue decreased $199.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to the Collaboration and Licensing Agreement we entered with Sobi. Sobi paid us an upfront payment of $250.0 million in November 2020, which we recognized in licensing revenue in the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $50.0 million in licensing revenue related to the probable achievement of the development milestone for first regulatory and reimbursement approval in Europe. Licensing and other revenue also includes $1.4 million in revenue for product supplied to Sobi during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into two different licensing and collaboration agreements with third parties to provide APL-9 for use in certain research projects which resulted in licensing revenue of $0.6 million.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the dollar increase or decrease and percentage change in those items:
Research and development expenses increased by $100.9 million to $425.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $325.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 31%. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $75.0 million in cost of research collaboration attributable to the Beam arrangement, an increase of $31.4 million in compensation and related personnel costs primarily due to the hiring of additional personnel in 2021, an increase of $19.4 million in clinical trial costs associated with the continued enrollment and conduct of our clinical trials in several indications, a decrease of $10.9 million contra research and development expense related to the Sobi transaction, an increase of $1.9 million related to research and innovation costs, an increase of $21.5 million in other research and development supporting activities primarily driven by regulatory, quality and medical affairs expenses, and an increase of $5.6 million in preclinical study expenses. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $44.6 million in contract manufacturing expenses due primarily to the timing of drug supply and analytical activity as well as the capitalization of inventory following FDA approval of EMPAVELI in May 2021, a decrease of $20.0 million for the licensee fee to Penn related to the Sobi transaction, and a decrease of $0.2 million in device development expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $37.4 million to $176.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $139.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 27%. The increase in general and administrative expenses was attributable to an increase in employee related costs of $26.3 million, an increase in professional and consulting fees and commercial preparation activities of $10.6 million, an increase in insurance costs of $0.1 million, an increase of $2.5 million in director stock option compensation, an increase of $0.8 million in travel, offset by $2.9 million decrease in office costs and other. The increased employee related costs of $26.3 million consisted of $15.8 million related to an increase in salaries and benefits primarily due to the hiring of additional personnel, $12.3 million related to stock expense associated with the grant of stock options and restricted stock units to employees, offset by a $1.8 million decrease in recruitment expense. The increased professional and consulting fees of $10.6 million primarily consisted of an increase in commercial related activity of $10.7 million and a decrease in general consulting fees of $0.1 million.
Loss on Conversion of Debt
In January 2021 and in July 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements to modify the conversion terms with certain holders of the Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged in January 2021 and July 2021 approximately $126.1 million and $201.1 million, respectively, in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 3,906,869 shares and 5,992,217 shares, respectively of common stock issued by us. In accordance with ASC 470-20, we accounted for the exchange as an induced conversion based on the short period of time the conversion offer was open and the substantive conversion feature offer. We accounted for the conversion of the debt as an inducement by expensing the fair value of the shares that were issued in excess of the original terms of the Convertible Notes.
For the January 2021 transaction, we reduced net debt outstanding and increased net equity on the consolidated balance sheet by $122.8 million, consisting of the par value of the 2019 Convertible Notes exchanged of $126.1 million less the $3.3 million of
remaining debt issuance costs associated with the exchanged notes. We also increased shares outstanding by 3,906,869 shares consisting of 3,196,172 shares issued at the initial conversion rate in the indenture of 25.3405 plus an additional 710,697 shares. Additionally, we issued 69,491 shares as settlement of debt issuance costs to our financial advisor in connection with the conversion transaction. We recorded a loss on conversion of debt of $39.5 million comprised of $36.4 million related to the value of the shares issued in excess of the original conversion terms at the fair market value and $3.1 million for the value of the 69,491 shares issued in payment of issuance costs. Upon exchange of the 2019 Convertible Notes, the holders forfeited accrued interest through the date of the exchange of $1.7 million, which we charged to interest expense and to equity.
For the July 2021 transaction, we reduced net debt outstanding and increased net equity on the consolidated balance sheet by $197.0 million, consisting of the par value of the Convertible Notes exchanged of $201.1 million less the $4.1 million of remaining debt issuance costs associated with the exchanged notes. We also increased shares outstanding by 5,992,217 shares consisting of 5,097,166 shares issued at the initial conversion rate in the Indenture of 25.3405 plus an additional 895,051 shares. Additionally, we issued 78,419 shares as settlement of debt issuance costs to our financial advisor in connection with the conversion transaction. Upon exchange of the 2019 and 2020 Convertible Notes, the holders forfeited accrued interest through the date of the exchange of $2.5 million, which we charged to interest expense and to equity.
The conditional conversion feature of the Convertible Notes was triggered as of June 30, 2021, and so the Convertible Notes were convertible at the option of the holders until September 31, 2021. Certain holders of the Convertible Notes converted approximately $0.7 million of aggregate principal of Convertible Notes into an aggregate of 18,775 shares. The shares were issued in October 2021.
We recognized $100.6 million of loss on conversion of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we held in treasury Convertible Notes in principal amount of $327.2 million which notes had not been cancelled.
Loss from Remeasurement of Development Derivative Liability
On February 28, 2019, we entered into the SFJ agreement under which SFJ agreed to provide funding to us to support the development of pegcetacoplan for the treatment of patients with PNH. The development derivative liability was initially recorded at the value of the $60.0 million aggregate cash received pursuant to the contact terms.
The SFJ agreement was amended on June 7, 2019 to provide for additional funding, and we received $20.0 million upon execution of the SFJ amendment in June 2019 and in each of September 2019 and January 2020, we achieved a $20.0 million development milestone under the terms of the agreement, resulting in receipt of an aggregate of $60.0 million of additional funding from SFJ.
We remeasured the fair value of the derivative liability as a level 3 derivative at the end of each quarter. The remeasurements resulted in a change in fair value which resulted in a loss of $97.7 million and $103.0 million recorded in the consolidated statement of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Prior to the EMA approval of systemic pegcetacoplan on December 15, 2021, the SFJ agreement was presented as a derivative liability on the consolidated balance sheet and, as such, is recorded at fair value and remeasured each quarter. Following the EMA approval obtained on December 15, 2021, we are obligated to make annual payments to SFJ following pre-determined, fixed payment schedules as set forth in the SFJ agreement and SFJ amendment. We made a $4.0 million initial payment to SFJ in June 2021 following FDA approval of systemic pegcetacoplan, and the remaining annual payments due to SFJ totaled $456.0 million as of December 31, 2021, with the initial payment following EMA approval of $5.0 million due in January 2022, which we paid in January 2022, with the final payment due in 2027. As the variability of the future payments derived from the underlying contingency (i.e., EMA approval and FDA approval) no longer exist, we remeasured the development derivative liability on December 15, 2021 and reclassified it from development derivative liability to development liability, with subsequent accounting to follow an effective interest accretion schedule to the fixed payment amounts.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $13.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $16.7 million, compared to $29.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest was primarily due to the decrease in the Convertible Notes outstanding and held by third parties as a result of the exchange transactions as well as the adoption of ASU 2020-06, which reduced the amount of non-cash interest recognized on the debt discount.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $3.8 million, compared to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income was primarily attributable to a decline in investment yields and interest rates.
Other Income, Net
Other Income/(expense) increased $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense decreased $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily related to foreign income tax expense.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
A discussion of changes in our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference and which is available free of charge on the SECs website at www.sec.gov.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through $1.2 billion in net proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, $535.8 million in net proceeds from offerings of Convertible Notes, a $250.0 million upfront payment and a total of $25.0 million of development reimbursement payments from Sobi pursuant to the Sobi collaboration agreement, $112.6 million in proceeds from the private placement of shares of our convertible preferred stock prior to our IPO, $140.0 million under the SFJ agreement, $20.0 million in proceeds from borrowings under a term loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank, and $7.0 million in proceeds from our issuance and sale of a promissory note. We have repaid the term loan facility and the promissory note in full, and we exchanged an aggregate of $327.2 million of aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes for shares of our common stock in January 2021 and July 2021.
On April 23, 2018, we issued and sold 5,500,000 shares of our common stock in a follow-on public offering at a public offering price of $25.50 per share for net proceeds of $131.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $8.4 million and offering expenses of $0.5 million.
On March 11, 2019, we issued and sold 6,900,000 shares of our common stock in a follow-on offering at a public offering price of $17.00. We received net proceeds of $109.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $7.0 million and offering costs of $0.7 million.
On September 16, 2019, we completed a private offering of $220.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes. We received net proceeds of approximately $212.9 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and offering costs of $7.1 million.
On January 13, 2020, we issued and sold 10,925,000 shares of our common stock in a follow-on offering at a public offering price of $37.00, including 1,425,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock. We received total net proceeds of $381.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $22.2 million and offering costs of $0.5 million.
On May 12, 2020, we completed a private offering of $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2020 Convertible Notes. We received net proceeds of approximately $322.9 million, which included accrued interest March 15, 2020 to, but not including May 12, 2020, and the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and offering costs of $6.0 million.
On January 6, 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements with certain holders of our 2019 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately $126.1 million in aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 3,906,869 shares of our common stock. These exchange transactions closed in January 2021.
On July 23, 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements to modify the conversion terms with certain holders of the 2020 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately
$201.1 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 5,992,217 shares of common stock. These exchange transactions closed in July 2021.
On November 18, 2021, we issued and sold 10,062,500 shares of our common stock in a follow-on offering at a public offering price of $40.00, including 1,312,500 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock. We received total net proceeds of $380.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $22.1 million and offering costs of $0.6 million.
In addition to our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, we anticipate cash to be generated from sales of EMPAVELI and the first regulatory milestone payment and committed development reimbursement payments from Sobi. Our ability to earn these milestone payments and the timing of earning these payments is dependent upon the outcome of our research and development and commercialization activities and is uncertain at this time.
The capped call transactions that we entered into concurrently with the issuance of the Convertible Notes are expected generally to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of Convertible Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted Convertible Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, is greater than the strike price of the capped call transactions, which is initially $39.4625, the conversion price of the Convertible Notes.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $563.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $746.4 million adjusted for $276.7 million of non-cash items, including a loss on early exchange of debt of $100.6 million, loss from remeasurement of development derivative liability of $97.7 million and share-based compensation expense of $70.7 million, a net increase in operating assets of $93.6 million, a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $160.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $344.9 million adjusted for $164.8 million of non-cash items, including a loss from remeasurement of development derivative liability of $103.0 million and share-based compensation expense of $45.4 million, a net increase in operating assets of $35.4 million, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $55.0 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $247.6 million due primarily to the purchase of marketable securities.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $317.0 million primarily to the purchase of marketable securities with proceeds from the follow-on common stock offering in January 2020, the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes in May 2020 and the $250.0 million from the Sobi agreement offset by the maturities of some of these investments.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $392.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of proceeds from the follow-on common stock offering in November 2021 of $380.4 million, the receipt of $17.7 million upon the exercise of stock options and the employee share purchase plan, partially offset by $4.0 million for the payment of the development derivative liability as well as $1.8 million for the payment of employee tax withholding related to equity-based compensation.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $692.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of proceeds from follow-on common stock offering in January 2020 of $381.4 million, the proceeds from the issuance of the 2020
Convertible Notes in May 2020 of $322.9 million, the receipt of $20.0 million from the SFJ agreement and $11.0 million upon the exercise of stock options and the employee share purchase plan, offset by the $43.1 million used to purchase the capped call.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution of EMPAVELI and pre-commercialization activities related to pegcetacoplan for GA. In addition, we expect our expenses to increase as we continue the research and development of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or commercialization efforts.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, along with cash anticipated to be generated from sales of EMPAVELI and the first regulatory milestone payment and committed development reimbursement payments from Sobi, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements at least into the second quarter of 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We are devoting resources to the preparation of submission for regulatory approval and to the building of a commercial infrastructure for intravitreal pegcetacoplan for GA. We will incur substantial additional commercialization expenses for intravitreal pegcetacoplan if we obtain marketing approval for GA. We are also devoting additional resources to the development of our other product candidates. We will need to seek additional funding to conduct these activities. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the commercialization of EMPAVELI, the development of intravitreal pegcetacoplan and other product candidates, and because the extent to which we may enter into collaborations with third parties for the development of these product candidates is unknown, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our product candidates. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
our ability to successfully commercialize and sell EMPAVELI in the United States;
•
the cost of and our ability to submit applications for regulatory approval and to build a commercial infrastructure for intravitreal pegcetacoplan for GA in the United States and worldwide;
•
the cost of and our ability to effectively establish and maintain, the commercial infrastructure and manufacturing capabilities required to support the commercialization of EMPAVELI, systemic pegcetacoplan and intravitreal pegcetacoplan and any other products for which we receive marketing approval including product sales, medical affairs, marketing, manufacturing and distribution;
•
the scope, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials of, and research and preclinical development efforts for systemic pegcetacoplan, intravitreal pegcetacoplan and our other product candidates;
•
our ability to maintain a productive collaborative relationship with Sobi with respect to systemic pegcetacoplan, including our ability to achieve milestone payments under our agreement with Sobi;
•
our ability to identify additional collaborators for any of our product candidates and the terms and timing of any collaboration agreement that we may establish for the development and any commercialization of such product candidates;
•
the number and characteristics of future product candidates that we pursue and their development requirements;
•
the outcome, timing and costs of clinical trials and of seeking regulatory approvals of pegcetacoplan in other jurisdictions and indications and other product candidates we may pursue;
•
the costs of commercialization activities for any of our product candidates that receive marketing approval to the extent such costs are not the responsibility of any collaborators, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing capabilities;
•
subject to receipt of marketing approval, revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of pegcetacoplan in other jurisdictions and indications and our other product candidates;
•
our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our research and development and establish a commercial infrastructure;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against intellectual property related claims;
•
the effect of competing technological and market developments;
•
the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the healthcare system and the economy generally and on our clinical trials and other operations specifically;
•
our ability to obtain adequate reimbursement for EMPAVELI in the United States or any other product we commercialize; and
•
the costs of operating as a public company.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We currently do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. Debt financing, if available, would result in fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business.
If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of payment due date by period at December 31, 2021:
(1)
Amounts include interest on long-term debt obligations under the debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021, applying contractual fixed interest rate and assuming scheduled payments are paid as contractually required through maturity. In January 2021 and July 2021, we entered into agreements to exchange $126.1 million and $201.1 million, respectively, of our Convertible Notes for shares of common stock.
(2)
Equals the non-cancellable purchase commitments signed as of December 31, 2021.
(3)
Represents future minimum lease payments under our non-cancelable operating leases. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
On February 28, 2019, we entered into the SFJ agreement. Under the SFJ agreement, following regulatory approval by the FDA in May 2021 and the EMA in December 2021 for the use of systemic pegcetacoplan as a treatment for PNH, we will make annual payments to SFJ following pre-determined, fixed payment schedules as set forth in the SFJ agreement and SFJ amendment. We made a $4.0 million initial payment to SFJ in June 2021 for FDA approval, and the remaining annual payments due to SFJ totaled $456 million as of December 31, 2021, with the first payment of $5.0 million due in January 2022, which we paid in January 2022, with the final payment due in 2027.
We have entered into contracts to conduct research and development activities with third parties which commit us to pay future milestone payments or to pay royalty fees if any of the research results in regulatory approval or commercial revenue for a product. The scope of the services under the research and development contracts can be modified and the contracts cancelled by us upon written notice. In some instances, the contracts may be cancelled by the third party upon written notice. If we were to cancel these contracts, we would be required only to pay for activities incurred through termination date. We have not included any of these potential payments in the contractual obligations table above, as we cannot reasonably estimate whether, when and in what amount any of such payments shall be made.
We are party to two license agreements with Penn under which we license specified intellectual property from Penn. The patent rights licensed to us by Penn include patents with claims that recite a class of compounds generically covering pegcetacoplan. Each license agreement requires us to pay ongoing annual maintenance payments of $100,000 per year until the first commercial sale of a licensed
product. With respect to the license for the nonophthalmic field of use, we have agreed to make milestone payments to Penn aggregating up to $1.7 million based on achieving specified development and regulatory approval milestones, and up to $2.5 million based on achieving specified annual sales milestones with respect to each of the first two licensed products. With respect to the license for the ophthalmic field of use, we have agreed to make milestone payments to Penn aggregating up to $3.2 million based on achieving specified development and regulatory milestones, and up to $5.0 million based on achieving specified annual sales milestones. The license agreements also require that we pay low single-digit royalties to Penn based on net sales of each licensed product by us and our affiliates and sublicensees and specified minimum quarterly royalty thresholds. We accrued $0.3 million for royalty obligations to Penn in 2021. In addition, we are obligated to pay Penn a specified portion of income we receive from sublicensees. In January 2021, we paid Penn $25.0 million as a sublicensee fee, in August 2021 we made payments of $1,025,000, net of a credit for the annual license maintenance payment for the achievement of milestones, and as of December 31, 2021 we accrued $5.0 million as a sublicense fee under these agreements relating to the Sobi agreement. We have not included any of these potential payments in the contractual obligations table above, as we cannot reasonably estimate whether, when and in what amount any of such payments shall be made.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for preclinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes. We have not included these payments in the table of contractual obligations above since either the contracts are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days prior written notice to the CRO, or the noncancelable minimum purchase commitments under such contracts have already been satisfied, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material. Under these agreements, as of December 31, 2021, we are obligated to pay up to $2.3 million to these vendors.
We have certain non-cancelable purchase obligations related to the manufacturing of drug substance and drug product, with Bachem, agreeing to purchase a significant portion of our requirements for the pegcetacoplan drug substance over the next five years and a commercial supply agreement with NOF Corporation, or NOF, to purchase activated polyethylene glycol derivative, or PEG, which is a component of pegcetacoplan. Under these agreements, as of December 31, 2021, we are obligated to pay up to an aggregate of $102.5 million to these vendors. In addition, we have other non-cancelable purchase agreements as of December 31, 2021, where we are obligated to pay up to an aggregate of $3.0 million to these vendors.