Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections of this Annual Report entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on April 1, 2021, for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses (“business combination”). We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our IPO, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
As indicated in the accompanying audited financial statements, as of December 31, 2021, we had $449,254 in cash and working capital of $85,144. Further, we expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our IPO, and, since the closing of our Initial Public Offering, our search for business combination candidates. On August 17, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 15,000,000 Units, as described below under “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.” Subsequent to our IPO, we have not generated, and will not generate, any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We have generated non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds of the IPO and the Private Placement (as defined herein). There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position since the date of our unaudited condensed financial statements included in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed with the SEC on November 18, 2021. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance) as well as for due diligence expenses. We expect our expenses to increase substantially since the closing of our IPO.
Our entire activity from April 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, was, except as noted above, related to organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the IPO. Although we consummated the IPO, we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination.
For the period from April 1,2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $525,837, which consisted of $1,175,244 of formation costs and other operating expenses, a warrant offering expense of $289,574, $141,870 of offering costs related to transferring founder shares to anchor investors, and $151,374 of franchise tax expense, offset by gain on change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,283,333, and income earned on investments in Trust Account of $566.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the IPO, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the Class B common stock (i.e., the Founder Shares) to our initial stockholders and up to $300,000 in loans from our Sponsor under an unsecured promissory note. As of the IPO date of August 17, 2021, the Company had drawn approximately $69,000 from the promissory note. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had repaid the amount borrowed and has not drawn any amount from the promissory note.
The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on August 12, 2021. On August 17, 2021 we consummated our IPO of 15,000,000 Units at $10.00 per share. Each Unit consists of one share of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, and one-third of one redeemable warrant, with each warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. Certain investment funds managed by affiliates of the Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 1,500,000 Units in the IPO. As part of the IPO, the Institutional Anchor Investors purchased an aggregate of $127,900,000 of Units. The IPO generated net proceeds of $146,466,375 and offering costs of $8,703,625, which includes $3,000,000 of underwriting fees, $5,250,000 in deferred underwriting commissions, $453,625 of other offering costs, and an estimated additional $80,000 in other offering expenses that will be paid (or net proceeds of $141,216,375 giving effect to deferred underwriting commissions). No payments for offering expenses, and no payments from the net offering proceeds, were made by us to our directors, officers or their associates, persons owning 10% or more of any class of equity securities of the Company or affiliates of the Company, except that offering expenses have been funded in part by the outstanding promissory note with our Sponsor, as disclosed above.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, we consummated the Private Placement of 3,333,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating total proceeds of $5,000,000, to the Sponsor. Substantially concurrently with the closing of the Private Placement, the Sponsor sold an aggregate of 66,666 Private Placement Warrants to the Institutional Anchor Investors. The Private Placement Warrants are identical to the warrants sold in the IPO, except that the Private Placement Warrants are non-redeemable and may be exercised on a cashless basis, in each case so long as they continue to be held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. The purchasers of the Private Placement Warrants have agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of the securities purchased in the Private Placement, including the underlying shares of Class A common stock (except to certain permitted transferees), until 30 days after the consummation of the Company’s initial business combination.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the Private Placement, a total amount of $150,000,000 ($10.00 per share) from the net proceeds of the IPO and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a Trust Account located in the United States with Computershare Trust Company, N.A. acting as trustee. The funds are invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 having a maturity of 180 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act of 1940 which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete an initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete an initial Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we expect to repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, such loans may be repaid only out of funds held outside of the Trust Account. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants issued to our Sponsor. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Class A common stock upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
On August 12, 2021, we entered into an Administrative Services Agreement pursuant to which we have been paying our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month, and will continue to pay this amount for up to 24 months in total, for administrative and support services. Upon completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans (and in each case holders of their component securities, as applicable) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement to be signed prior to or on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, requiring the Company to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to our Class A ordinary shares). The holders of the majority of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the consummation of a Business Combination and rights to require the Company to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments at the Initial Public Offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions.
The underwriter was paid a cash underwriting discount of 2.00% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $3,000,000, in connection with the Initial Public Offering. In addition, the underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of three and half percent (3.50%) of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $5,250,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
The underwriter’s over-allotment option was not exercised and expired on September 26, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting estimates:
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for the Warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the Warrants and the applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”), and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether they are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common shares and whether the holders of the Warrants could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the Warrants and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the Warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of liability-classified warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The fair value of the Private Warrants were estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model-based approach. The measurements of fair market value of the Public Warrants were initially estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model-based approach. As of December 31, 2021 the Public warrants are calculated based on the market price of the Public Warrants, which trade under the ticker symbol APMIW (See Note 10).
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in FASB ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” The shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 15,000,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Income per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Net income per share of Class A common stock is calculated by dividing weighted net income by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding during the period. Net income per share of Class B common stock is calculated by dividing weighted net income by the weighted average number of shares of Class B common stock outstanding during the period. The calculation of diluted net income does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the IPO (including the consummation of the Over-allotment) and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 15,000,000 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, because their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income per share is the same as basic net income per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Investments Held in Trust Account
The Company’s portfolio of investments held in trust consists solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these investments are included in income earned on investments in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. As a smaller reporting company, ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation and (v) comply with the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.