ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Management's Discussion and Analysis, contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. The words “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “forecast,” “project,” “should,” "will," "continue" and similar expressions are intended to identify “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All forecasts and projections in this document are “forward-looking statements,” and are based on management's current expectations or beliefs of the Company's near-term results, based on current information available pertaining to the Company, including the risk factors noted under Item 1A in this Form 10-K. From time to time, we also may provide oral and written forward-looking statements in other materials we release to the public, such as press releases, presentations to securities analysts or investors, or other communications by the Company. Any or all of our forward-looking statements in this report and in any public statements we make could be materially different from actual results.
Accordingly, we wish to caution investors that any forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the Company are subject to uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from such statements. These uncertainties and other risk factors include, but are not limited to, the risks and uncertainties set forth under Item 1A in this Form 10-K, all of which are incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
We wish to caution investors that other factors might in the future prove to be important in affecting the Company's results of operations. New factors emerge from time to time; it is not possible for management to predict all such factors, nor can it assess the impact of each such factor on the business or the extent to which any factor, or a combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a leader in the design and development of value-added glass and metal products and services. Our four reporting segments are: Architectural Framing Systems, Architectural Glass, Architectural Services and Large-Scale Optical Technologies (LSO).
During fiscal 2022, we conducted a strategic review of our business and the markets we serve in order to establish a new enterprise strategy with three key elements, as discussed in Item 1 on page 4 of this Form 10-K. As part of executing our enterprise strategy, during the second quarter of fiscal 2022, we announced plans to realign and simplify our business structure which resulted in the closure of two facilities within the Architectural Glass segment, in Dallas, Texas and Statesboro, Georgia. These closures were made in order to focus the Architectural Glass segment on premium, high-performance products. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we finalized plans for integrating the Sotawall business into the Architectural Services segment, beginning in fiscal 2023, and as a result, we recorded impairment expense of $49.5 million on indefinite- and finite-lived intangible assets. During fiscal 2022, we saw inflation on raw materials and freight, which we were able to largely offset with pricing actions by the end of our fiscal fourth quarter. We also have experienced supply chain challenges during fiscal 2022 but are actively working to ensure continued supply of key materials.
Fiscal 2022 summary of results:
•Consolidated net sales were $1.3 billion, an increase of 7 percent from $1.2 billion in fiscal 2021.
•Operating income was $22.0 million, a decrease of 14 percent from $25.5 million in the prior year.
•Diluted EPS was $0.14, compared to $0.59 in the prior year, a decrease of 76 percent.
•Adjusted operating income was $82.6 million, a decrease of 5 percent compared to the prior year, and adjusted diluted EPS was $2.48 in fiscal 2022, an increase of 3 percent compared to the prior year. Refer to the table below for a reconciliation to GAAP of these adjusted amounts.
Adjusted operating income and adjusted earnings per diluted share (adjusted diluted EPS) are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures provided by the Company to assess performance on a more comparable basis from period-to-period by excluding amounts that management does not consider part of core operating results. Management uses these non-GAAP measures to evaluate the Company’s historical and prospective financial performance, measure operational profitability on a consistent basis, and provide enhanced transparency to the investment community.
Return on average invested capital (ROIC) is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as operating income (adjusted for certain items that are unusual in nature or whose fluctuations from period to period do not necessarily correspond to changes in the operations of the Company) after tax, divided by average invested capital. We believe this measure is useful in understanding operational performance and capital allocation over time. This measure is not calculated in accordance with GAAP. Certain information necessary to calculate this measure on a GAAP basis is dependent on future events, some of which are beyond our control, and cannot be predicted without unreasonable efforts. It is important to note that these factors could be material to Apogee’s results computed in accordance with GAAP.
These non-GAAP measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative to, the reported financial results of the Company prepared in accordance with GAAP. Other companies may calculate these measures differently, thereby limiting the usefulness of the measures for comparison with other companies.
Results of Operations
Net Sales
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Net sales in fiscal 2022 increased by 6.8 percent compared to fiscal 2021, driven by record revenue in the LSO and Architectural Services segments and growth in the Architectural Framing Systems segment, partially offset by decreased volume in the Architectural Glass Segment.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Net sales in fiscal 2021 decreased by 11.3 percent compared to fiscal 2020, reflecting end market softness and COVID-19 related volume declines in the Architectural Framing Systems, Architectural Glass and LSO segments, partially offset by increased volume in the Architectural Services segment, driven by execution of projects in backlog.
Performance
The relationship between various components of operations, as a percentage of net sales, is provided below.
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Gross margin was 20.9 percent in fiscal 2022, a decrease of 150 basis points from fiscal 2021. This decrease was driven by $28.2 million of restructuring costs included in cost of sales incurred during fiscal 2022 related to restructuring actions announced in August 2021, as well as inflationary pressure on raw materials and freight within the Architectural Glass and Architectural Framing Systems segments. These costs were partially offset by $19.5 million of gain on sale of assets related to the sale of a manufacturing facility in the Architectural Glass segment and by positive impacts from continued recovery of the LSO segment (which closed for most of the first and second quarters of the prior year, based on COVID-related government directives).
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense for fiscal 2022, including impairment expense on goodwill and intangible assets noted in the table above, was 19.2 percent, a decrease of 110 basis points from fiscal 2021. This was driven by a $49.4 million impairment expense taken within the Architectural Framing Systems segment during the current year compared
to a $70.1 million impairment expense taken within the Architectural Framing Systems segment in the prior year. In addition, we received a benefit of $4.9 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $7.4 million in fiscal 2021, as a result of a Canadian wage subsidy program offered to support Canadian business impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, thereby offsetting cost actions that would have been taken had this subsidy not been secured.
Net interest expense declined by 10 basis points compared to the prior year, due to the lower average debt balance in fiscal 2022.
The effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 was 74.9 percent, compared to 31.7 percent in fiscal 2021, primarily due to the valuation allowance recorded against the tax benefit of the Sotawall impairment and the impact of certain permanent items in relation to reduced earnings in fiscal 2022.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Gross margin was 22.4 percent in fiscal 2021, a decrease of 60 basis points from fiscal 2020. This decrease was driven by the impact from lower volumes due to end market softness and COVID-19 related project delays, partially offset by strong project execution in the Architectural Services segment.
SG&A expense for fiscal 2021 including impairment expense on goodwill and intangible assets noted in the table above, was 20.3 percent, an increase of 360 basis points from fiscal 2020. This was driven by a $70.1 million impairment expense taken within the Architectural Framing Systems segment, partially offset by a $19.3 million gain on the sale-leaseback of a building within the Large-Scale Optical segment and $7.4 million of income related to a New Markets Tax Credit transaction within the Architectural Glass segment. In addition, we received a benefit of $7.4 million in fiscal 2021, as a result of a Canadian wage subsidy program offered to support Canadian business impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, thereby offsetting cost actions that would have been taken had this subsidy not been secured.
Net interest expense declined by 30 basis points compared to the prior year, due to the lower average debt balance in fiscal 2021 and a favorable one-time legal settlement impacting interest.
The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 31.7 percent, compared to 22.4 percent in fiscal 2020, primarily due to nondeductible goodwill impairment in Canada and the impact of the unfavorable permanent items in relation to reduced earnings in fiscal 2021.
Segment Analysis
Architectural Framing Systems
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021. Net sales increased 4.5 percent, or $25.8 million, from fiscal 2021, primarily reflecting flow through from pricing actions taken to offset inflation, partially offset by lower volume. The segment had an operating loss of $16.7 million and operating margin of (2.8) percent in fiscal 2022 compared to an operating loss of $44.8 million and operating margin of (7.8) percent in fiscal 2021, reflecting the impact of the $49.5 million and $70.1 million impairment expense and $1.7 million and $4.4 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively, partially offset by the benefit of $4.9 million and $7.4 million in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively, from a Canadian wage subsidy program offered to Canadian businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Net sales decreased 16.9 percent, or $115.7 million, from fiscal 2020, primarily reflecting lower order volume for short lead-time products and market-related project delays. The segment had an operating loss of $44.8 million and operating margin of (7.8) percent in fiscal 2021, compared to operating income of $36.1 million and operating margin of 5.3 percent in fiscal 2020, reflecting the impact of the $70.1 million impairment expense and leverage on the lower revenue, partially offset by cost reduction actions and the benefit of $7.4 million in fiscal 2021 from a Canadian wage subsidy program offered to Canadian businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Architectural Glass
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021. Fiscal 2022 net sales decreased 6.4 percent, or $21.0 million, over the prior year, primarily reflecting lower volume. Operating margin decreased 510 basis points for the fiscal year ended 2022 compared to the prior year period, as a result of $27.1 million of restructuring costs during the current year, as well as the impact of higher material and freight costs from inflation, partially offset by $19.5 million gain on sale of a manufacturing facility in Georgia. The prior year period also included $7.4 million of income related to a New Markets Tax Credit transaction.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2021 net sales decreased 14.7 percent, or $56.9 million, over fiscal 2020, due to market-related volume declines and project delays. Operating margin increased 30 basis points for the fiscal year ended 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, as a result of $7.4 million of income related to a New Markets Tax Credit transaction, offset by the impacts of lower volume and increased costs related to the small projects growth initiative.
Architectural Services
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021. Net sales increased 18.1 percent, or $53.6 million, compared to the prior year, driven by increased volume from executing projects in backlog. Operating margin decreased 110 basis points over the prior year, reflecting the impact of inflation and isolated performance challenges on certain projects experienced during the first quarter of fiscal 2022.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Net sales increased 9.9 percent, or $26.7 million, compared to fiscal 2020, driven by increased volume from executing projects in backlog. Operating margin increased 170 basis points over fiscal 2020, primarily driven by improved volume leverage and strong project execution.
Large-Scale Optical Technologies (LSO)
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021. Fiscal 2021 net sales increased 45.1 percent, or $31.6 million, compared to the prior year, reflecting a more favorable sales mix, as demand recovered from the impact of COVID in the prior year period. In fiscal 2021, most of the segment's customers and the segment's manufacturing operations were closed for a large part of the first and second quarters to comply with COVID-related government directives. The segment had operating margin of 23.2 percent in fiscal 2022 compared to operating margin of 44.5 percent in fiscal 2021, reflecting the impact of a $19.3 million gain on the sale-leaseback of a building recognized during the third quarter of the prior year, partially offset by the impacts of the temporary shutdown and the related lower volume.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2021 net sales decreased 20.3 percent, or $17.9 million, compared to fiscal 2020, as a result of the required COVID-related closure of most of the segment's customers and the segment's manufacturing locations for several months during the first half of fiscal 2021. The segment had operating margin of 44.5 percent in fiscal 2021 compared to operating margin of 25.8 percent in fiscal 2020, reflecting the impact of a $19.3 million gain on the sale-leaseback of a building recognized during the third quarter of fiscal 2021, partially offset by the impacts of the temporary shutdown and the related lower volume.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $100.5 million in fiscal 2022, a decrease of $41.4 million from fiscal 2021, primarily reflecting a decline in net earnings during the current fiscal year and the benefit in the prior year from reduced working capital and temporary actions related to the pandemic.
Investing Activities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $9.3 million in fiscal 2022, compared to net cash used by investing activities of $2.1 million in fiscal 2021, due to an increase of $5.5 million of proceeds from property sales in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, related to the sale of an Architectural Glass manufacturing facility in Georgia in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, and reduced capital expenditures by $4.3 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2021, we sold an LSO manufacturing facility in Illinois, and in fiscal 2020, we sold an Architectural Framing manufacturing facility in Toronto.
Financing Activities. Cash used by financing activities was $120.6 million in fiscal 2022, compared to $107.9 million in fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2022, we paid dividends totaling $20.3 million and repurchased 2,292,846 shares under our authorized share repurchase program, at a total cost of $100.0 million. We repurchased 1,177,704 shares under the program in fiscal 2021 and 686,997 shares under the program in fiscal 2020. We have repurchased a total of 9,425,462 shares, at a total cost of $307.3 million, since the 2004 inception of this program. We have remaining authority to repurchase 1,824,538 shares under this program, which has no expiration date, and we will continue to evaluate making future share repurchases, depending on our cash flow and debt levels, market conditions, including the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, and other potential uses of cash.
As of February 26, 2022, no borrowings were outstanding under the revolving credit facility. As defined within the credit facility, we have two affirmative financial covenants which require us to stay below a maximum leverage ratio and to maintain a minimum interest expense-to-EBITDA ratio. At February 26, 2022, we were in compliance with both financial covenants.
Other Financing Activities. The following summarizes our significant contractual obligations that impact our liquidity as of February 26, 2022:
Debt obligations in the table above include a $150.0 million term loan that matures in fiscal 2025 and $13.0 million of industrial revenue bond obligations that mature in fiscal years 2023 through 2043.
We acquire the use of certain assets through operating leases, such as warehouses, manufacturing equipment, office equipment, hardware, software and vehicles. While many of these operating leases have termination penalties, we consider the risk related to termination penalties to be minimal.
Purchase obligations in the table above relate to raw material commitments and capital expenditures.
We expect to make contributions of approximately $0.7 million to our defined-benefit pension plans in fiscal 2023, which will equal or exceed our minimum funding requirements.
As of February 26, 2022, we had reserves of $3.3 million and $0.5 million for long-term unrecognized tax benefits and environmental liabilities, respectively. We are unable to reasonably estimate in which future periods the remaining unrecognized tax benefits will ultimately be settled.
At February 26, 2022, we had ongoing letters of credit of $16.4 million related to industrial revenue bonds, construction contracts and insurance collateral that expire in fiscal 2023 and reduce borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility.
In addition to the above standby letters of credit, we are required, in the ordinary course of business, to provide surety or performance bonds that commit payments to our customers for any non-performance. At February 26, 2022, $352.5 million of our backlog was bonded by performance bonds with a face value of $1.2 billion. These bonds do not have stated expiration dates, as we are released from the bonds upon completion of the contract. We have not been required to make any payments under these bonds with respect to our existing businesses.
During calendar 2020, we took advantage of the option to defer remittance of the employer portion of Social Security tax as provided in the Coronavirus, Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act). This deferral allowed us to retain cash during calendar year 2020 that would have otherwise been remitted to the federal government. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we repaid half of the deferred tax payments in the amount of $6.8 million, with a remaining amount of $6.8 million included within accrued payroll and other benefits on our consolidated balance sheets to be repaid in calendar year 2022.
We had total cash and short-term marketable securities of $37.6 million, and $218.6 million available under our committed revolving credit facility, at February 26, 2022. We believe that cash flows from operating activities will be adequate to meet our short-term and long-term liquidity and capital expenditure needs. In addition, we believe we have the ability to obtain both short-term and long-term debt to meet our financing needs for the foreseeable future. We also believe we will continue to be in compliance with our existing debt covenants over the next fiscal year.
We continually review our portfolio of businesses and their assets and how they support our business strategy and performance objectives. As part of this review, we may acquire other businesses, pursue geographic expansion, take actions to manage capacity and further invest in, divest and/or sell parts of our current businesses.
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements at February 26, 2022 or February 27, 2021 that had or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material to investors.
Outlook
The Company is providing initial guidance for fiscal year 2023, with full year adjusted earnings expected to be in the range of $2.90 to $3.30 per diluted share. The Company expects revenue growth in fiscal 2023, led by the flow through of inflation-related pricing actions in Architectural Framing Systems. The Company forecasts full year capital expenditures of $35 to $40 million.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements within Item 8 of this Form 10-K for information pertaining to recently issued accounting pronouncements, incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our analysis of operations and financial condition is based on our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. In developing these estimates and assumptions, a collaborative effort is undertaken involving management across the organization, including finance, sales, project management, quality, risk, legal and tax, as well as outside advisors, such as consultants, engineers, lawyers and actuaries. Our estimates are evaluated on an ongoing basis and are drawn from historical experience and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ under other assumptions or circumstances.
We consider the following items in our consolidated financial statements to require significant estimation or judgment.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenue from the design, engineering and fabrication of architectural glass, curtainwall, window, storefront and entrance systems, and from installing those products on commercial buildings. We also manufacture value-added glass and acrylic products. Due to the diverse nature of our operations and various types of contracts with customers, we have businesses that recognize revenue over time and businesses that recognize revenue at a point in time. We believe the most significant areas of estimation and judgment relate to over-time revenue recognition on longer-term contracts.
We have three businesses which operate under long-term, fixed-price contracts, representing approximately 38 percent of our total revenue in fiscal February 26, 2022. The contracts for these businesses have a single, bundled performance obligation, as these businesses generally provide interrelated products and services and integrate these products and services into a combined output specified by the customer. The customer obtains control of this combined output, generally integrated window systems or installed window and curtainwall systems, over time. We measure progress on these contracts following an input method, by comparing total costs incurred to-date to the total estimated costs for the contract, and record that proportion of the total contract price as revenue in the period. Contract costs include materials, labor and other direct costs related to contract performance. We believe this method of recognizing revenue is consistent with our progress in satisfying our contract obligations.
Due to the nature of the work required under these long-term contracts, the estimation of costs incurred and remaining to complete on a project is subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. It is common for these contracts to contain potential bonuses or penalties which are generally awarded or charged upon certain project milestones or cost or timing targets, and can be based on customer discretion. We estimate variable consideration at the most likely amount to which we expect to be entitled. We include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on our assessments of anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us.
Long-term contracts are often modified to account for changes in contract specifications and requirements of work to be performed. We consider contract modifications to exist when the modification, generally through a change order, either creates new or changes existing enforceable rights and obligations, and we evaluate these types of modifications to determine whether they may be considered distinct performance obligations. In many cases, these contract modifications are for goods or services that are not distinct from the existing contract, due to the significant integration service provided in the context of the contract. Therefore, these modifications are generally accounted for as part of the existing contract. The effect of a contract modification on the transaction price and our measure of progress is recognized as an adjustment to revenue, generally on a cumulative catch-up basis.
Impairment of goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets and long-lived assets
Goodwill
We have historically evaluated goodwill for impairment annually at our year-end, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of the goodwill may not be recoverable. In the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we changed the date of our annual goodwill impairment test from our fiscal year-end to the first day in our fiscal fourth quarter. This change results in better alignment of the annual impairment test with our strategic and annual planning processes, and we will follow this new cadence for our annual impairment valuations going forward. This change was determined not to be material to and had no impact on our current or historical consolidated financial statements.
Evaluating goodwill for impairment involves the determination of the fair value of each reporting unit in which goodwill is recorded using a qualitative or quantitative analysis. A reporting unit is an operating segment or a component of an operating segment for which discrete financial information is available and reviewed by segment management on a regular basis. During the third quarter of fiscal 2022, we combined certain reporting units to form two reporting units, following certain structural and leadership changes at the Company, specifically within the Architectural Framing Systems segment. Within this segment, as a result of integration efforts that are ongoing, leadership over our Wausau, EFCO and Sotawall reporting units were combined to form the Window and Wall Systems reporting unit, and our Linetec and Tubelite reporting units were combined to form the Storefront and Finishing Solutions reporting unit. With these organizational changes, Architectural Framing Systems segment management regularly reviews and evaluates the results of the Window and Wall Systems and Storefront and Finishing Solutions reporting units. Additionally, functional leaders in areas such as operations, sales, marketing and general and administrative areas are responsible for allocating resources and reviewing results of the Window and Wall Systems and Storefront and Finishing Solutions reporting units. The goodwill of the five individual pre-integration reporting units was aggregated to the respective combined reporting units. We evaluated goodwill on a qualitative basis prior to and subsequent to this change and concluded no adjustment to the carrying value of goodwill was necessary as a result of this change. The
reporting units for our fiscal 2022 annual impairment test align with reporting segments, with the exception of our Architectural Framing Systems segment, which contains two reporting units, Window and Wall Systems and Storefront and Finishing Solutions, which represent $55.6 million and $37.6 million, of the goodwill balance at February 26, 2022, respectively.
For our fiscal 2022 annual impairment test, we elected to bypass the qualitative assessment process and to proceed directly to comparing the fair value of each of our reporting units to carrying value, including goodwill. If fair value exceeds the carrying value, goodwill impairment is not indicated. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit is higher than its estimated fair value, the excess is recognized as an impairment expense.
We estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using both the income approach and the market approach. The income approach uses a discounted cash flow methodology that involves significant judgment and projections of future performance. Assumptions about future revenues and future operating expenses, capital expenditures and changes in working capital are based on the annual operating plan and other business plans for each reporting unit. These plans take into consideration numerous factors, including historical experience, current and future operational plans, anticipated future economic conditions and growth expectations for the industries and end markets in which we participate. These projections are discounted using a weighted-average cost of capital, which considers the risk inherent in our projections of future cash flows. We determine the weighted-average cost of capital for this analysis by weighting the required returns on interest bearing debt and common equity capital in proportion to their estimated percentages in an expected capital structure, using published data where possible. We used discount rates that are commensurate with the risks and uncertainties inherent in the respective businesses and in the internally developed forecasts. The market approach uses a multiple of earnings and revenue based on guidelines for publicly traded companies.
Based on these analyses, estimated fair value exceeded carrying value at all of our reporting units. The discounted cash flow projections used in these analyses are dependent upon achieving forecasted levels of revenue and profitability. If revenue or profitability were to fall below forecasted levels, or if market conditions were to decline in a material or sustained manner, impairment could be indicated at these or our other reporting units and we could incur non-cash impairment expense that would negatively impact our net earnings.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets
We have intangible assets for certain acquired trade names and trademarks which are determined to have indefinite useful lives. We evaluate the reasonableness of the useful lives and test indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually at the same measurement date as goodwill, the first day of our fiscal fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired. We bypassed a qualitative assessment and performed a quantitative impairment test to compare the fair value of each indefinite-lived intangible asset with its carrying value. If the carrying value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment expense is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. If an impairment expense is recognized, the adjusted carrying amount becomes the asset's new accounting basis.
Fair value is measured using the relief-from-royalty method. This method assumes the trade name or trademark has value to the extent that the owner is relieved of the obligation to pay royalties for the benefits received from the asset. This method requires estimation of future revenue from the related asset, the appropriate royalty rate, and the weighted average cost of capital. The assessment of fair value involves significant judgment and projections about future performance. In the fair value analysis, we assumed a discount rate of 12.3 percent, a royalty rate of 1.5 percent, and a long-term growth rate of 3.0 percent. Based on our annual analysis, the fair value of each of our trade names and trademarks exceeded the carrying amount, however, based on the finalization of our plans for integrating the Sotawall business into the Architectural Services segment, beginning in fiscal 2023, it was determined that the carrying value of the Sotawall trade name exceeded fair value by $12.7 million as it was determined to have an immaterial fair value as of fiscal 2022 year end. This amount was recognized as impairment expense in the fourth quarter ended February 26, 2022.
We continue to conclude that the useful lives of our remaining indefinite-lived intangible assets is appropriate. If future revenue were to fall below forecasted levels or if market conditions were to decline in a material or sustained manner, further impairment could be indicated on these indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Long-lived assets
Long-lived assets or asset groups, including intangible assets subject to amortization and property and equipment, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of those assets may not be recoverable. We use undiscounted cash flows to determine whether impairment exists and measure any impairment loss using discounted cash flows to determine the fair value of long-lived assets. Due to triggering events as a result of finalization of our plans for integrating the Sotawall business into the Architectural Services segment, beginning in fiscal 2023, we determined that the finite-lived intangible assets were impaired as of February 26, 2022. As such, a long-lived asset impairment charge of
$36.7 million in finite-lived intangible assets was recognized in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022 within the Architectural Framing Systems segment.
Reserves for disputes and claims regarding product liability, warranties and other project-related contingencies
We are subject to claims associated with our products and services, principally as a result of disputes with our customers involving the performance or aesthetics of our products, some of which may be covered under our warranty policies. We have in the past and are currently subject to product liability and warranty claims, including certain legal claims related to a commercial sealant product formerly incorporated into our products. We also are subject to project management and installation-related contingencies as a result of our fixed-price material supply and installation service contracts, primarily in our Architectural Services segment and certain of our Architectural Framing Systems businesses, including those taken on with our acquisition of EFCO. The time period from when a claim is asserted to when it is resolved, either by negotiation, settlement or litigation, can be several years. While we maintain various types of product liability insurance, the insurance policies include significant self-retention of risk in the form of policy deductibles. In addition, certain claims could be determined to be uninsured. We also actively manage the risk of these exposures through contract negotiations and proactive project management.
We reserve estimated exposures on known claims, as well as on a portion of anticipated claims for product warranty and rework costs, based on similar historical product liability claims, as a ratio of sales. We also reserve for estimated exposures on other claims as they are known and reasonably estimable.
Income taxes
We are required to make judgments regarding the potential tax effects of various financial transactions and ongoing operations to estimate our obligation to taxing authorities. These tax obligations include income, real estate, franchise and sales/use taxes. Judgments related to income taxes require the recognition in our financial statements that a tax position is more-likely-than-not to be sustained on audit.
Judgment and estimation is required in developing the provision for income taxes and the reporting of tax-related assets and liabilities and, if necessary, any valuation allowances. The interpretation of tax laws can involve uncertainty, since tax authorities may interpret such laws differently. Actual income tax could vary from estimated amounts and may result in favorable or unfavorable impacts to net income, cash flows and tax-related assets and liabilities. In addition, the effective tax rate may be affected by other changes including the allocation of property, payroll and revenues between states.
We assess the deferred tax assets for recoverability taking into consideration historical and anticipated earnings levels; the reversal of other existing temporary differences; available net operating losses and tax carryforwards; and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the deferred tax assets. Based on this assessment, management must evaluate the need for, and amount of, a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets. As facts and circumstances change, adjustment to the valuation allowance may be required.