Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those under “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We provide a low-code platform that accelerates the creation of high-impact business applications and workflows, enabling our customers to automate the most important aspects of their business. Global organizations use our applications to improve customer experience, achieve operational excellence, and simplify global risk management and compliance.
With our platform, organizations can rapidly and easily discover, design, and automate powerful, enterprise-grade workflows and custom applications through our intuitive, visual interface with little or no coding required. Our customers have used workflows and applications built on our platform to launch new business lines, automate vital employee workflows, manage complex trading platforms, accelerate drug development, and build global procurement systems. With our platform, decision makers can reimagine their products, services, processes, and customer interactions by removing much of the complexity and many of the challenges associated with traditional approaches to software development.
We have generated the majority of our revenue from sales of subscriptions, which include (1) SaaS subscriptions bundled with maintenance and support and hosting services and (2) term license subscriptions bundled with maintenance and support. Our subscription fees are based primarily on the number of users who access and utilize the applications built on our platform or, alternatively, non-user based single application licenses. Our customer contract terms generally vary from one to three years with most providing for payment in advance on an annual, quarterly, or monthly basis. Due to the variability of our billing terms and the episodic nature of our customers purchasing additional subscriptions, we do not believe changes in our deferred revenue in a given period are directly correlated with our revenue growth.
Since inception, we have invested in our Customer Success organization to help ensure customers are able to build and deploy applications on our platform. We have several strategic partnerships, including with KPMG, Accenture, PwC, Infosys, Wipro, and Deloitte, for them to refer customers to us in order to purchase subscriptions and then to provide professional services directly to the customers using our platform. We intend to further grow our base of strategic partners to provide broader customer coverage and solution delivery capabilities. In addition, over time we expect professional services revenue as a percentage of total revenue to decline as we increasingly rely on strategic partners to help our customers deploy our software. We believe our investment in professional services, including strategic partners building their practices around Appian, will drive increased adoption of our platform.
As of December 31, 2021, we had 816 customers in a variety of industries, of which 635 customers were commercial and 181 customers were government or non-commercial entities. Our customers include financial services, government, life sciences, insurance, manufacturing, energy, healthcare, telecommunications, and transportation organizations. Generally, our sales team targets its efforts to organizations with over 2,000 employees and $2 billion in annual revenue. As of December 31, 2021, 25% of our commercial customers were Global 2000 organizations, and 68 of our customers were Fortune 500 companies. Revenue from government agencies represented 19.6%, 18.1%, and 17.1% of our total revenue in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. No single end-customer accounted for more than 10% of our total revenue in 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Our platform supports multiple languages to facilitate collaboration and address challenges in multinational organizations. We offer our platform globally. In 2021, 2020, and 2019, 34.0%, 33.8%, and 32.3%, respectively, of our total revenue was generated from customers outside of the United States. As of December 31, 2021, we operated in 13 countries. We believe we have a significant opportunity to grow our international footprint. We are investing in new geographies, including through investment in direct and indirect sales channels, professional services, and customer support and implementation partners.
We have experienced strong revenue growth, with revenue of $369.3 million, $304.6 million, and $260.4 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Our subscriptions revenue was $263.7 million, $198.7 million, and $151.3 million in 2021, 2020,
and 2019, respectively, and includes sales of our SaaS subscriptions, on-premises term license subscriptions, and maintenance and support. Our cloud subscription revenue was $179.4 million, $129.2 million, and $95.0 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
We have invested in developing our platform, expanding our sales and marketing and research and development capabilities, and providing general and administrative resources to support our growth. We intend to continue to invest in our business to take advantage of our market opportunity. As a result, we incurred net losses of $88.6 million, $33.5 million, and $50.7 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We also used cash in operations of $53.9 million, $7.6 million, and $8.9 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
Beginning in late 2019 and continuing into 2022, the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease, or COVID-19, has resulted in the declaration of a global pandemic and adversely affected economic activity across virtually all sectors and industries on a local, national, and global scale. The impact of COVID-19, including the emergence of new variant strains of COVID-19, on the economy and our business continues to be a fluid situation.
Operationally, we remain focused on supporting our customers, employees, and communities during this time. At the outset of the pandemic, we responded quickly to adopt a virtual corporate strategy consisting of enabling most of our employees to work productively from home while continuing to guard the health and safety of our teams, support our customers, and mitigate risk. In the third quarter of 2021, we announced an option allowing for our employees to return to offices in select jurisdictions if they elect to do so. We remain focused on ensuring continuity for our customers and we continue to conduct business as usual, with necessary or advisable modifications to employee travel, employee work locations, and marketing events.
Through December 31, 2021, we have not seen a meaningful adverse impact to our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows and liquidity as a result of COVID-19. While the verticals from which we have historically generated the majority of our revenue have been less impacted by COVID-19 to date, there may be impacts to our financial condition and results of operations in 2022 as a result of reduced demand for our products and services and longer sales cycles. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 and any variant strains thereof on our business is not estimable at this time and will be largely dependent upon a number of factors outside of our control including the extent and duration of the outbreak as well as any mitigating actions which may be undertaken by global governments and the general public.
Our Business Model
Our business model focuses on maximizing the lifetime value of customer relationships, which is a function of the duration of a customer’s deployment of our platform as well as the price and number of subscriptions of our platform that a customer purchases. We incur significant customer acquisition costs, including expenses associated with hiring new sales representatives, who can take anywhere from six months to a year to become productive given the length of our sales cycle, and marketing costs, all of which, with the exception of sales commissions, are expensed as incurred.
At the same time, we believe the costs we incur to retain customers and drive additional purchases of software are lower than our customer acquisition costs on a relative basis. Over time, we expect a large portion of our customers to renew their subscriptions and purchase additional subscriptions as they continue to build more applications and add more users to our platform. Over the last three completed fiscal years, we had an average cloud subscription renewal rate of 98%. We calculate our cloud subscription renewal rate by dividing (i) the cloud subscription revenue from renewing cloud customers in the current 12-month period that were cloud customers during the entirety of the prior 12-month period, giving effect to price increases but excluding additional cloud subscription for additional users, or upsells, by (ii) our cloud subscription revenue from all cloud customers in the corresponding prior 12-month period that were cloud customers during the entirety of such prior 12-month period. For example, to obtain our cloud subscription renewal rate for the 12-month period ended December 31, 2021, we identified the amount of cloud subscription revenue in 2021 from cloud customers that were our cloud customers for all of 2020 and subtracted the amount of upsells to such cloud customers and new users from those cloud customers in 2021. We then divided the balance of 2021 cloud subscription revenue from such cloud customers by all cloud subscription revenue generated
in 2020 from cloud customers that were cloud customers for the entirety of 2020. With respect to the average for our last three completed fiscal years, we calculated the average of the three applicable 12-month periods. We also expect the proportion of annual revenue from existing customers to grow relative to annual revenue from new customers. We believe this mix shift over time will have a positive impact on our operating margins, as we expect the percentage of revenue spent on sales and marketing to decline.
We measure the effectiveness of our business model by comparing the lifetime value of our customer relationships to our customer acquisition costs. On a rolling 12 month basis, we estimate that for each of the past five fiscal years, the average lifetime value of a customer has exceeded 7x the associated average cost of acquiring them, including the year ended December 31, 2021.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
The following are several key factors that affect our performance:
•Market Adoption of Our Platform. Our ability to grow our customer base and drive market adoption of our platform is affected by the pace at which organizations digitally transform. We expect our revenue growth will be primarily driven by the pace of adoption and penetration of our platform. We offer a leading custom software platform and intend to continue to invest to expand our customer base. The degree to which prospective customers recognize the need for low-code software that enables organizations to digitally transform, and subsequently allocate budget dollars to purchase our software, will drive our ability to acquire new customers and increase sales to existing customers, which, in turn, will affect our future financial performance.
•Growth of Our Customer Base. We believe we have a substantial opportunity to grow our customer base. We define a customer as an entity with an active subscription or maintenance and support contract or a legacy perpetual license as of the specified measurement date. Furthermore, we define a new customer as an entity that has entered into its first active subscription or maintenance and support contract within one calendar year of the specified measurement date while existing customers are defined as entities that have maintained an active subscription or maintenance and support contract for at least one calendar year from the specified measurement date. Legacy customers from entities acquired in business combinations are not counted as new customers until they enter into a new active subscription or maintenance and support contract with us subsequent to the completion of the business combination. Additionally, to the extent we contract with one or more entities under common control, we count those entities as separate customers.
We have aggressively invested, and intend to continue to invest, in our sales team in order to drive sales to new customers. We continue to make investments to enhance the expertise of our sales and marketing organization within our key industry verticals of financial services, government, and life sciences. In addition, we have established relationships with strategic partners who work with organizations undergoing digital transformations. We had a total customer count of 816, 693, and 533 as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Our number of customers with active software subscription agreements was 783, 654, and 487 as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, 25% of our commercial customers were Global 2000 organizations, and 68 of our customers were Fortune 500 companies. Our ability to continue to grow our customer base is dependent, in part, upon our ability to differentiate ourselves within the increasingly competitive markets in which we participate.
•Further Penetration of Existing Customers. Our sales team seeks to generate additional revenue from existing customers by adding new users to our platform. Many of our customers begin by building a single application and then grow to build dozens of applications on our platform. Generally, the development of new applications on our platform results in the expansion of our user base within an organization and a corresponding increase in revenue to us because we charge subscription fees on a per-user basis or through non-user based single application licenses. As a result of this “land and expand” strategy, we have generated significant additional revenue from our customer base. Our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including the size of our sales and professional services teams, customers’ level of satisfaction with our platform and professional services, pricing, economic conditions, and our customers’ overall spending levels. We have also re-focused some of our professional services personnel to become customer success managers. Their role is to ensure the customer realizes value from our platform and support strategic partners and the “land and expand” strategy versus delivering billable hours.
•Mix of Subscriptions and Professional Services Revenue. We believe our professional services have driven customer success and facilitated the adoption of our platform by customers. During the initial period of deployment by a customer, we generally provide a greater amount of support in building applications and training than later in the deployment, with a typical engagement extending from two to six months. At the same time, many of our customers have historically purchased subscriptions only for a limited set of their total potential end users. As a result of these factors, the proportion of total revenue for a customer associated with professional services is relatively high during the initial deployment period. Over time, as the need for professional services associated with user deployments decreases and the number of end users increases, we expect subscriptions revenue as a percentage of total revenue to increase. In addition, we continue to grow our base of strategic partners to provide broader customer coverage and solution delivery capabilities. These partners perform professional services with respect to any new service contracts they originate. As the usage of partners expands, we expect the proportion of our total revenue from subscriptions to increase over time relative to professional services. In 2021, 2020, and 2019, 71.4%, 65.2%, and 58.1% of our revenue, respectively, was derived from sales of subscriptions, while the remaining 28.6%, 34.8%, and 41.9%, respectively, was derived from the sale of professional services.
•Investments in Growth. We have made, and plan to continue to make, investments for long-term growth, including investing in our platform and infrastructure to continuously maximize their power and speed, meet the evolving needs of our customers, and take advantage of our market opportunity. In addition, we continue to pursue strategic acquisitions that enhance our product offerings. We also intend to continue to invest in sales and marketing as we further expand our sales teams, increase our marketing activities, and grow our international operations.
Key Metrics
We monitor the following metrics to help us measure and evaluate the effectiveness of our operations. All dollar amounts are presented in thousands.
Cloud Subscription Revenue
Cloud subscription revenue includes SaaS subscriptions bundled with maintenance and support and hosting services. In 2021, 2020, and 2019, 68.0%, 65.0%, and 62.8%, respectively, of subscriptions revenue was cloud subscription revenue. As we generally sell our SaaS subscriptions on a per-user basis or through non-user based single application licenses, our cloud subscription revenue for any customer is primarily determined by the number of users who access and utilize the applications built on our platform or by the number of application licenses purchased, as well as the price paid. We believe increasing cloud subscription revenue is an indicator of the demand for our platform, the pace at which the market for our solutions is growing, the productivity of our sales team and strategic relationships in growing our customer base, and our ability to further penetrate our existing customer base.
Cloud Subscription Revenue Retention Rate
A key factor to our success is the renewal and expansion of subscription agreements with our existing customers. We calculate this metric over a set of customers who have been with us for at least one full year. To calculate our cloud subscription revenue retention rate for a particular trailing 12-month period, we first establish the recurring cloud subscription revenue for the previous trailing 12-month period. This effectively represents recurring dollars we should expect in the current trailing 12-month period from the cohort of customers from the previous trailing 12-month period without any expansion or contraction. We subsequently measure the recurring cloud subscription revenue in the current trailing 12-month period from the cohort of customers from the previous trailing 12-month period. Cloud subscription revenue retention rate is then calculated by dividing the aggregate recurring cloud subscription revenue in the current trailing 12-month period by the previous trailing 12-month period. This calculation includes the impact on our revenue from customer non-renewals, pricing changes, and growth in the number of users on our platform. Our cloud subscription revenue retention rate can fluctuate from period to period due to large customer contracts in any given period.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we provide investors with certain non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP operating loss, non-GAAP net loss, non-GAAP net loss per share, non-GAAP weighted average shares outstanding, and adjusted EBITDA, which we collectively refer to as non-GAAP financial measures. We define non-GAAP operating loss as operating loss before stock-based compensation expense and certain litigation-related expenses. We define non-GAAP net loss as net loss before stock-based compensation expense, certain litigation-related expenses, and gains or losses on disposals of property and equipment. In periods we report non-GAAP net income, we calculate non-GAAP weighted average shares outstanding as GAAP weighted average shares outstanding adjusted for the effect of potentially dilutive securities that would otherwise be antidilutive under GAAP. We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss before (1) other expense (income), net, (2) interest expense, (3) income tax expense, (4) depreciation and amortization expense, (5) stock-based compensation expense, and (6) certain litigation-related expenses.
We exclude stock-based compensation expense because of varying available valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions, and the variety of equity instruments that can impact our non-cash expense. We exclude certain litigation-related expenses consisting of professional fees and other costs incurred in connection with two separate lawsuits, one involving reciprocal false advertising and related claims with a competitor and one involving an effort to enforce our intellectual property, because we believe such costs are outside of our ordinary course of business. We exclude gains or losses on disposals of property and equipment as these transactions are unrelated to current operations nor predictive of future results. We believe providing non-GAAP financial measures excluding the aforementioned items provides investors and management with greater visibility into the underlying performance of our business operations, aids to provide supplemental information and comparable financial results from period to period, and may also provide comparison with the results of other companies in our industry.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation from, as a substitute for, or superior to the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. We use non-GAAP financial measures as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We also believe our non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information about our operating results, enhance the overall understanding of past financial performance and future prospects, and allow for greater transparency with respect to metrics used by our management in its financial and operational decision making. Reconciliations of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are included below for review. Reliance should not be placed on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Our non-GAAP financial measures may not provide information that is directly comparable to that provided by other companies in our industry as other companies in our industry may calculate non-GAAP financial results differently, particularly with respect to non-recurring, unusual items. Non-GAAP financial measures do not have uniform definitions, and our definitions will likely differ from the definitions used by other companies, including peer companies. In addition, non-GAAP financial measures exclude expenses that may have a material impact upon our reported financial results. Further, stock-
based compensation expense will continue to be a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of the compensation provided to our employees for the foreseeable future.
The table below reconciles GAAP operating loss to non-GAAP operating loss for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
The following table reconciles GAAP net loss to non-GAAP net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
The following table sets forth non-GAAP net loss per share for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands except share and per share data):
GAAP basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding were equal to non-GAAP basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding for each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
The following table reconciles GAAP net loss per share to non-GAAP net loss per share for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
The following table reconciles GAAP net loss to adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily through sales of subscriptions to our platform as well as professional services. We generally sell our software on a per-user basis or through non-user based single application licenses. We generally bill customers and collect payment for subscriptions to our platform in advance on an annual, quarterly, or monthly basis. In certain instances, we have had customers pay their entire contract value up front.
Our revenue is comprised of the following:
Subscriptions
Subscriptions revenue is primarily derived from:
•SaaS subscriptions bundled with maintenance and support and hosting services; and
•On-premises term license subscriptions bundled with maintenance and support.
Our maintenance and support agreements provide customers with the right to unspecified software upgrades, maintenance releases and patches released during the term of the maintenance and support agreement on a when-and-if-available basis, and rights to technical support. On-premises term license subscriptions are offered when the customer prefers to self-manage the deployment of our platform within their own infrastructure. When our platform is delivered as a SaaS subscription, we manage their operational needs in third-party hosted data centers.
Professional Services
Our professional services revenue is comprised of fees for consulting services, including application development, deployment assistance, and training related to our platform. Over time, as the need for professional services associated with user deployments decreases and the number of end users increases, we expect professional services revenue as a percentage of total revenue to decrease. Additionally, professional services revenue may be negatively impacted if there is a decline in our procurement of new customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have several strategic partnerships, including with KPMG, Accenture, PwC, Infosys, Wipro, and Deloitte. These partners refer software subscription customers to us and generally perform professional services with respect to any new service contracts they originate, increasing our subscriptions revenue without any change to our professional services revenue. Our agreements with our strategic partners have indefinite terms and may be terminated for convenience by either party. We intend to further grow our base of strategic partners to provide broader customer coverage and solution delivery capabilities. As we expand the network of strategic partners, we expect professional services revenue to decline as a percentage of total revenue
over time since our strategic partners may perform professional services associated with software subscriptions we sell. Professional services revenue may also decline in absolute dollars if we increasingly rely on our network to procure new customers.
Cost of Revenue
Subscriptions
Cost of subscriptions revenue consists primarily of fees paid to our third-party managed hosting providers and other third-party service providers, personnel costs, including payroll and benefits for our technology operations and customer support teams, and allocated facility costs and overhead. We expect cost of revenue to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as our customer base grows.
Professional Services
Cost of professional services revenue includes all direct and indirect costs to deliver our professional services and training, including employee compensation for our global professional services and training personnel, third-party contractor costs, allocated facility costs and overhead, and the costs of billable expenses such as travel and lodging. The unpredictability of the timing of entering into significant professional services agreements sold on a standalone basis may cause significant fluctuations in our cost of professional services which, in turn, may impact our quarterly financial results and allocated facility costs and overhead.
Gross Margin
Gross profit and gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of total revenue, have been, and will continue to be, affected by various factors, including the mix of SaaS subscriptions and on-premises term license subscriptions, the mix of total subscriptions revenue and professional services revenue, subscription pricing, the costs associated with third-party hosting facilities, and the extent to which we expand our professional services to support future growth. Our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period based on the above factors.
Subscriptions Gross Margin
Subscriptions gross margin is primarily affected by the growth in our subscriptions revenue as compared to the growth in, and timing of, costs to support such revenue. We expect to continue to invest in customer support and SaaS operations to support growth in our business, and the timing of those investments is expected to cause subscriptions gross margin to fluctuate on a quarterly basis.
Professional Services Gross Margin
Professional services gross margin is affected by the growth in our professional services revenue as compared to the growth in, and timing of, the cost of our Customer Success organization as we continue to invest in the growth of our business. Professional services gross margin is also impacted by the amount of services performed by subcontractors and partners as opposed to internal resources. Beginning in 2020, we lowered our usage of subcontractors, and the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in fewer in-person professional services engagements and deployments, both of which reduced certain classes of expenses and improved professional services margins. In 2021, these margins began to normalize but remain subject to fluctuation based on the factors discussed above and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic outside of our control.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related costs such as salaries, bonuses, commissions, payroll tax payments, and stock-based compensation expense are the most significant components of each of these expense categories. Other components of each category include professional fees for third-party services such as contract labor, legal, development resources, and consulting as well as allocated facility and overhead, which can include, among other types of costs, travel and entertainment expenditures, human
resources costs such as placement fees, referral bonuses, training costs, and employee relations spending, office-related expenditures, and information technology costs for such items as infrastructure, software, and cloud computing services.
In general, our operating expenses are expected to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we invest resources in growing our various teams. We grew from 1,460 employees at December 31, 2020 to 1,798 employees at December 31, 2021, and we expect to continue to hire new employees in order to support our anticipated revenue growth.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense primarily includes personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, commissions, stock-based compensation, and other personnel costs related to sales teams. Additional major expenses in this category include travel and entertainment, marketing activities and promotional events, subcontracting fees, and allocated facility costs and overhead.
The number of employees in sales and marketing functions grew from 445 at December 31, 2020 to 552 at December 31, 2021. In order to continue to grow our business, geographical footprint, and brand awareness, we expect to continue investing resources in sales and marketing by increasing the number of sales and account management teams. As a result, we expect sales and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest to acquire new customers and further expand usage of our platform within our existing customer base.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel costs for our employees who develop and enhance our platform, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, and other personnel costs. Also included are non-personnel costs such as subcontracting, consulting, and professional fees to third party development resources, allocated facility costs, and overhead.
Our research and development efforts are focused on enhancing the speed and power of our software platform. The number of employees in research and development functions grew from 381 at December 31, 2020 to 488 at December 31, 2021. We expect research and development expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars as such costs are critical to maintain and improve the quality of applications and our competitive position.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, and other personnel costs for our administrative, legal, information technology, human resources, finance and accounting employees, as well as our executives. Additional expenses included in this category are non-personnel costs such as travel-related expenses, contracting and professional fees for such services as audits, taxation, and legal, insurance and other corporate expenses, allocated facility costs and overhead, bad debt expenses, and depreciation and amortization costs.
The number of employees in general and administrative functions grew from 206 at December 31, 2020 to 224 at December 31, 2021. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to support our growth.
Other Expense (Income)
Other Expense (Income), Net
Other expense (income), net, net consists primarily of unrealized and realized gains and losses related to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, interest income on our cash and cash equivalents and investments, gains or losses on the disposal of property and equipment, and other sources of income or expense not related to our core business operations.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our debt, unused credit facility fees, and commitment fees on our letters of credit.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data (in thousands):
(1) Stock-based compensation as a component of these line items is as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenue:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased $64.7 million, or 21.2%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due to an increase in our subscriptions revenue of $65.0 million, which was partially offset by a decrease in our professional services revenue of $0.3 million. The increase in subscriptions revenue was driven largely by a $50.2 million increase in cloud subscription revenue, an $11.8 million increase in on-premises software revenue, and a $3.0 million increase in maintenance and support revenue. With respect to new versus existing customers, $48.1 million of the increase in subscriptions revenue stemmed from expanded deployments and corresponding sales of additional subscriptions to existing customers while $16.6 million stemmed from sales of subscriptions to new customers. The remainder of the increase is attributable to revenue recognized from Lana Labs GmbH, or Lana Labs, subsequent to the acquisition. The decrease in professional services revenue was due primarily to a $19.7 million decrease in
revenue from existing customers which was largely offset by $19.3 million in sales to new customers. Further impacting the decrease in professional services revenue were increased contributions of partners performing professional services on our behalf in 2021 as compared to 2020, which has resulted in increases to our subscriptions revenue without any change to our professional services revenue.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $15.3 million, or 17.3%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $15.2 million increase in professional services and product support personnel costs, a $4.4 million increase in other cost of revenue, and a $1.5 million increase in facility and overhead costs. These increases were partially offset by a $4.8 million decrease in contractor costs and a $1.0 million decrease in billable expenses. Personnel costs increased due to an increase in professional services and product support personnel headcount of 24.8% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, coupled with a $1.9 million increase in stock-based compensation. The increase in other cost of revenue was due to increased hosting costs as sales of our cloud offering grew in 2021, while the increase in facility and overhead costs was due largely to an increase in certain allocated costs tied to our growth such as spending for offices, human resources costs, and information technology expenses. Contractor costs decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to a decrease in the usage of subcontractors for professional service engagements, which is in line with our strategic shift towards increasing professional services headcounts and utilizing more internal resources to complete engagements. Billable expenses decreased primarily as a result of lower travel and entertainment costs pursuant to a shift to remote work that began in the second quarter of 2020 and continued into 2021.
Subscriptions gross margin slightly increased to 89.6% in 2021 compared to 89.5% in 2020 due to an increase in subscriptions revenue in 2021, which was largely offset by increased hosting costs as sales of our cloud offering increased and became a larger proportion of our overall subscriptions revenue. Professional services gross margin decreased to 27.3% in 2021 compared to 35.8% in 2020 due to higher personnel costs in 2021 as well as a decrease in professional services revenue. Additionally, fewer in-person professional services engagements and deployments in 2020 led to temporarily improved margins in the prior year. These impacts were partially offset by a decrease in the usage of subcontractors for professional services engagements. Given the higher percentage of subscriptions revenue for the comparable periods and the aforementioned decline in professional services revenue, gross margin rose to 71.8% in 2021 as compared to 70.9% in 2020.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense increased $37.5 million, or 28.8%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $28.8 million increase in sales and marketing personnel costs, a $5.1 million increase in marketing costs, a $3.0 million increase in facility and overhead costs, and a $0.6 million increase in professional fees. Personnel costs increased due to an increase in
sales and marketing personnel headcount of 24.0% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, increased sales commissions driven by our subscriptions revenue growth, and a $2.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense. Marketing costs increased due to an increase in the number of marketing events held during 2021 as compared to 2020 as well as increased spending on marketing materials, slightly offset by a decrease in advertising expense. Facility and overhead costs increased due to higher allocated costs tied to our growth, such as information technology spending and human resources costs. Professional fees increased due to higher fees paid to third-party marketing consultants pursuant to new marketing campaigns and initiatives.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased $27.3 million, or 38.8%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $22.9 million increase in research and development personnel costs, a $3.2 million increase in facility and overhead costs, and a $1.1 million increase in professional fees. Personnel costs increased due to an increase in research and development personnel headcount of 28.1% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, coupled with a $2.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expense. Facility and overhead costs increased due largely to higher allocated costs tied to our growth, such as information technology spending, human resources costs, and office spending. Professional fees increased due to an increase in consulting services fees stemming from higher usage of external resources to assist in our platform development efforts.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased $30.6 million, or 57.5%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $15.8 million increase in professional fees, an $11.7 million increase in general and administrative personnel costs, and a $2.4 million increase in facility and overhead costs. Professional fees increased due largely to higher legal fees. Personnel costs increased due to the acceleration of $3.3 million in stock-based compensation expense stemming from the vesting of the 2019 CEO grant, coupled with an increase in general and administrative personnel headcount of 8.7% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. Facility and overhead costs increased primarily due to higher allocated costs tied to our growth, such as information technology spending, human resources costs, and office spending as well as higher withholding taxes at certain of our foreign subsidiaries.
Other Expense (Income), Net
*** - Indicates a percentage that is not meaningful
Other expense was $3.6 million in 2021 compared to other income of $5.8 million in 2020. This change was primarily due to $3.7 million in foreign exchange losses in 2021 compared to $4.3 million in foreign exchange gains in 2020. Additionally, we recognized $1.0 million in other income in 2020 due to a payment received from a state government as a result of our achievement of certain job creation and capital investment goals.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by a nominal amount in 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower commitment fees on the letter of credit outstanding.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
For a discussion and analysis of changes in financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 18, 2021.
Seasonality
We have historically experienced seasonality in terms of when we enter into agreements with customers. We typically enter into a significantly higher percentage of agreements with new customers, as well as renewal agreements with existing customers, in the fourth quarter. The increase in customer agreements for the fourth quarter is attributable to large enterprise account buying patterns typical in the software industry. Furthermore, we usually enter into a significant portion of agreements with customers during the last month of each quarter. However, we recognize the majority of our subscriptions revenue ratably over the terms of our subscriptions agreements, which are generally one to three years in length. As a result, a substantial portion of the subscriptions revenue we report in each period will be derived from the recognition of deferred revenue relating to agreements entered into during previous periods. Consequently, a decline in new sales or renewals in any one period may not be immediately reflected in our revenue results for that period. Such a decline, however, will negatively affect our revenue in future periods. Accordingly, the effect of significant downturns in sales and market acceptance of our platform and potential changes in our rate of renewals may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods.
While we will continue to recognize the majority of our subscriptions revenue ratably over the terms of our subscription agreements, we may experience greater variability and reduced comparability of our quarterly revenue and results with respect to the timing and nature of our term license subscription agreements due to the upfront revenue recognition.
Backlog
Backlog represents non-cancellable future amounts to be recognized under SaaS and term license subscription agreements and is representative of our remaining performance obligations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had backlog of $285.5 million and $206.2 million, respectively. Approximately 34% of our backlog as of December 31, 2021 is not expected to be recognized in 2022.
We expect backlog to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to increase the number of SaaS agreements we enter into. However, the amount of backlog relative to the total value of our contracts can change from quarter to quarter and year to year for several reasons, including the specific timing and duration of SaaS and term license subscription agreements with large customers, the specific timing of customer renewals, changes in customer financial circumstances, and foreign currency fluctuations.
We often sign multiple-year SaaS subscription agreements. Backlog may vary based on changes in the average non-cancellable term of SaaS and term license subscription agreements. The change in backlog resulting from changes in the average non-cancellable term of SaaS and term license subscription agreements may not be an indicator of the likelihood of renewal or expected future revenue. Accordingly, we believe fluctuations in backlog may not be a reliable indicator of future revenue, and we do not utilize backlog as a key management metric internally.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
* Exclusive of the current portion of restricted cash
As of December 31, 2021, we had $100.8 million of cash and cash equivalents and $55.2 million of short-term investments and marketable securities. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments and marketable securities, together with any positive cash flows from operations and available borrowings under our line of credit, will be sufficient to support working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. We expect future sources of funds to consist primarily of cash generated from sales of subscriptions and the related professional services. We may also elect to raise additional sources of funding through draws on our existing line of credit, entering into new debt financing arrangements, or conducting additional public offerings. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, particularly internationally, the introduction of new and enhanced products and functions as well as platform enhancements and professional services offerings, the level of market acceptance of our applications, spending we may incur on our headquarters, and the global economic uncertainty and financial market conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business.
In the event additional financing is required from outside sources, we may be unable to raise the funds on acceptable terms, if at all. To the extent existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash from operations are not sufficient to fund future activities, we may need to raise additional funds. We may seek to raise additional funds through equity, equity-linked, or debt financings. If we raise additional funds through the incurrence of indebtedness, such indebtedness may have rights that are senior to holders of our equity securities and could contain covenants that restrict operations. Any additional equity financing may be dilutive to our existing stockholders. We recently have, and in the future may enter into, investments in, or acquisitions of, complementary businesses, products, or technologies, which could also require us to seek additional equity financing, incur indebtedness, or use cash resources. We have no present binding agreements or commitments to enter into any such acquisitions. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results, and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Sources of Funds
We have financed our operations in large part with equity and debt financing arrangements, specifically proceeds raised from our initial public offering in 2017 and subsequent underwritten public offerings as summarized in the table below (in thousands except share and per share information):
* Net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses
We also have the ability to draw upon a $20.0 million revolving line of credit with a lender with an original maturity date of November 2022. In December 2021, we executed the first loan modification agreement which extended the revolving line of credit's maturity date to November 2025 and amended certain borrowing terms and financial covenants. Under the amended agreement, we may elect whether amounts drawn on the revolving line of credit bear interest on the outstanding principal amount at a rate per annum equal to either a) the Prime rate plus an additional interest rate margin or b) secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”) plus an additional interest rate margin that is determined by the availability of the borrowings under the revolving line of credit. The additional interest rate margin will range from 0.75% to 1.25% in the case of Prime rate advances and from 1.75% to 2.25% in the case of SOFR rate advances. The revolving line of credit contains an unused facility fee up to 0.20% of the average unused portion of the revolving line of credit, which is payable quarterly. The agreement contains certain customary affirmative and negative covenants and requires us to maintain (i) an adjusted quick ratio of at least 1.35 to 1.00 subject to a net cash threshold as set forth in the agreement and (ii) minimum adjusted EBITDA, in the amounts and for the periods set forth in the agreement. Any amounts borrowed under the credit facility are collateralized by substantially all of our assets. We were in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under this revolving line of credit, and we had outstanding letters of credit totaling $11.2 million in connection with securing our leased office space.
Uses of Funds
Our current principal uses of cash are funding operations and other working capital requirements. Historically, we have also utilized cash to pay for the acquisition of entities we believe to be complementary to our business, and we may pursue similar opportunities in the future. Over the past several years, revenue has increased significantly from year to year and, as a result, cash flows from customer collections have increased. However, operating expenses have also increased as we have invested in growing our business. Outside of cash used to fund operations, our uses of cash in 2021 included the acquisition of Lana Labs, purchases of investments, and capital expenditures. Cash uses in 2020 included the acquisition of Novayre Solutions SL, or Novayre, and modest capital expenditures.
With respect to future uses of funds, we expect to incur annual royalty fees of $0.3 million for the foreseeable future related to a non-cancellable agreement for the use of technology that is integral in the development of our software. Additionally, we expect to incur capital expenditures in relation to the expanded occupancy of our headquarters, although such expenditures do not represent capital commitments. Furthermore, we are contractually obligated to make cash payments on our various operating leases through October 2031. As of December 31, 2021, the amount of funds we expect to utilize over this time period for our lease commitments is approximately $92.9 million.
In 2021, we executed a non-cancellable cloud hosting arrangement with Amazon Web Services, or AWS, that contains provisions for minimum purchase commitments. Purchase commitments under the agreement total $131.0 million over five years, including $22.0 million in the first year, $25.0 million in the second year, and $28.0 million in each of the third, fourth, and fifth years. The timing of payments under the agreement may vary, and the total amount of payments may exceed the
minimum depending on the volume of services utilized. Spending under this agreement for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $11.8 million.
Furthermore, we have other non-cancellable agreements for subscription software products that contain provisions stipulating minimum purchase commitments. However, the annual purchase commitments under these contracts are, individually and in the aggregate, immaterial to our consolidated statements of operations.
Historical Cash Flows
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities of $53.9 million consisted of a net loss of $88.6 million, offset by $29.6 million in adjustments for non-cash items and $5.1 million of cash provided by changes in working capital. Adjustments for non-cash items consisted primarily of stock-based compensation of $23.8 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $5.7 million, bad debt expense of $0.4 million, and losses on the disposal of property and equipment of $0.1 million. These adjustments were partially offset by deferred income tax adjustments of $0.5 million. The increase in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash resulting from changes in working capital primarily consisted of a $33.4 million increase in deferred revenue as a result of increased subscription sales, a $12.6 million increase in accrued compensation and related benefits as a result of the timing around and increase in employee benefit accruals for such costs as commissions and bonuses stemming from increased headcounts, an $11.5 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to larger accruals related to legal costs, AWS hosting costs, and marketing costs as well as timing differences between billings and payments, a $2.1 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets primarily due to the timing of payments, and a $1.5 million net decrease in right-of-use lease assets. These increases to working capital were offset by a $33.9 million increase in accounts receivable stemming from increased sales and the timing of billings and collections in the fourth quarter, a $21.6 million increase in deferred commissions due to increased sales activity combined with the timing of order completions, and a $0.4 million decrease in other current and non-current liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities of $7.6 million consisted of a net loss of $33.5 million, offset by $22.0 million in adjustments for non-cash items and $3.9 million of cash provided by changes in working capital. Adjustments for non-cash items consisted primarily of stock-based compensation of $15.3 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $5.9 million, and bad debt expense of $1.0 million, offset by a provision for deferred income taxes of $0.2 million. The increase in cash and cash equivalents resulting from changes in working capital primarily consisted of a $27.6 million increase in deferred revenue as a result of increased subscription sales, an $11.8 million increase in accrued compensation and related benefits as a result of higher employee benefit accruals such as vacation and bonuses, a $3.7 million increase in other liabilities due to the deferral of social security tax payments pursuant to the provisions of the CARES Act and a contract liability arising from a three year deal that included a termination for convenience clause, a $3.7 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets attributable to timing, and a $3.4 million increase in operating lease liabilities as a result of recognizing a new right-of-use liability related to the expanded occupancy of our headquarters building. The increase to working capital was partially offset by a $33.6 million increase in accounts receivable stemming from increased sales as well as the timing of billings and collections, an $8.6 million increase in deferred commissions due to increased sales activity, and a $4.2 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to the timing of payments.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $41.9 million, which was primarily the result of $120.6 million in proceeds from investments, partially offset by $41.9 million in purchases of investments, $30.7 million in payments, net of cash acquired, related to the acquisition of Lana Labs, and $6.1 million in purchases of property and equipment stemming from spending related to the expanded occupancy of our headquarters.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $153.4 million which was primarily the result of $146.0 million in purchases of investments and $6.1 million in payments, net of cash acquired, related to the acquisition of Novayre. In addition there were approximately $1.3 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $2.8 million, consisting entirely of proceeds received from stock option exercises.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $110.5 million, consisting of $108.3 million in proceeds from our underwritten public offering, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, and $6.4 million in proceeds received from stock option exercises. These increases were offset by principal payments on finance lease obligations of $3.8 million and payment of public offering costs of $0.3 million.
For a discussion and analysis of net cash used in or provided by operating, investing, and financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 18, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those financial statements and accompanying notes. Although we believe the estimates we use are reasonable, due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making those estimates, actual results reported in future periods could differ from those estimates.
We believe the following accounting estimates involve a high degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the estimates we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of our operations. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of our other significant accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We generate subscriptions revenue primarily through the sale of SaaS subscriptions bundled with maintenance and support and hosting services and term license subscriptions bundled with maintenance and support. We generate professional services revenue from fees for our consulting services, including application development and deployment assistance and training related to our platform. Significant judgments and estimates inherent in our revenue recognition are as follows:
Determining the Transaction Price
The transaction price, or the amount of consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for transferring services to our customers, includes both fixed and variable components. The variable components of our contracts, which have been nominal to date, include performance penalties, extended payment terms or implied price concessions, and warranty refunds. If necessary, we estimate these components using the expected value method, which estimates variable consideration as the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. We believe this method is the most appropriate to utilize because our variable components could vary by contract, leading to multiple potential outcomes.
Our variable consideration estimates are subject to subsequent true-up adjustments which may result in changes to transaction prices, but such true-up adjustments are not expected to be material. Variable consideration is also included in the transaction price only to the extent it is probable a significant reversal will not occur. Factors considered when determining to incorporate variable consideration in the transaction price include, but are not limited to, whether the variable consideration is highly susceptible to factors outside of the company's influence, the length of time the uncertainty surrounding reversal is expected to last, our experience levels with similar types of contracts, our historical practices for similar contracts in similar circumstances, and the number and range of possible consideration amounts. The amount of variable consideration excluded from the transaction price for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 was insignificant.
Allocating the Transaction Price Based on Standalone Selling Prices
We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in a contract based on its relative standalone selling price, or SSP. The SSP is the observable price at which we sell the product or service separately. In the absence of observable pricing, we estimate SSP using the residual approach. We establish SSP as follows:
1.SaaS subscriptions - Given the highly variable selling price of our SaaS subscriptions, we establish the SSP of our SaaS subscriptions using a residual approach after first determining the SSP of consulting and training services.
2.Term license subscriptions - Given the highly variable selling price of our term license subscriptions, we have established the SSP of term license subscriptions using a residual approach after first determining the SSP of maintenance and support. Maintenance and support is sold on a standalone basis with renewals of our legacy perpetual software licenses and within a narrow range of the net license fee, resulting in a defined economic relationship existing between the license and maintenance and support.
3.Maintenance and support - We establish the SSP of maintenance and support as a percentage of the stated net subscription fee based on observable pricing of maintenance and support renewals from our legacy perpetual software licenses.
4.Consulting services and training services - The SSP of consulting services and training services is established based on the observable pricing of standalone sales within each geographic region where the services are sold.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all instrument types, including stock options, awards with market conditions, and restricted stock units, or RSUs, based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. The methods for determining fair value vary by instrument type.
Options
For the vast majority of our stock options, we estimate fair value using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model. For the option to purchase 700,000 shares of our Class A common stock granted to our Chief Executive Officer in May 2019, we estimated fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation because the award contains a market condition. Both valuation methods require the use of subjective assumptions, including but not limited to, the following:
1.The expected term of the option - The expected term represents the period of time the stock options are expected to be outstanding. Due to the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to otherwise estimate the expected term of the stock options, we use the simplified method to estimate the expected term. Under the simplified method, the expected term of an option is presumed to be the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term.
2.Current trading price - The current price of our stock is based on the closing market price of our Class A common stock as quoted on the Nasdaq Global Market on the date of grant.
3.The expected stock price volatility - Expected volatility is based on the historical volatilities of our publicly traded stock as well as the publicly traded stock of comparable companies within our industry over the estimated expected term of the stock options. Expected volatility is sensitive to market- and company-specific conditions which may cause our stock price or the stock prices of our peers to fluctuate. Furthermore, expected volatility can be impacted by the companies we select as peers for inclusion in the analysis.
4.Expected dividend yield - We assume no dividend yield because dividends on our common stock are not expected to be paid in the near future, which is consistent with our history of not paying dividends on our common stock.
5.The risk-free interest rate - We utilize the yields of U.S. government securities, typically U.S. Treasury bonds, that have maturities commensurate with the expected term of the options.
RSUs
The fair value of RSUs is based on the closing market price of our Class A common stock as quoted on the Nasdaq Global Market on the date of grant.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Income Taxes
We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be reversed. We establish a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets to the extent it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. This requires us to make judgments and estimates regarding future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, future taxable income, and the impact of tax planning strategies.
Our tax positions are subject to income tax audits by multiple tax jurisdictions throughout the world. We recognize the tax benefit of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the position is sustainable upon examination by the taxing authority. We measure the tax benefit recognized as the largest amount of benefit which is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement with the taxing authority. This determination involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws.
We calculate the current and deferred income tax provision based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in income tax returns filed in subsequent years and record adjustments based on filed income tax returns when identified. The amount of income taxes paid is subject to examination by U.S. federal, state, and foreign tax authorities. The estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax issue is subject to our assessment of relevant risks, facts, and circumstances existing at that time. To the extent the assessment of such tax position changes, we record the change in estimate in the period in which we make that determination.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting as of the business combination date. Under this method, we allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is allocated to goodwill. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires us to use significant estimates and assumptions that may vary between transactions. Examples include, but are not limited to:
•Selection of valuation methodologies;
•Estimated fair values of intangible assets and liabilities;
•Estimated fair values of contractual obligations assumed from the acquiree under existing contractual obligations at the date of acquisition;
•Estimated fair value of pre-acquisition contingent considerations;
•Future expected cash flows from subscription and support contracts, professional services contracts, other customer contracts and acquired developed technologies and patents;
•Discount rates;
•Fair value of any assumed equity awards; and
•Estimated fair value of any trade names and non-compete agreements.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions to determine the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition, our estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which can be up to one year from the acquisition date, these estimates may be refined, as necessary, and we may record adjustments to the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or the final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.
Impairment of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
We review goodwill, long-lived assets, and certain intangible assets for impairment at least annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable.
Goodwill
With respect to our goodwill impairment assessment, we first perform a qualitative assessment, which requires us to consider events or circumstances including but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, changes in management or key personnel, changes in strategy, changes in customers, litigation, changes in the composition or carrying amount of a reporting unit’s net assets, and changes in our stock price.
The events and factors listed above are examples and not all-inclusive. None of these events or circumstances by themselves would indicate it is more likely than not that goodwill associated with a reporting unit is impaired. As part of our analysis, we also weigh any positive or mitigating factors identified and holistically evaluate all events since the most recent quantitative impairment test to determine whether it is more likely than not the goodwill associated with the reporting unit is impaired. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than the carrying amount, then the quantitative goodwill impairment test is not performed.
Because we operate under one reporting unit, the fair value of our reporting unit is based on our enterprise value. Additionally, because our enterprise value is significantly in excess of carrying value, any sensitivity in the underlying assumptions and estimates is not likely to trigger an impairment. No indicators of goodwill impairment were identified for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets, excluding goodwill, consist of property, leasehold improvements, hardware, software, equipment, and intangible assets. Such assets are reviewed for impairment at least annually or more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If such review indicates the carrying amount of our long-lived assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. There were no indicators of impairment of our long-lived assets noted for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements for information related to recently issued accounting standards.