ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the section titled “Risk Factors.” In this discussion, we use financial measures that are considered non-GAAP financial measures under Securities and Exchange Commission rules. These rules require supplemental explanation and reconciliation, which is included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation from or in substitution for, financial information presented in compliance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. In the below discussion, we use the term basis points to refer to units of one-hundredth of one percent.
Overview
Blue Apron’s vision is “better living through better food.” Founded in 2012, we are on a mission to spark discovery, connection, and joy through cooking. We offer fresh, chef-designed recipes that empower our customers to embrace their culinary curiosity and challenge their abilities to see what a difference cooking quality food can make in their lives.
Our core product is the meal experience we help our customers create. These experiences extend from discovering new recipes, ingredients, and cooking techniques to preparing meals with families and loved ones to sharing photos and stories of culinary triumphs. Central to these experiences are the original recipes we design with fresh, seasonally inspired produce and high quality ingredients sent directly to our customers. We do this by employing technology and expertise across many disciplines - demand planning, recipe creation, procurement, recipe merchandising, fulfillment operations, distribution, customer service, and marketing - to drive our end-to-end value chain.
We offer our customers four weekly meal plans-a Two-Serving Signature Plan, a Two-Serving Vegetarian Plan a Two-Serving Wellness Plan, and a Four-Serving Signature Plan. In addition, customers can add up to two Add-ons recipes to each box, which includes appetizers, side dishes or desserts, and / or Heat & Meat meals, which are pre-made meals ready to heat and eat in minutes. We also sell wine, which can be paired with our meals, through Blue Apron Wine, our direct-to-consumer wine delivery service. Through Blue Apron Market, our e-commerce market, we sell a curated selection of cooking tools, utensils, pantry items, add-on products for different culinary occasions, which are tested and recommended by our culinary team, and à la carte wine offerings. Our products are available to purchase through our website and mobile app.
Key Financial and Operating Metrics
We use the following key financial and operating metrics to evaluate our business and operations, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, project our future performance, and make strategic decisions. You should read the key financial and operating metrics in conjunction with the following discussion of our results of operations and financial condition together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Orders
We define Orders as the number of paid orders by our Customers across our meal, wine, and market products sold on our e-commerce platforms in any reporting period, inclusive of orders that may have eventually been refunded or credited to customers. Orders, together with Average Order Value, is an indicator of the net revenue we expect to recognize in a given period. We view Orders delivered as a key indicator of our scale and financial performance, however orders has limitations as a financial and operating metric as it does not reflect the product mix chosen by our customers or the purchasing behavior of our customers. Because of these and other limitations, we consider, and you should consider, Orders in conjunction with our other metrics, including net revenue, net income (loss), adjusted EBITDA, net cash from (used in) operating activities, free cash flow, Average Order Value, and Orders per Customer.
Customers
We determine our number of Customers by counting the total number of individual customers who have paid for at least one Order from Blue Apron across our meal, wine, or market products sold on our e-commerce platforms in a given reporting period. For example, the number of Customers in the quarter ended December 31, 2021 was determined based on the total number of individual customers who paid for at least one Order across our meal, wine or market products in the quarter ended December 31, 2021. We view the number of Customers as a key indicator of our scale and financial performance, however customers has limitations as a financial and operating metric as it does not reflect the product mix chosen by our customers, Order frequency, or the purchasing behavior of our customers. Because of these and other limitations, we consider, and you should consider, Customers in conjunction with our other metrics, including
net revenue, net income (loss), adjusted EBITDA, net cash from (used in) operating activities, free cash flow, Orders per Customer, and Average Revenue per Customer.
Average Order Value
We define Average Order Value as our net revenue from our meal, wine, and market products sold on our e-commerce platforms in a given reporting period divided by the number of Orders in that period. We view Average Order Value as a key indicator of the mix of our product offerings chosen by our customers, the mix of promotional discounts, and the purchasing behavior of our customers.
Orders per Customer
We define Orders per Customer as the number of Orders in a given reporting period divided by the number of Customers in that period. We view Orders per Customer as a key indicator of our customers’ purchasing patterns, including their repeat purchase behavior.
Average Revenue per Customer
We define Average Revenue per Customer as our net revenue from our meal, wine, and market products sold on our e-commerce platforms in a given reporting period divided by the number of Customers in that period. We view Average Revenue per Customer as a key indicator of our customers’ purchasing patterns, including their repeat purchase behavior.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined by us as net income (loss) before interest income (expense), net, other operating expense, gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt, other income (expense), net, benefit (provision) for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, and share-based compensation expense. We have presented adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans and make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of certain items in calculating adjusted EBITDA can produce a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA provides useful information in understanding and evaluating our operating results. Please see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of the use of non-GAAP financial measures and for a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure defined by us as net cash from (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment. We have presented free cash flow in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is used by our management and board of directors as an indicator of the amount of cash we generate or use and to evaluate our ability to satisfy current and future obligations and to fund future business opportunities. Accordingly, we believe that free cash flow provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our ability to satisfy our financial obligations and pursue business opportunities, and allowing for greater transparency with respect to a key financial metric used by our management in their financial and operational decision-making. Free cash flow is not a measure of cash available for discretionary expenditures since we have certain non-discretionary obligations such as debt repayments or capital lease obligations that are not deducted from the measure. Additionally, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate free cash flow differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure. Please see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of the use of non-GAAP financial measures and for a reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash from (used in) operating activities, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
Since late in the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has to varying degrees resulted in significant economic disruptions and changes to the labor market and consumer behaviors in the United States, which has impacted and may continue to impact our business.
In particular, beginning in late March 2020, we experienced an increase in demand due in part, as a result of changes to consumer behaviors resulting from the various restrictions that have been enacted throughout much of the United States in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As restrictions have lifted and as vaccines have become more widely available in the United States and people begin to resume pre-pandemic activities, such as travel and dining out, this increased demand due to the pandemic has and may continue to decline.
In 2020, in response to the increased demand, we took action to manage and increase capacity at our fulfillment centers, including continuing to hire new personnel, temporarily reducing variety in menu options, closing some weekly offering cycles early, and delaying certain new product offerings. In addition, in January 2021, we temporarily reopened our fulfillment center in Arlington, Texas. At the same time, we have taken a variety of safety and sanitation measures following federal, state, and local guidelines at our fulfillment centers’ operations. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we have also seen higher than normal rates of absenteeism among our fulfillment center workforce and, at times, we have experienced difficulty in hiring a sufficient number of employees to adequately staff our fulfillment centers. Furthermore, in response to the increased demand, we intentionally reduced marketing spend for portions of 2020 to manage capacity, but we increased our marketing spend at the end of the second quarter of 2020 and we have reengaged, and expect to continue to reengage, in significant additional marketing spend in the future as part of our accelerated growth strategy to retain existing and attract new customers.
The COVID-19 pandemic may have other adverse effects on our business, operations, and financial results and condition, including, among other things, as a result of adverse impacts on labor availability, our fulfillment center operations, supply chain and logistics disruptions, consumer behaviors, and on the overall economy, including recent high inflation levels impacting consumer spending. While most areas of the United States have reduced most or all COVID-19 restrictions, as the pandemic continues and if new outbreaks emerge, there is uncertainty regarding the magnitude and duration of the economic and social effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, and therefore we cannot predict the full extent of the positive or negative impacts the pandemic will have on our business, operations, and financial results and condition in future periods. In particular, the positive trends on our operating results relating to changes in consumer behaviors relating to the pandemic that we have generally seen since March 2020 may not continue, and could decline in future periods.
Please see “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A for further discussion regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and under “Risk Factors.”
Marketing and Customer Lifecycle Management
Our performance and future success depend in large part on our ongoing ability to invest in marketing to sufficiently support the acceleration of our growth strategy and cost-effectively launch marketing campaigns that attract, retain, and engage customers. We use various online paid advertising channels (such as digital and social media and email), strategic brand partnerships, and offline paid advertising channels (such as television, radio and podcasts, and direct mail). We typically complement our paid advertising channels by offering promotional discounts to new customers for use on their first Order. We also attract new customers by word of mouth, including through our customer referral program, through which certain existing customers may invite others to receive a single complimentary meal kit box.
As part of the acceleration of our growth strategy using the proceeds from the Capital Raise (as defined below) that closed in November 2021, we significantly increased marketing expenses toward the end of the fourth quarter of 2021, and plan to significantly increase marketing expenses in 2022 to continue to drive customer acquisition with a deliberate focus on the marketing channels we believe to be the most efficient and customer segments that demonstrate stronger affinity and retention. By prioritizing customer segments that demonstrate stronger affinity and retention, we believe we will strengthen our customer base and improve our ability to achieve profitable revenue. We also intend to use our increased marketing efforts over the next twelve months to drive customer retention, customer engagement and brand awareness.
In addition to marketing, we continue to invest in our products, brand and overall customer experience, each of which further drives customer acquisition, customer retention and customer engagement and encourages repeat purchases. We also engage with our customers through social media, our website, blog, in-box content and mobile application, including through how-to videos and visual imagery, to deepen our customers’ connection with our brand. Our flexible platform allows customers to interact with us by either actively managing or passively receiving orders, and we believe this flexibility drives higher customer engagement, loyalty and retention over the long term. Our ability to efficiently acquire new customers, retain existing customers and drive customer engagement through marketing investment and other business initiatives significantly impacts our revenue and results of operations.
Product Offerings
Our ability to enhance our existing products and introduce new products impacts our revenue and results of operations. We make ongoing changes to our products intended to enhance the customer experience and strive to offer our customers a balanced mix of ingredients, cuisines, familiarity, discovery, and preparation times. To accommodate various customer lifestyles, we offer four weekly meal plans - a Two-Serving Signature Plan, a Two-Serving Vegetarian Plan, a Two-Serving Wellness Plan, and a Four-Serving Signature Plan for our meals, each with flexibility in recipe selection. We are focused on offering a variety of choices every week, including a range of recipes designed for a healthy lifestyle so that customers can make selections based on their individual household needs and preferences.
Customers have the option to customize some of their recipe selections, such as the ability to upgrade a protein with a more premium protein, replace a meat with a plant protein, swap a vegetable for a starch, or increase the serving size from two to four. We also offer Premium recipes, including our Craft offering, that introduce our customers to specialty protein combinations, advanced culinary tecchniques, and unique flavor twists. In addition, customers can add up to two Add-ons recipes to each box, which includes appetizers, side dishes or desserts, and / or Heat & Eat meals, which are pre-made meals ready to heat and eat in minutes.
We are also focused on brand extensions that are complementary to our meal experience, such as Blue Apron Wine and Blue Apron Market. We sell occasion-based offerings from time to time, which we have sold both on our subscription meal plan and the Blue Apron Market platform. A selection of non-subscription meal kit boxes and our wines are also sold on the Blue Apron Market website. We believe that by introducing new products and by increasing the choices available, we will better attract, engage and retain customers. Our customers’ choices from among our product offerings will impact our revenue and results of operations, and as we introduce additional products and increase flexibility in our existing products, our customers’ behavior and engagement with us may change.
Operational Execution
Our ability to effectively coordinate supply and demand and execute across our end-to-end value chain impacts our customer experience and our operating results. We begin by working with our suppliers, often months in advance of creating our menus. We then continue to forecast demand as well as monitor and evaluate our expected supply of ingredients, retaining flexibility to finalize recipes in the weeks leading up to fulfillment. As of January 31, 2022, we operated two technology-enabled, refrigerated fulfillment centers that collectively employed approximately 1,664 employees. Each fulfillment center includes an operation that portions ingredients into exact quantities for each week’s recipes using a combination of automated methods, manual labor, and warehousing, packaging, and shipping operations. We utilize a company-managed, third party delivery network that optimizes outbound logistics, including packing
materials and the choice of carrier, on a ZIP code by ZIP code basis to ensure cost-effective, timely, and safe delivery of our orders.
In February 2020, we announced the planned closure of our Arlington, Texas fulfillment center and the consolidation of production volume from our Arlington, Texas fulfillment center into our Linden, New Jersey and Richmond, California fulfillment centers in order to more efficiently continue to service our national footprint while also enabling us to redirect financial resources into other parts of the business, including growth initiatives. We temporarily reopened its Arlington fulfillment center beginning in January 2021 to leverage existing assets to meet forecasted demand while continuing to implement operating efficiencies at its other fulfillment centers. In April 2021, we closed down the temporarily reopened Arlington fulfillment center, with all production volume consolidated at our other fulfillment centers. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Capital Investment to Support our Strategic Initiatives
Our strategic investments in our fulfillment center operations will continue to significantly impact our ability to successfully execute on our accelerated growth strategy, introduce new products, increase variety to customers, and create efficiencies in our cost structure. We made significant investments to scale our operations and support the expansion of our business, including the build-out of our fulfillment center in Linden, New Jersey which we completed in 2017, which have contributed to meaningful efficiencies in our fulfillment operations. In the future, we plan to further invest in capital expenditures primarily related to accelerating our growth strategy and to further optimize and drive efficiency in our operations.
Seasonality
We experience seasonality in our business that impacts the level at which customers engage with our products and brand and our quarterly results of operations. We anticipate that the first quarter of each year will generally represent our strongest quarter in terms of customer engagement. Conversely, during the summer months and the end of year holidays, when people are vacationing more often or have less predictable weekly routines, we generally anticipate lower customer engagement. In 2020, the economic and social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic masked, in part, the seasonal fluctuations in our operating results as we saw our strongest quarter in the second quarter of 2020. We believe that historical seasonal trends have affected and will continue to affect our quarterly results in the future. However, we cannot predict the ongoing impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on seasonality in future periods as we have begun to see a return to normal seasonality in 2021. Our marketing strategies, which we significantly increased in the fourth quarter of 2021 and plan to significantly increase in 2022, will also impact our quarterly results of operations.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We generate net revenue primarily from the sale of meals to customers through our Two-Serving, Four-Serving, and Meal Prep Plans. We also generate net revenue through sales of Blue Apron Wine, and through sales on Blue Apron Market. For each of the years ending December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we derived substantially all of our net revenue from sales of our meals through our direct-to-consumer platform. We deduct promotional discounts, actual customer credits and refunds as well as customer credits and refunds expected to be issued to determine net revenue. Customers who receive a damaged meal or wine order or are dissatisfied with a meal or wine order and contact us within seven days of receipt of the order may receive a full or partial refund, full or partial credit against future purchase, or replacement, at our sole discretion. Credits only remain available for customers who maintain a valid account with us. Customers who return an unused, undamaged Blue Apron Market product within 30 days of receipt receive a full refund.
Our business is seasonal in nature and, as a result, our revenue and expenses and associated revenue trends fluctuate from quarter to quarter. We anticipate that the first quarter of each year will generally represent our strongest quarter in terms of customer engagement. Conversely, during the summer months and the end of year holidays, when people are vacationing more often or have less predictable weekly routines, we generally anticipate lower customer
engagement. In 2020, the economic and social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic masked, in part, the seasonal fluctuations in our operating results as we saw our strongest quarter in the second quarter of 2020. We believe that historical seasonal trends have affected and will continue to affect our quarterly results in the future. However, we cannot predict the ongoing impact, if any, that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on seasonality in future periods as we have begun to see a return to normal seasonality in 2021. We also anticipate that our net revenue will be impacted by the timing and success of our ongoing product expansion initiatives.
In addition, our net revenue is impacted by our marketing strategies, including the timing and amount of paid advertising and promotional activity. For example, prior to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on demand for our products, our deliberate reduction in marketing expenses to focus on the marketing channels we believe to be the most efficient and target consumers that we believe will exhibit higher affinity and retention negatively impacted our net revenue. In addition, in order to manage heightened demand, we made a decision to temporarily cut back on certain existing product offerings and delay certain future new product offerings to meet increased demand relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, which may impact net revenue in future periods. As part of the acceleration of our growth strategy using the proceeds from the Capital Raise (as defined below) that closed in November 2021, we significantly increased marketing expenses toward the end of the fourth quarter of 2021, and plan to significantly increase marketing expenses in 2022.
Credit card charges are recorded in deferred revenue until the criteria for revenue recognition have been met. Because we generally charge credit cards in advance of shipment and, historically, customers have most frequently requested delivery of their meals earlier in the week, our deferred revenue balance at the end of a financial reporting period may fluctuate significantly based on the day of the week on which that period ends. Consequently, large changes in deferred revenue at any particular time are not meaningful indicators of our financial results or future revenue trends.
Cost of Goods Sold, excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, consists of product and fulfillment costs. Product costs include the cost of food, packaging for food that is portioned prior to delivery to customers, labor and related personnel costs incurred to portion food for our meals, inbound shipping costs, and cost of products sold through Blue Apron Wine and Blue Apron Market. Fulfillment costs consist of costs incurred in the shipping and handling of inventory including the shipping costs to our customers, labor and related personnel costs related to receiving, inspecting, warehousing, picking inventory, and preparing customer orders for shipment, and the cost of packaging materials and shipping supplies. As noted above, our business is seasonal in nature and, as a result we anticipate that the third quarter of each year will generally reflect higher levels of cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, due to higher packaging and shipping costs due to warmer temperatures. In the near-term we expect that these expenses will be higher because of the various actions taken to increase capacity in our fulfillment centers, as well as due to higher labor costs, including our recent increase to minimum wage, to help recruit and retain fulfillment center employees, higher food costs, higher fuel and logistics costs, and ongoing investments in product innovation to provide product variety, flexibility, and additional choice for our customers. Over time, we expect such expenses to decrease as a percentage of net revenue as we continue to focus on operational improvements and optimizing our fulfillment center operations.
Marketing
Our marketing expenses consist primarily of costs incurred to acquire new customers, retain existing customers and build our brand awareness through various online and offline paid channels, including digital and social media, television, direct mail, radio and podcasts, email, brand activations, and certain variable and fixed payments to strategic brand partnerships. Also included in marketing expenses are the costs of orders through our customer referral program, in which certain existing customers may invite others to receive a complimentary meal kit, as well as costs paid to third parties to market our products. The cost of the customer referral program is based on our costs incurred for fulfilling a complimentary meal delivery, including product and fulfillment costs.
As part of the acceleration of our growth strategy, we increased marketing expenses toward the end of the fourth quarter of 2021, and plan to significantly increase marketing expenses in 2022, while also continuing to focus on
efficiency and our customer acquisition strategy to target consumers that we believe will exhibit high affinity and retention through marketing channels we believe to be the most efficient. We anticipate that our marketing strategies, including the timing and extent of our marketing investments, will be informed by our strategic priorities, including our ability to accelerate our growth strategy, the sufficiency of our cash resources, the seasonal trends in our business, and the competitive landscape of our market, and will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter and have a significant impact on our quarterly results of operations. We also anticipate that our near-term marketing strategies and investments may continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic or other macro-economic factors, and we may reduce or increase marketing expenditures in future periods to help us manage unforeseen demand to alleviate any future capacity constraints.
Product, Technology, General and Administrative
Product, technology, general and administrative expenses consist of costs related to the development of our products and technology, general and administrative expenses, and overhead expenses, which include: payroll and related expenses for employees involved in the application, production, and maintenance of our platform and other technology infrastructure costs; payroll and related expenses for employees performing corporate and other managerial functions; facilities’ costs such as occupancy and rent costs for our corporate offices and fulfillment centers; and payment processing fees, professional fees, and other general corporate and administrative costs. Over time, we expect such expenses to decrease as a percentage of net revenue reflecting our continued focus on expense management and as we continue to scale our business.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization consists of depreciation expense for our property and equipment and amortization expense for capitalized software development costs.
Other Operating Expense
Other operating expense consists of a non-cash gain, net of a termination fee, on the Fairfield lease termination, impairment losses on long-lived assets, charges for estimated legal settlements, and restructuring costs.
Gain (Loss) on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt relates to the extinguishment loss recorded upon the amendment of the 2020 Term Loan in May 2021.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income and expense consists primarily of interest expense on outstanding borrowings, capital lease financings, and build-to-suit lease financings, partially offset by interest income on cash and cash equivalents balances.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists of the change in fair value of the Blue Torch warrant obligation upon remeasurement as of each reporting period. For additional information on the Blue Torch warrant obligation, see Note 9 and Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Benefit (Provision) for Income Taxes
Our benefit (provision) for income taxes and our effective tax rates are affected by permanent differences between GAAP and statutory tax laws, certain one-time items, and the impact of valuation allowances. For each of the years ending December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our benefit (provision) for income taxes was $(0.0) million, resulting in an effective tax rate of (0.03)%, (0.09)% and (0.07)%, respectively. We continue to maintain a valuation allowance for federal and state tax jurisdictions. Our tax provision results from state taxes in a jurisdiction in which net operating losses were not available to offset our tax obligation.
As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $460.9 million and $197.7 million, respectively. Of the $460.9 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards, $221.5 million was generated before January 1, 2018 and is subject to a 20-year carryforward period. The remaining $239.4 million can be carried forward indefinitely, but is subject to an 80% taxable income limitation in any future taxable year. The pre-2018 federal and all state net operating losses will begin to expire in 2032 and 2033, respectively, if not utilized.
Results of Operations
The following sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of net revenue for each of the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased by $9.8 million, or 2%, to $470.4 million for 2021 from $460.6 million for 2020. The increase in net revenue was primarily due to an increase in Average Order Value and Average Revenue per Customer during 2021 as a result of both the continued execution of our growth strategy, including through product innovation, and the changes in consumer behaviors relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Goods Sold, excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, increased by $18.9 million, or 7%, to $301.8 million for 2021 from $282.9 million for 2020. As a percentage of net revenue, cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, increased to 64.2% for 2021 from 61.4% for 2020. The increase in cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, as a percentage of net revenue, was primarily due to:
● an increase of 190 basis points in food and product packaging costs, driven by price increases, the cost of premium and specialty ingredients related to new product offerings and enhancements to our existing product offerings to provide variety, flexibility, and additional choice for our customers, as well as increased usage of higher-priced pre-packaged produce to facilitate and improve capacity at our fulfillment centers; and
● an increase of 60 basis points in shipping and fulfillment packaging largely due to rate increases and fuel surcharges from shipping carriers, and
● an increase of 30 basis points in labor costs driven by the minimum wage increase for hourly employees in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Marketing
Marketing expenses increased by $22.2 million, or 44%, to $72.1 million for 2021 from $49.9 million for 2020. The increase was seen across various online paid channels, partially offset by decreases in various offline paid channels and our customer referral program. As a percentage of net revenue, marketing expenses increased to 15.3% for 2021 from 10.8% for 2020. This increase, as a percentage of net revenue, included an increase of 480 basis points in online paid channels, partially offset by a decrease of 20 basis points in our customer referral program primarily driven by a decrease in the mix of customer referral orders versus total Orders, and a decrease of 10 basis points in offline paid channels. The significant increase in marketing expenses toward the end of the fourth quarter of 2021 following the Capital Raise (as defined below), as well as plans to significantly increase marketing expenses in 2022, are part of the acceleration of our growth strategy to continue to drive customer acquisition and target new consumers that we believe will exhibit high affinity and retention through marketing channels we believe to be the most efficient.
Product, Technology, General and Administrative
Product, technology, general and administrative expenses increased by $8.2 million, or 6%, to $145.4 million for 2021 from $137.2 million for 2020. This increase was primarily driven by investments to support our business and execute on key business initiatives, including:
● an increase of $5.6 million in corporate overhead and administrative costs, driven by investments in external consultants to support our growth strategy;
● an increase of $2.2 million in personnel costs driven by wage increases and certain headcount increases to support our growth strategy, and an increase in shared-based compensation; and
● an increase of $0.4 million in facilities costs for our corporate offices and fulfillment centers, primarily driven by the costs of administering COVID-19 tests to workers at our fulfillment centers.
As a percentage of net revenue, product, technology, general and administrative expenses increased to 30.9% for 2021 from 29.8% for 2020 primarily due to investments to support our business and execute on key business initiatives.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased by $2.3 million, or 9%, to $22.2 million for 2021 from $24.5 million for 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by impairment charges and write-offs on long-lived assets. As a percentage of net revenue, depreciation and amortization decreased to 4.7% in 2021 from 5.3% in 2020.
Other Operating Expense
Other operating expense for 2021 and 2020 was $0.0 million and $4.6 million, respectively. Other operating expense for 2020 represents charges of $8.4 million related to the Arlington fulfillment center closure announced in February 2020, including $7.6 million of non-cash impairment charges on long-lived assets, $0.4 million of employee-related expenses, primarily consisting of severance payments, and $0.4 million of other exit costs, as well as a $1.1 million charge for an estimated legal settlement, partially offset by a $4.9 million non-cash gain, net of a $1.5 million termination fee, on the Fairfield lease termination in March 2020.
Income (Loss) from Operations
Income (loss) from operations for 2021 and 2020 was $(71.1) million and $(38.6) million, respectively. This change was due to an increase in operating expenses of $42.3 million, which was partially offset by an increase in net revenue of $9.8 million. As a percentage of net revenue, income (loss) from operations was (15.1)% and (8.4)% for 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase was primarily driven by increases as a percentage of net revenue in marketing expenses, cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, and product, technology, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by decreases as a percentage of net revenue in other operating expense and depreciation and amortization, for the reasons set forth above.
Gain (Loss) on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt for 2021 and 2020 was $(4.1) million and $0.0 million, respectively. This change was due to the extinguishment loss recorded upon the amendment of the 2020 Term Loan in May 2021.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income (expense), net for 2021 and 2020 was $(8.1) million and $(7.5) million, respectively. This change was primarily due to increased interest expense incurred on outstanding borrowings of $1.1 million, as well as decreased interest income on cash and cash equivalents of $0.1 million, partially offset by a decrease of $0.6 million associated with build-to-suit lease financings as a result of the Fairfield lease termination.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net for 2021 and 2020 was $(5.0) million and $0.0 million, respectively. This change consists of the change in fair value of the Blue Torch warrant obligation, issued in May 2021 in conjunction with the amendment of the 2020 Term Loan, upon remeasurement as of each reporting period.
Benefit (Provision) for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes recorded in 2021 and 2020 reflects state income taxes in a jurisdiction in which net operating losses were not available to offset our tax obligations.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased by $5.7 million, or 1%, to $460.6 million for 2020 from $454.9 million for 2019. The increase in net revenue was primarily due to an increase in Orders per Customer and Average Order Value during the year ended December 31, 2020 as customers chose to order more frequently and more meals per order both as a result of the changes in consumer behaviors relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the continued execution of our growth strategy, including through product innovation.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Goods Sold, excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, increased by $3.8 million, or 1%, to $282.9 million for 2020 from $279.1 million for 2019. As a percentage of net revenue, cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, was 61.4% for 2020 and 2019.
Marketing
Marketing expenses increased by $1.8 million, or 4%, to $49.9 million for 2020 from $48.1 million for 2019. The increase was seen across various offline and online paid channels, partially offset by a decrease in our customer referral program. As a percentage of net revenue, marketing expenses increased to 10.8% for 2020 from 10.6% for 2019. This increase, as a percentage of net revenue, included an increase of 30 basis points in online paid channels, an increase of 30 basis points in offline paid channels, partially offset by a decrease of 40 basis points in our customer referral program primarily driven by a decrease in the mix of customer referral orders versus total Orders.
Product, Technology, General and Administrative
Product, technology, general and administrative expenses decreased by $7.7 million, or 5%, to $137.2 million for 2020 from $144.9 million for 2019. This decrease was primarily due to increased focus on expense management, including:
● a decrease of $5.2 million in corporate overhead and administrative costs,
● a decrease of $3.7 million in facilities costs for our corporate offices and fulfillment centers, including occupancy and rent; partially offset by
● an increase of $1.4 million in personnel costs primarily driven by an increase in bonuses.
As a percentage of net revenue, product, technology, general and administrative expenses decreased to 29.8% for 2020 from 31.9% for 2019 primarily due to continued focus on expense management and optimization of our cost structure.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased by $6.7 million, or 21%, to $24.5 million for 2020 from $31.2 million for 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by impairment charges and write-offs on long-lived assets. As a percentage of net revenue, depreciation and amortization decreased to 5.3% in 2020 from 6.9% in 2019.
Other Operating Expense
Other operating expense for 2020 and 2019 was $4.6 million and $3.6 million, respectively. Other operating expense for 2020 represents charges of $8.4 million related to the Arlington fulfillment center closure announced in February 2020, including $7.6 million of non-cash impairment charges on long-lived assets, $0.4 million of employee-related expenses, primarily consisting of severance payments, and $0.4 million of other exit costs, as well as a $1.1 million charge for an estimated legal settlement, partially offset by a $4.9 million non-cash gain, net of a $1.5 million termination fee, on the Fairfield lease termination in March 2020. Other operating expense for 2019 includes a $2.1 million charge related to an estimated legal settlement, $1.3 million of non-cash impairment charges on long-lived assets primarily related to the reprioritization of initiatives to support our growth strategy, and $0.2 million of employee-related expenses consisting of severance payments relating to the Arlington fulfillment center downsizing announced in January 2019.
Income (Loss) from Operations
Income (loss) from operations for 2020 and 2019 was $(38.6) million and $(52.1) million, respectively. This improvement was due to a decrease in operating expenses of $7.8 million and an increase in net revenue of $5.7 million. As a percentage of net revenue, income (loss) from operations was (8.4)% and (11.5)% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. This decrease was primarily driven by decreases as a percentage of net revenue in product, technology, general and administrative expenses and depreciation and amortization, partially offset by an increase in other operating expense and marketing expenses as a percentage of net revenue for the reasons set forth above.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income (expense), net for 2020 and 2019 was $(7.5) million and $(8.9) million, respectively. This decrease in interest income (expense), net was primarily due to a decrease of $1.8 million associated with build-to-suit lease financings as a result of the Fairfield lease termination and a decrease of $1.1 million in interest expense incurred on outstanding borrowings under our senior secured loan and terminated revolving credit facility, partially offset by decreased interest income on cash and cash equivalents of $1.5 million.
Benefit (Provision) for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes recorded in 2020 and 2019 reflects state income taxes in a jurisdiction in which net operating losses were not available to offset our tax obligations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To provide additional information regarding our financial results, we monitor and have presented within this Annual Report on Form 10-K adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow, which are non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, and are not necessarily comparable to similarly-titled measures presented by other companies.
We define adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest income (expense), net, other operating expense, gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt, other income (expense), net, benefit (provision) for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, and share-based compensation expense. We have presented adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans and make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of certain items in calculating adjusted EBITDA can produce a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business.
We use adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our operating performance and trends and make planning decisions. We believe adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allowing for greater transparency with respect to key financial metrics used by our management in its financial and operational decision-making.
Our adjusted EBITDA is not prepared in accordance with GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of adjusted EBITDA rather than net income (loss), which is the most directly comparable GAAP equivalent. Some of these limitations are:
● adjusted EBITDA excludes share-based compensation expense, as share-based compensation expense has recently been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
● adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization expense and, although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated may have to be replaced in the future;
● adjusted EBITDA excludes other operating expense, as other operating expense represents non-cash impairment charges on long-lived assets, a non-cash gain, net of a termination fee, on a lease termination, charges for estimated legal settlements, and restructuring costs;
● adjusted EBITDA excludes loss on extinguishment of debt as this represents a non-cash charge;
● adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest, which reduces cash available to us;
● adjusted EBITDA does not reflect other (income) expense, net as this represents changes in the fair value of the Blue Torch warrant obligation as of each reporting period;
● adjusted EBITDA does not reflect income tax payments that reduce cash available to us; and
● other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
We define free cash flow as net cash from (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment. We have presented free cash flow in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is used by our management and board of directors as an indicator of the amount of cash we generate or use and to evaluate our ability to satisfy
current and future obligations and to fund future business opportunities. Accordingly, we believe that free cash flow provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our ability to satisfy our financial obligations and pursue business opportunities, and allowing for greater transparency with respect to a key financial metric used by our management in their financial and operational decision-making.
Our free cash flow is not prepared in accordance with GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of free cash flow rather than net cash from (used in) operating activities, which is the most directly comparable GAAP equivalent. Some of these limitations are:
● free cash flow is not a measure of cash available for discretionary expenditures since we have certain non-discretionary obligations such as debt repayments or capital lease obligations that are not deducted from the measure; and
● other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate free cash flow differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, we consider, and you should consider, adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow together with other financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. The following tables present a reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, for each of the periods presented:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table shows our cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, net, restricted cash, and working capital as of the dates indicated:
(1) We define working capital as the difference between our current assets (excluding cash and cash equivalents) and current liabilities (excluding the current portion of long-term debt and the current portion of the Blue Torch warrant obligation).
Total outstanding debt, net of debt issuance costs, was $29.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and $32.2 million as of December 31, 2020. Issued letters of credit outstanding were $1.4 million and $1.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Our cash requirements are principally for working capital and capital expenditures to support our business, including investments at our fulfillment centers, investment in marketing, and investments in sustainability efforts to support the acceleration of our growth strategy. Our primary sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from the operations of our business, and cash generated through financing activities, as discussed below.
Based on the current facts and circumstances, including the additional financial flexibility provided by the Capital Raise that closed on November 4, 2021, and discussed further in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that we can effectively manage liquidity and subscription count in order to remain in compliance with the financial covenants under our 2020 Term Loan and we believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements and the availability and accessibility to additional funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to remain compliant with the covenants of our 2020 Term Loan and those described in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part II, Item 1A below.
November 2021 Capital Raise
On September 15, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with RJB Partners LLC, or RJB, an affiliate of Joseph N. Sanberg, one of our existing stockholders and founding investors, and Matthew B. Salzberg, our co-founder, relating to an equity capital raise for an aggregate of $78.0 million of gross proceeds, without giving effect to the receipt of any exercise price of any warrants issued in the transactions. We refer to this series of related transactions as the “Capital Raise”. The Purchase Agreement provided that, among other things:
● We would conduct a rights offering (the “Rights Offering”), pursuant to which we distributed, at no charge, to the holders of record of our outstanding shares of Class A common stock and certain outstanding warrants to purchase shares of Class A common stock held by our lenders (the “Eligible Securityholders”) one non-transferable subscription right (each, a “Subscription Right” and collectively, the “Subscription Rights”) for each share of Class A common stock held or, in the case of the holders of the applicable outstanding warrants, each share of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of such warrants. Each Subscription Right provided the Eligible Securityholder the right to purchase one unit consisting of (i) a fraction of (the “Applicable Fraction”) of one share of Class A common stock, (ii) one warrant to purchase the Applicable Fraction of 0.8 of one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $15.00 per share, (iii) one warrant to purchase the Applicable Fraction of 0.4 of one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $18.00 per share, and (iv) one warrant to purchase the Applicable Fraction of 0.2 of one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $20.00 per share. The Applicable Fraction was equal to 0.185055707113895 based upon the shares held (or issuable upon exercise of the applicable outstanding warrants) by the Eligible Securityholders as of the record date. The subscription price for each unit was equal to $1.8505 (or $10.00
multiplied by the Applicable Fraction). 6,671,271 subscription rights were subscribed for in the rights offering, which closed on November 4, 2021, resulting in the issuance of (i) 1,234,187 shares of Class A common stock, (ii) warrants to purchase 987,645.417802738 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $15.00 per share, (iii) warrants to purchase 493,822.7089013690 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $18.00 per share, and (iv) warrants to purchase 246,911.3544506840 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $20.00 per share.
● RJB would purchase in a private placement (the “Backstop Private Placement”) the number of shares of Class A common stock and warrants that remained unsubscribed at the expiration of the Rights Offering subscription period for an aggregate purchase price equal to $45.0 million less the aggregate purchase price received from purchasers of units in the Rights Offering. On November 4, 2021, RJB purchased $32.7 million of securities in the Backstop Private Placement and we issued (i) 3,265,813 shares of Class A common stock, (ii) warrants to purchase 2,612,354.58219726 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $15.00 per share, (iii) warrants to purchase 1,306,177.291098630 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $18.00 per share, and (iv) warrants to purchase 653,088.645549316 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $20.00 per share.
● RJB would purchase, in a private placement, or the Concurrent Private Placement, on the same terms and concurrently with the consummation of the Backstop Private Placement and for an aggregate purchase price of $30.0 million, (i) 3,000,000 shares of Class A common stock, (ii) warrants to purchase 2,400,000 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $15.00 per share, (iii) warrants to purchase 1,200,000 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $18.00 per share, and (iv) warrants to purchase 600,000 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $20.00 per share. The Concurrent Private Placement closed on November 4, 2021.
● Mr. M. Salzberg would purchase, on the same terms as the Backstop Private Placement and the Concurrent Private Placement and for an aggregate purchase price of $3.0 million, (i) 300,000 shares of Class A common stock, (ii) warrants to purchase 240,000 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $15.00 per share, (iii) warrants to purchase 120,000 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $18.00 per share, and (iv) warrants to purchase 60,000 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $20.00 per share, resulting in $2.8 million of proceeds, net of issuance costs, without giving effect to the receipt of any exercise price of any warrants issued in the transactions. The Salzberg Private Placement closed on September 15, 2021.
● The Class B Automatic Conversion would occur. For additional information on the Class B Automatic Conversion, see Note 11 Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit) to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Under the Purchase Agreement, RJB agreed to a customary standstill for a period of three years, as well as provisions requiring RJB to vote all our securities it beneficially owns, and to cause our securities beneficially owned by Mr. Sanberg and certain of its or his respective affiliates to be voted, in each case in excess of 19.9% of the total voting power of our outstanding capital stock in the aggregate, in proportion to and in accordance with the vote of all of our stockholders.
As contemplated by the Purchase Agreement, on November 4, 2021, we entered into a registration rights agreement with RJB and Mr. Salzberg to provide them with customary registration rights with respect to the securities purchased in the private placements and other shares of our Class A common stock held by RJB and certain of its affiliates and Mr. Salzberg. Further, the Purchase Agreement also requires our board of directors (the “Board”) to adopt specified environmental, social, and corporate governance measures, including the following: (i) using reasonable best efforts to conduct and complete a greenhouse gas emissions inventory survey by December 31, 2021 and to become “carbon neutral” in specified respects from and after March 31, 2022; (ii) establishing a minimum wage of at least $15.00 per hour to all hourly employees and adopting a policy to pay hourly employees wages at least equal to those offered by comparable companies; and (iii) using reasonable best efforts to cause our nominees for election to the Board at the 2022 annual stockholders meeting (the “2022 Annual Meeting”) to be composed of individuals at least half of whom are women and at least half of whom are persons of color and, if at least half the directors are not women or if at least half of
the directors are not persons of color immediately after the 2022 Annual Meeting, to increase the size of the Board and appoint new directors, or obtain resignations from then-current directors, such that at least half of the directors are women and at least half of the directors are persons of color. We have engaged a national search firm to assist us in recruiting new Board members. We have further agreed, at the 2022 Annual Meeting, to propose amendments to our restated certificate of incorporation, as amended (the “Charter”), to: (i) permit stockholders representing at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the voting power of our outstanding capital stock to call a special meeting of stockholders and (ii) eliminate the requirement that the affirmative vote of stockholders representing at least sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66-2/3%) of the voting power of our outstanding capital stock be required to (x) remove a director and (y) amend our Charter or our bylaws, subject to certain exceptions. In connection with the closing of the Capital Raise, on November 4, 2021, we also amended our bylaws to adopt a “proxy access” provision.
Each warrant issued in the Salzberg Private Placement, the Rights Offering, Backstop Private Placement and Concurrent Private Placement has a term of seven years from the date of issuance. Each such warrant may only be exercised for cash, except in connection with certain fundamental transactions, and no fractional shares will be issued upon exercise of the warrants. The warrants are non-transferable, except in limited circumstances, and have not been listed or otherwise trade on any stock exchange. The number of shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants and the applicable exercise prices is subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of certain events, including (i) dividends or distributions of shares of our Class A common stock, (ii) subdivisions, combinations and certain reclassifications of shares of our Class A common stock, (iii) certain additional issuances of Class A common stock or securities exercisable for or convertible into shares of Class A common stock at a price per share less than the market price for our Class A common stock, (iv) distributions of assets other than Class A common stock, or (v) certain repurchases made by us.
We plan to use the net proceeds of the Capital Raise for general corporate purposes, primarily consisting of:
● Acceleration and expansion of our growth strategy, with an expected focus on:
o Opening up channels to appeal to new audiences and segments through new products and product categories;
o Product innovation to increase variety, flexibility, and choice; and
o Increasing investments in marketing and technology infrastructure to build on improvements over the past year to drive engagement with our current customers and attract new ones.
● Acceleration of certain of our environmental and sustainability initiatives, including a plan to accelerate our path to carbon neutrality by March 31, 2022, initially through carbon offsets, and thereafter supplement or replace the offsets by systematic reduction of carbon use in packaging, logistics, sourcing, and production.
● Increased investments in our hourly employees to attract, retain and engage a talented, diverse workforce, including raising the base hourly compensation rate to at least $18 per hour for employees in good standing in our existing offices and fulfillment centers (which we implemented in October 2021) as well as enhancing our employee benefits and programs.
We may also use up to $5.0 million of such proceeds, at our sole discretion, to voluntarily repay any of our existing indebtedness under the 2020 Term Loan.
February 2022 Private Placement
On February 14, 2022, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “February Purchase Agreement”) with RJB, under which we agreed to issue and sell to RJB in a private placement (the “Private Placement”), for an aggregate purchase price of $5.0 million (or $14.00 per unit), 357,143 units each consisting of (i) 1 share of Class A common stock, (ii) 1 warrant to purchase 0.8 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $15.00 per share, (iii) 1 warrant to purchase 0.4 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $18.00 per share and (iv) 1 warrant to purchase 0.2 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $20.00 per share. In the aggregate, RJB received (i) 357,143 shares of Class A common stock, (ii) warrants to purchase 285,714 shares of Class A common stock at an
exercise price of $15.00 per share, (iii) warrants to purchase 142,857 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $18.00 per share, and (iv) warrants to purchase 71,429 shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $20.00 per share, resulting in approximately $4.8 million of proceeds, net of issuance costs, without giving effect to the receipt of any exercise price of any warrants issued in the transactions. The Private Placement closed on February 14, 2022. We intend to use the net proceeds of the Private Placement for working capital and general corporate purposes, including to continue to accelerate our growth strategy.
Underwritten public offerings
On April 29, 2020, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), or the 2020 Shelf, to register for sale from time to time up to $75.0 million of Class A common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and/or warrants in one or more offerings, which became effective on July 23, 2020.
On August 10, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 4,000,000 shares of our Class A common stock under the 2020 Shelf, resulting in $32.9 million of proceeds, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
On June 18, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering (the “June 2021 offering”) of 5,411,900 shares of our Class A common stock, including the 705,900 shares issuable upon the underwriter’s exercise of its option to purchase additional shares, under the 2020 Shelf, resulting in $21.1 million of proceeds, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
Debt financing transactions
On October 16, 2020 (the “effective date”), we entered into a financing agreement which provided for the 2020 Term Loan in the aggregate principal amount of $35.0 million and maturing in March 2023. The proceeds of the 2020 Term Loan were used, together with cash on hand, to repay in full the outstanding indebtedness under the revolving credit facility and to pay fees and expenses in connection with the transactions contemplated by the 2020 Term Loan. We terminated the revolving credit facility effective as of the closing of the 2020 Term Loan.
On May 5, 2021, we amended the financing agreement relating to the 2020 Term Loan (the “Amendment”), which modified certain provisions of the financing agreement, as well as provided for a $5.0 million term loan, that was funded into escrow (the “2021 Term Loan”). The 2021 Term Loan bore interest at a rate equal to LIBOR (subject to a 1.50% floor) plus 10.00% per annum and matured at the same time as the 2020 Term Loan. The Amendment also increased the interest rate margin on the 2020 Term Loan by 1.00% per annum. Pursuant to the Amendment, the net proceeds of the June 2021 offering were not subject to the mandatory prepayment provision of the 2020 Term Loan. However, the Amendment required that the 2021 Term Loan be released in full from escrow to the lenders upon completion of the June 2021 offering.
As of December 31, 2021 the 2020 Term Loan bore interest at a rate equal to LIBOR (subject to a 1.50% floor) plus 9.00% per annum. The principal amount of the 2020 Term Loan is repayable in equal quarterly installments of $875,000 through December 31, 2022, with the remaining unpaid principal amount of the 2020 Term Loan repayable on March 31, 2023.
The 2020 Term Loan contains restrictive covenants, financial covenants, and affirmative and financial reporting covenants restricting our and our subsidiaries’ activities. As of December 31, 2021, the financial covenants in the 2020 Term Loan include a requirement to maintain a minimum aggregate liquidity balance of $20.0 million at all times and a minimum subscription count (defined in the 2020 Term Loan as the number of all active customers on our internal account list) of 300,000 on any determination date occurring between the effective date and December 31, 2021, and 320,000 on any determination date occurring thereafter. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all of the covenants under the 2020 Term Loan.
Cash Flows
The following table presents the major components of net cash flows from and used in operating, investing, and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Net Cash from (used in) Operating Activities
Net cash from (used in) operating activities consists of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities.
In 2021, net cash from (used in) operating activities was $(49.0) million and consisted of net income (loss) of $(88.4) million, non-cash items of $41.1 million, and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $(1.7) million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by decreases in accrued expenses and other current liabilities and other noncurrent assets and liabilities of $12.0 million and increases in inventories and receivables of $6.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $11.2 million and increases in accounts payable and deferred revenue of $6.0 million.
In 2020, net cash from (used in) operating activities was $(5.4) million and consisted of net income (loss) of $(46.2) million, primarily non-cash items of $36.3 million, and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $4.5 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by increases in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, deferred revenue, and other noncurrent assets and liabilities of $11.2 million and decreases in inventory and receivables of $8.2 million, partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $14.4 million and a decrease in accounts payable of $0.5 million.
In 2019, net cash from (used in) operating activities was $(16.5) million and consisted of net income (loss) of $(61.1) million, non-cash items of $42.2 million and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $2.5 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by decreases in inventory, prepaid expenses and other current assets, and receivables of $11.9 million and an increase in accounts payable of $1.7 million, partially offset by decreases in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, deferred revenue, and other noncurrent assets and liabilities of $11.2 million.
Net Cash from (used in) Investing Activities
Net cash from (used in) investing activities primarily relates to capital expenditures to support our business initiatives and drive efficiency in fulfillment center operations and investment in software development.
In 2021, net cash from (used in) investing activities was $(3.7) million and consisted primarily of $(5.1) million for purchases of property and equipment, of which approximately $(2.7) million relates to capitalized software costs, to support business initiatives and ongoing product expansion, partially offset by $1.4 million of proceeds from the sales of fixed assets. In the future we expect to incur capital expenditures primarily related to the acceleration and execution of our growth strategy and to further optimize and drive efficiency in our operations and capitalized software costs. As of December 31, 2021, our projected capital expenditures are expected to amount to approximately $8.0 million to $10.0 million in the aggregate for 2022. The timing and amount of our projected expenditures is dependent upon a number of
factors, including our ability to successfully execute on our accelerated growth strategy, and may vary significantly from our estimates.
In 2020, net cash from (used in) investing activities was $(5.8) million and consisted primarily of $(6.0) million for purchases of property and equipment, of which approximately $(2.9) million relates to capitalized software costs, to support business initiatives and ongoing product expansion. Cash paid for capital expenditures in 2020 was primarily driven by acquisition of fixed assets and development of software to support business initiatives and ongoing product expansion.
In 2019, net cash from (used in) investing activities was $(4.5) million and consisted primarily of $(5.2) million for purchases of property and equipment, of which approximately $(2.6) million relates to capitalized software costs, partially offset by $0.7 million of proceeds from the sale of fixed assets.
Net Cash from (used in) Financing Activities
Net cash from (used in) financing activities primarily relates to proceeds from issuances of Class A common stock, net borrowings and repayments of debt, payments of debt issuance costs, proceeds from exercises of stock options, and principal payments on capital lease obligations.
In 2021, net cash from (used in) financing activities was $90.4 million and consisted primarily of $70.3 million of proceeds from the November 2021 Capital Raise, net of issuance costs, $21.1 million of proceeds the public offering of Class A common stock, net of offering costs, $2.8 million of proceeds from the Salzberg Private Placement, net of issuance costs, and the deemed receipt of funds held in escrow relating to the Amendment, partially offset by the release back to the lenders of the funds held in escrow relating to the Amendment, repayments of debt, payments of debt issuance costs, and principal payments on capital lease obligations.
In 2020, net cash from (used in) financing activities was $10.5 million and consisted primarily of $33.0 million of proceeds from our senior secured term loan, net of debt issuance costs, $32.9 million of proceeds from the public offering of Class A common stock, net of offering costs, and $0.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $55.6 million of repayments of all outstanding indebtedness under our revolving credit facility, and principal payments on capital lease obligations. The proceeds of the senior secured term loan were used, together with cash on hand, to repay in full all outstanding indebtedness under the revolving credit facility and to pay fees and expenses in connection with the transactions contemplated by the senior secured term loan. See “Senior Secured Term Loan” below for further discussion.
In 2019, net cash from (used in) financing activities was $(29.9) million and consisted primarily of a $(28.9) million repayment of debt under our revolving credit facility, $(0.8) million in payments of debt issuance costs, and $(0.3) million in principal payments on capital lease obligations, slightly offset by proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as net cash from (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment.
Our free cash flow was $(54.0) million, $(11.4) million, and $(21.7) million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. In 2021, free cash flow consisted of $(49.0) million of net cash from (used in) operating activities and $(5.1) million for purchases of property and equipment, of which approximately $(2.7) million relates to capitalized software costs.In 2020, free cash flow consisted of $(5.4) million of net cash from (used in) operating activities and $(6.0) million for purchases of property and equipment, of which approximately $(2.9) million relates to capitalized software costs. In 2019, free cash flow consisted of $(16.5) million of net cash from (used in) operating activities and $(5.2) million for purchases of property and equipment, of which approximately $(2.6) million relates to capitalized software costs. Please see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of the use of non-
GAAP financial measures and for a reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash from (used in) operating activities, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Contractual Obligations
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, the remaining principal payments required under our 2020 Term loan are $30.6 million, of which $3.5 million is payable within 12 months, and the remaining interest payments required under our 2020 Term Loan are $5.0 million, of which $3.7 million is payable within 12 months. Estimated interest payments are subject to change due to the variable nature of the interest rates under our 2020 Term Loan as described in “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Debt financing transactions” above.
Leases
We lease fulfillment centers and office space under non-cancelable operating lease arrangements that expire on various dates through 2027, including non-cancelable operating leases for office space in New York City and Austin, Texas, currently occupied fulfillment centers in Linden, New Jersey and Richmond, California, and a previously occupied fulfillment center in Arlington, Texas and Jersey City, New Jersey. We also have various non-cancelable operating leases for certain equipment. As of December 31, 2021, we had lease payment obligations of $56.4 million, of which $16.1 million is payable within 12 months.
We have also entered into agreements to sublease portions of our corporate offices and fulfillment centers. The subleases continue through the duration of our existing leases for each location and entitle us to future minimum sublease payments of approximately $7.7 million as of December 31, 2021, of which $3.5 million is receivable within 12 months.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities that are reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying disclosures. We believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements because they involve the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. Accordingly, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information about these critical accounting policies, as well as a description of our other accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We primarily generate revenue from the sale of our products to customers, including meals, wine and kitchen tools. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we derived substantially all of our Net revenue from sales of our meals.
Our revenue contracts represent a single performance obligation to sell our products to our customers. We recognize revenue upon transfer of control, including passage of title to the customer and transfer of risk of loss related to the products, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to. In general, we charge credit cards in advance of shipment. Transfer of control generally passes upon delivery to the customer. Sales taxes imposed on our sales are presented on a net basis in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, and therefore do not impact Net revenue or Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization.
We deduct promotional discounts, actual customer credits and refunds as well as credits and refunds expected to be issued to determine Net revenue. Customers who receive a damaged meal or wine order or are dissatisfied with an
order and contact us within seven days of receipt of the order may receive a full or partial refund, full or partial credit against future purchase, or replacement, at our sole discretion. Credits only remain available for customers who maintain a valid account with us. Customers who return an unused, undamaged Blue Apron Market product within 30 days of receipt receive a full refund. We estimate and record expected credits and refunds based on prior history, recent trends, and projections for credits and refunds on sales in the current period. Reserves for credits and refunds are included within Accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We periodically enter into agreements with third parties to market our products. We record revenue from such arrangements at the gross amount as we are the principal in these arrangements as we are primarily responsible for fulfilling the goods to customers, provide primary customer service for such products sold on its website, have latitude in establishing price and selecting such products sold on our website, and maintain inventory risk.
We have two types of contractual liabilities: (i) cash collections from our customers prior to delivery of products purchased, which are included in Deferred revenue on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and are recognized as revenue upon transfer of control of our products, and (ii) unredeemed gift cards and other prepaid orders, which are included in Deferred revenue on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and are recognized as revenue when gift cards are redeemed and the products are delivered. Certain gift cards are not expected to be redeemed, also known as breakage, and are recognized as revenue over the expected redemption period, subject to requirements to remit balances to governmental agencies.
We adopted ASU 2014-09 using a modified retrospective approach and recognized $0.3 million cumulative-effect adjustment to reduce Accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2019. The cumulative-effect adjustment to Accumulated deficit was due to breakage of gift cards to the extent there is no requirement for remitting balances to governmental agencies. Under the modified retrospective approach, prior period balances are not retrospectively adjusted.
Inventories, Net
Inventories, net consist primarily of bulk and prepped food, products available for resale, packaging, containers, and wine products which are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventory costs consist of product costs, inbound shipping and handling costs, and applicable direct labor costs. Inventories are valued on a first-in, first-out cost basis. We record an inventory valuation reserve when applicable, based on currently available information, about the likely method of disposition, such as through sales to individual customers, donations or liquidations, and expected recoverable values of each inventory category. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, the inventory valuation reserve was $0.4 million, $0.3 million, and $1.5 million, respectively.
Leases
We categorize lease agreements at their inception as either operating or capital leases. For operating leases, we recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. For capital leases, we record a leased asset with a corresponding liability. Payments are recorded as reductions to the liability with an interest charge recorded based on the remaining liability.
We review leases for which we are involved in construction to determine if we are considered to be the owner for accounting purposes during the construction period. If we are determined to be the owner for accounting purposes, we follow build-to-suit accounting and capitalize the fair value of the building and direct construction costs incurred along with a corresponding facility financing liability. At the end of the construction period we assess whether these arrangements qualify for sales recognition under sale-leaseback accounting guidance. If upon completion of construction, the arrangement does not meet the sale-leaseback criteria, we will continue to be considered the owner of the building for accounting purposes.
Upon substantial completion of the construction phase of the facilities we lease in Linden and Fairfield in June 2017 and December 2017, respectively, we performed a sale-leaseback analysis pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 840 - Leases, to determine the appropriateness of removing the previously capitalized assets from the consolidated balance sheets. We concluded that components of “continuing involvement” were evident as a result of
this analysis, thereby failing the sale-leaseback tests which precludes the derecognition of the related assets from the consolidated balance sheets. In conjunction with the leases, we also recorded a facility financing obligation equal to the fair market value of the assets received from the landlord. At the end of the lease terms, including exercise of any renewal options, the difference between the remaining facility financing obligation and the net carrying value of the fixed assets will be recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on sale of the properties. We do not report rent expense for the leases. Rather, rental payments under the leases are recognized as a reduction of the financing obligation and interest expense and the associated assets capitalized throughout the construction projects are depreciated over the determined useful life.
In March 2020, we terminated the lease for our Fairfield facility. Accordingly, we derecognized the net carrying value of the build-to-suit assets and liabilities and the deferred rent balance. As a result, we recorded a non-cash gain of $4.9 million, net of the lease termination fee, in Other operating expense during the first quarter of 2020. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
Share-Based Payments
We recognize share-based compensation for share-based awards, including stock options and restricted stock units, based on the estimated fair value of the awards, on a straight-line basis over the period in which the employee is required to provide services, generally up to four years.
In February 2021, we granted 1,190,250 shares of performance-based restricted stock units for our Class A common stock to certain employees, including our executive officers. Such units are subject to vesting conditions that are tied to the achievement of certain stock price targets and time-based requirements beginning February 25, 2021 and continuing through February 25, 2024. As this grant was determined to include a market condition, we utilized the Monte Carlo simulation valuation model to value the grant. The total grant date fair value was $7.7 million, and will be recognized on a straight-line basis over the derived service periods, which range from 0.99 to 2.99 years, as determined by the Monte Carlo simulation valuation model.
In 2020, we did not grant any performance stock units.
In 2019, we granted 54,740 performance stock units of our Class A common stock to certain employees, including our executive officers. Such units were subject to vesting conditions that were tied to the achievement of certain financial targets through December 31, 2019. A portion of the financial target options would have, subject to certain conditions, accelerated in connection with a change in control event based on the time that had elapsed from the commencement of the applicable measurement period through the date of such change in control. As of December 31, 2019, the financial targets were not achieved and the awards were forfeited.
Warrant Obligation
The Blue Torch warrant obligation issued in conjunction with the Amendment, as discussed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Debt financing transactions” above, is accounted for in accordance with ASC 815-40, Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, as a liability recognized at fair value, and is remeasured as of each balance sheet date with changes in fair value recorded in Other income (expense), net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The amount of each warrant to be issued under the obligation set forth in the financing agreement is based upon 0.50% of the then-outstanding shares of our common stock on a fully-diluted basis on the first day of each quarter beginning on or after July 1, 2021, so long as the 2020 Term Loan remains outstanding. As such, the fair value of the Blue Torch warrant obligation was calculated using the estimated amount of warrants to be issued over the life of the financing agreement multiplied by the closing price of our stock as of the balance sheet date, less $0.01 per share to represent each warrant’s exercise price. The estimated amount of shares to be issued was derived from our estimate of shares of our common stock on a fully-diluted basis over the life of the financing agreement.
In 2021, we recorded a non-cash loss in Other income (expense) of $(5.0) million in our Statement of Operations resulting from the change in the fair value of the Blue Torch warrant obligation upon remeasurement as of each reporting period. As of December 31, 2021, warrants issued under the Blue Torch warrant obligation to purchase 264,218 shares of
Class A common stock were unexercised. In January 2022, all warrants that had been issued under the Blue Torch warrant obligation were exercised in full, resulting in the issuance of 488,055 shares of Class A common stock.
Recoverability of Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist of property and equipment and capitalized software development costs. We periodically evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the remaining estimated useful life of long-lived assets may warrant revision or that the remaining balance may not be recoverable. These factors may include a significant deterioration of operating results, changes in business plans, or changes in anticipated cash flows. Recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset group to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition, where applicable. If future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value, an impairment is recognized in earnings to the extent that the carrying value exceeds fair value. In determining future cash flows, we use industry accepted valuation models and engage third party valuation specialists, as needed. When multiple valuation methodologies are used, the results are weighted appropriately. In addition to the recoverability assessment, we routinely review the remaining estimated useful lives of our long-lived assets. If we reduce the estimated useful life assumption for any asset, the remaining balance would be depreciated over the revised estimated useful life.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, there were no impairments of long-lived assets. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairment charges of $7.6 million in Other operating expense on long-lived assets related to our Arlington fulfillment center. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded impairment charges of $1.3 million in Other operating expense on long-lived assets primarily related to the reprioritization of initiatives to support our growth strategy. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
Contingencies
We record accruals for loss contingencies when it is probable that a liability will be incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. If the reasonable estimate of the loss is a range and no amount within the range is a better estimate, the minimum amount of the range is recorded as a liability. If a probable loss is not reasonably estimable, or we determine that a loss is reasonably possible, but not probable, we disclose the matter, and the amount or range of the possible losses, if estimable, in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we had accruals of $0.0 million, $1.1 million, and $2.1 million in Other operating expense for estimated legal settlements for which we concluded the loss was probable and reasonably possible.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an "emerging growth company," as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (the “JOBS Act”), and may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We may take advantage of these exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and as a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We may take advantage of these exemptions up until December 31, 2022 (the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the IPO), or such earlier time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We would cease to be an emerging growth company if we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue, we have more than $700.0 million in market value of our stock held by non-affiliates, or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt securities over a three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information about recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.