Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (this MD&A) together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This MD&A contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties, such as those set forth in the sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K captioned “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors” and elsewhere. As a result, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage, research and development biotechnology company focused on developing novel immunotherapeutic candidates for the treatment of different forms of cancer. We have developed two versatile and enabling platform technologies for rational design of precision immune modulatory drugs. Our lead clinical candidate, APVO436, and preclinical candidates, ALG.APV-527 and APVO603, were developed using our ADAPTIR™ modular protein technology platform. Our preclinical candidate APVO442 was developed using our ADAPTIR-FLEX™ modular protein technology platform.
The versatile and robust ADAPTIR and ADAPTIR-FLEX platforms are designed to generate monospecific, bispecific, and multi-specific antibody candidates that are capable of enhancing the human immune system against cancer cells. ADAPTIR and ADAPTIR-FLEX are both modular platforms, which gives us the flexibility to generate immunotherapeutic candidates with a variety of mechanisms of action. This flexibility in design allows us to potentially generate novel therapeutic candidates that may provide the foundation for the establishment of effective strategies against difficult to treat, as well as advanced forms of cancer. We have successfully designed and constructed numerous investigational-stage prototype product candidates based on our ADAPTIR platform. The ADAPTIR platform technology is designed to generate monospecific and bispecific immunotherapeutic proteins that specifically bind to one or more targets, for example, bispecific therapeutic molecules, which may have structural and functional advantages over monoclonal antibodies. The structural differences of ADAPTIR molecules over monoclonal antibodies allow for the development of ADAPTIR immunotherapeutics that are designed to engage immune effector cells and disease targets in a novel manner to produce unique signaling responses and ultimately kill tumors or modulate the immune system to kill tumors.
We are skilled at candidate generation, validation, and subsequent preclinical and clinical development using the ADAPTIR platform and have added the ADAPTIR-FLEX platform to generate multi-specific candidates or other candidates to our platform capabilities. We have developed preclinical candidate based on the ADAPTIR-FLEX platform which is advancing in our pipeline. We are developing our ADAPTIR and ADAPTIR-FLEX molecules by way of our protein engineering, preclinical development, process development, and clinical development capabilities.
Recent Developments
Announced results from the Phase 1b dose escalation trial evaluating lead drug candidate, APVO436, for the treatment of AML and MDS. Results showed:
•
APVO436 exhibited a favorable safety profile with acceptable tolerability and generally manageable drug-related adverse events.
•
Promising clinical activity was observed in 11 of 40 patients (27.5%) evaluable for efficacy. This included two complete remissions in patients with AML and three complete marrow responses in patients with MDS.
Initiated the dose expansion part of the APVO436 Phase 1b trial, evaluating adult patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in a multi-center, multi-cohort study of up to 90 patients who will receive APVO436 in combination and monotherapy.
Published three articles in two peer-reviewed publications, Cancers and Frontiers in Medicine, discussing APVO436 data. Results were also presented at the American Society of Hematology annual meeting in November 2021.
Announced that a high-risk AML patient treated with a combination of chemotherapy plus APVO436 achieved a complete remission after one cycle of therapy. The chemotherapy regimen included the standard leukemia drugs Mitoxantrone, Etoposide, and Cytarabine. The patient tolerated treatment without evidence of overt toxicity. More recently, Aptevo reported that this patient will proceed to transplant.
Solidified plans with Alligator Bioscience to submit an IND for ALG.APV-527 in the second half of 2022 to evaluate the compound for the treatment of multiple solid tumor types.
•
Aptevo will investigate the initial differentiating benefits of ALG.APV-527 to induce stronger and more tumor-directed T cell activity with the potential for improved safety and efficacy than existing 4-1BB monoclonal antibody treatments.
Received $35 million on March 30, 2021 from its sale of the right to royalty payments made by Pfizer with respect to net sales of RUXIENCE to an entity managed by HCR.
Earned a $10 million milestone payment related to 2021 sales of RUXIENCE under the terms of its royalty purchase agreement with HCR. Received the proceeds from the milestone payment in March 2022, which will be used to pay down our MidCap Financial term loan to $5 million, further strengthening the Company’s balance sheet.
On November 22, 2021 and November 26, 2021, Tang filed statements on Schedule 13D/A to report that Tang had sold 1,760,000 shares of our common stock. The shares sold represented Tang’s entire ownership position in the Company at that time and as of the date hereof we believe that Tang no longer holds any of our shares of issued and outstanding common stock.
Results of Operations
Except as otherwise stated below, the following discussions of our results of operations reflect the results of our continuing operations, excluding the results related to Aptevo BioTherapeutics LLC (Aptevo BioTherapeutics), which was sold in February 2020 to Medexus and has been separated from continuing operations and reflected as a discontinued operation. See Note 2 - Discontinued Operations to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had net losses of $28.5 million and $17.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $214.1 million.
Royalty Revenue
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded royalty revenue of $12.3 million and $4.3 million, respectively. The royalty revenue relates to a Collaboration and License Agreement (Definitive Agreement) acquired by Aptevo as part of our spin-off from Emergent in 2016. The agreement was originally executed by Trubion Pharmaceuticals, which was subsequently acquired by Emergent, and Wyeth, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Pfizer. The royalty term runs through January 2027, which is the seventh anniversary of the first commercial sale of the CD20 biosimilar. On March 30, 2021, we entered into the Royalty Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we sold to HCR the right to receive royalty payments made by Pfizer in respect of net sales of RUXIENCE. We maintain our rights under the Definitive Agreement originally between Trubion and Wyeth, with the exception of the cash flows of the RUXIENCE royalty payments purchased by HCR. Due to our continuing involvement under the Definitive Agreement originally between Trubion and Wyeth, we continue to recognize royalty revenue on net sales of RUXIENCE and record the royalty payments to HCR as a reduction of the liability when paid. As such payments are made to HCR, the balance of the liability will be effectively repaid over the life of the Royalty Purchase Agreement. To the extent total future royalties collected are an amount less than the liability, the Company is not obligated to fund any such shortfall.
Research and Development Expenses
We expense research and development costs as incurred. These expenses consist primarily of the costs associated with our research and development activities, including conducting non-clinical studies and clinical trials, fees to professional service providers for analytical testing, consulting costs, independent monitoring or other administration of our clinical trials and obtaining and evaluating data from our clinical trials and non-clinical studies, as well as costs of contract manufacturing services for clinical trial material, and costs of materials used in clinical trials and research and development. Our research and development expenses include:
•
employee salaries and related expenses, including stock-based compensation and benefits for our employees involved in our drug discovery and development activities;
•
external research and development expense incurred under agreements with third-party contract research organizations (CROs) and investigative sites;
•
manufacturing expenses and material for third-party manufacturing; and,
•
overhead costs such as rent, utilities and depreciation.
We expect our research and development spending will be dependent upon such factors as the results from our clinical trials, the availability of reimbursement of research and development spending, the number of product candidates under development, the size, structure and duration of any clinical programs that we may initiate, and the costs associated with manufacturing our product candidates on a large-scale basis for later stage clinical trials. We may experience interruption of key clinical trial activities, such as patient enrollment and clinical trial site monitoring, and key non-clinical activities due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. While programs are still in the preclinical trial phase, we do not provide a breakdown of the initial associated expenses as we are often evaluating multiple product candidates simultaneously. Costs are reported in preclinical research and discovery until the program enters the clinic.
Our research and development expenses by program for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are shown in the following table:
Research and development expenses increased by $1.1 million, to $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to higher spending on consulting services for our APVO436 clinical trial as we continue to advance that trial and increased spending on analytical analysis for our preclinical programs, including ALG.APV-527, APVO603, and APVO442. Further, we have now started dosing in our Phase 1b Expansion program for our APVO436 clinical trial.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs and professional fees in support of our executive, business development, finance, accounting, information technology, legal and human resource functions. Other costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses increased by $0.7 million, or 5%, to $14.7 million from $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher costs related to responding to stockholder activism matters and higher employee costs.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense consists primarily of costs related to debt extinguishment, accrued exit fees on debt, non-cash interest on financing agreements, and interest on debt. Other expense, net was $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to interest expense and accrued exit fees for the MidCap Credit Agreement, as well as non-cash interest expense for the Royalty Purchase Agreement.
Discontinued Operations
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include discontinued operations from two separate transactions: the sale of hyperimmune business to Saol International Limited in September 2017, from which we received a payment in 2021 related to collection of certain accounts receivable, and the sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics in 2020.
The following table represents the components attributable to income from discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of operations (in thousands):
Income from discontinued operations was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $13.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we collected $0.5 million related to the sale of hyperimmune business to Saol as a result of the collection of certain accounts receivable and deferred payment of $0.5 million received from Medexus related to IXINITY sales. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized net income from discontinued operations totaling $13.2 million. This included the gain on the sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics of $14.3 million, net operating losses from Aptevo BioTherapeutics of $1.6 million related to the period prior to the sale on February 28, 2020, and $0.4 million deferred payment from Medexus related to IXINITY sales.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to our net operating loss of $28.5 million and changes in working capital accounts. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our net operating loss of $17.8 million, the gain on sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics of $14.3 million, and changes in working capital accounts.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to purchases of property and equipment. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the cash received from the sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics, net of transaction fees.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to $35.0 million received from Royalty Purchase Agreement, $10.2 million received from the common stock sold to Lincoln Park, offset by the $10.5 million partial repayment of the MidCap Financial term loan and the $8.6 million repayments under liability related to sale of future royalties. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $21.2 million received from the exercises of warrants and common stock, and proceeds of $24.7 million from the credit agreement we entered into with MidCap Financial on August 5, 2020, which was offset by the $22.1 million repayment of long-term debt in the first quarter of 2020.
Sources of Liquidity
Royalty Purchase Agreement and Milestone Payments
On March 30, 2021, we entered into Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR pursuant to which we sold HCR the right to receive royalty payments made by Pfizer in respect to net sale of RUXIENCE. Under the Royalty Purchase Agreement, we received $35 million at closing and incurred $1.1 million in transaction costs. We are eligible to receive additional payments in aggregate of up to an additional $32.5 million based on achievement of sales milestones in 2022, 2023, and 2024. The Royalty Purchase Agreement further provides that, once HCR reaches aggregate royalty payments totaling 190% of the Investment Amount plus the Milestone Amounts to the extent paid to us by HCR, we will be entitled to receive 50% of any additional royalty payments by Pfizer thereafter. The Company received $10 million milestone payment in March 2022 and incurred $0.5 million in transaction costs. The Company is eligible to receive additional payments in aggregate of up to $22.5 million based on achievement of sales milestone in 2023 and 2024.
IXINITY Royalty Payments
On February 28, 2020, Aptevo entered into an LLC Purchase Agreement with Medexus, pursuant to which we sold all of the issued and outstanding limited liability company interests of Aptevo BioTherapeutics LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Aptevo. As consideration for the sale, Aptevo received $30 million in cash at closing. In addition to the payment received at closing, the Company receives deferred payments based on quarterly net sales of IXINITY and may also earn milestones from Medexus in the future. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Aptevo received $0.5 million from Medexus related to IXINITY sales.
Equity Distribution Agreement
On December 14, 2020, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Piper Sandler & Co (Piper Sandler). The Equity Distribution Agreement provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth therein, we may issue and sell through Piper Sandler, acting as sales agent, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50 million. We have no obligation to sell any such shares under the Equity Distribution Agreement. The sale of the shares of our common stock by Piper Sandler, if any, will be effected pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-3 which we filed on December 14, 2020. We did not issue any shares under the Equity Distribution Agreement for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Equity Distribution Agreement will terminate upon the issuance and sale of all shares under the Equity Distribution Agreement or upon the earlier termination thereof at any time by us or Piper Sandler upon notice to the other party.
Registration Statement
We previously filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 13, 2017, amended on December 6, 2017 and declared effective on December 15, 2017 (the Prior Registration Statement). The Prior Registration Statement registered the offer and sale of an indeterminate number of shares of common stock and preferred stock, an indeterminate principal amount of debt securities and an indeterminate number of warrants to purchase common stock, preferred stock, and various series of debt securities and/or warrants to purchase any of such securities, having an aggregate initial offering price of $150 million, of which an aggregate of $127.8 million remained unsold as of the December 14, 2020. On December 14, 2020, we filed a new registration
statement covering the offering, issuance, and sale up to $200 million in common stock, preferred stock, and various series of debt securities and/or warrants to purchase any of such securities, which included the unsold securities from the Prior Registration Statement.
Purchase Agreement
On December 20, 2018, we entered into a Purchase Agreement, and a Registration Rights Agreement with Lincoln Park Financial LLC (Lincoln Park). Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park committed to purchase up to $35.0 million worth of our common stock over a 36-month period commencing on February 13, 2019, the date the registration statement covering the resale of the shares was declared effective by the SEC.
Under the Purchase Agreement, on any business day selected by us, we may direct Lincoln Park to purchase shares of our common stock provided that Lincoln Park’s maximum commitment on any single day does not exceed $2.0 million. The purchase price per share will be based off of prevailing market prices of our common stock immediately preceding the time of sale; provided, however, that we cannot direct any such purchase if the prevailing market price is less than $1.00. In addition, we may also direct Lincoln Park to purchase other amounts as accelerated purchases or as additional accelerated purchases if the closing sale price of our common stock exceeds certain threshold prices as set forth in the Purchase Agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued 407,047 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement. We received $10.2 million in proceeds from issuance of these shares over three-year period. Our 2018 Purchase Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement with Lincoln Park expired in March 2022.
On February 16, 2022, the Company entered into a new Purchase Agreement and a Registration Rights Agreement with Lincoln Park. Under the new Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park committed to purchase up to $35.0 million worth of our common stock over a 36-month period commencing after the satisfaction of certain conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement. The purchase price per share will be based off of prevailing market price; provided, however, that the prevailing market price is not below $1.00. The Company agreed to issue 99,276 shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park for no cash consideration as an initial fee for its commitment to purchase shares of our common stock under the Purchase Agreement.
Actual sales of shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement will occur at our discretion from time to time and depend on a variety of factors, including, among others, market conditions, the trading price of our common stock and additional determinations as to the appropriate sources of funding for our operations. Lincoln Park has no right to require any sales, but is obligated to make purchases as we direct, in accordance with the Purchase Agreement.
Warrants
On March 11, 2019, we completed a public offering of common stock and warrants, as follows:
•
for a combined public offering price of $14.00 per share of common stock and related warrants, 1,417,857 shares of common stock and related warrants with a 5-year life to purchase up to 1,417,857 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $18.20 per share,
•
for a combined public offering price of $13.86 per pre-funded warrant and related warrant, pre-funded warrants with a 10-year life to purchase up to 153,571 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.14 per share and related warrants with a 5-year life to purchase up to 153,571 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $18.20 per share. These pre-funded warrants were exercised on March 21, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, certain of the holders of the Company’s warrants exercised warrants with a strike price of $18.20 per share, resulting in the issuance of 54,105 shares of the Company’s common stock and aggregate proceeds to the Company of approximately $1.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, there were warrants to purchase 350,589 shares of common stock outstanding.
Liquidity
We have financed our operations to date primarily through revenue generated from our commercial products, the Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR, royalty payments from Pfizer, deferred payments from Medexus, the
sale of our hyperimmune products business in September 2017, the sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics on February 28, 2020, public offerings of our common stock, proceeds from issuance of our common stock pursuant to our 2018 Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park, loan proceeds, milestone payments, research and development funding from strategic partners, and funds received at the date of our spin-off from Emergent. We had a net loss of $28.5 million and $17.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. We had cash and cash equivalents of $45.0 million, restricted cash of $1.3 million, and an accumulated deficit of $214.1 million as of December 31, 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in our operating activities was $21.7 million.
Our future success is dependent on our ability to develop our product candidates and ultimately upon our ability to attain profitable operations. We anticipate that we will continue to incur significant operating losses for the next several years as we incur expenses to continue to execute on our development strategy to advance our preclinical and clinical stage assets. We will not generate revenues from our development stage product candidates unless and/or until we or our collaborators successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for such product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years and is subject to significant uncertainty. If we obtain regulatory approval for one of our development stage product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, to the extent that such costs are not paid by collaborators. We do not have sufficient cash to complete the clinical development of any of our development stage product candidates and will require additional funding in order to complete the development activities required for regulatory approval of such product candidates. We will require substantial additional funds to continue our development programs and to fulfill our planned operating goals.
Due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience delays in opportunities to partner our product candidates, due to financial and other impacts on potential partners. Additionally, we may experience potential impacts on our future deferred payments and milestones from Medexus due to effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may impact Medexus’ ability to continue to successfully commercialize the IXINITY businesses. Additionally, we may experience potential impacts on our future milestones from HCR, which are based on global net sales of RUXIENCE, due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may impact Pfizer’s ability to continue to successfully commercialize the RUXIENCE business. We believe that our existing cash resources, the Investment Amount and Milestone Amounts related to the Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR, Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park, the cash to be generated from future IXINITY deferred payments, release of restricted cash securing letters of credit, and funds available to us from the remaining principal balance of the Credit Agreement with MidCap Financial, will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements and debt service for at least twelve months from the date of this filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
There are numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development, and commercialization of pharmaceutical products. Accordingly, our future funding requirements may vary from our current expectations and will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
our ability to establish and maintain strategic partnerships, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•
the number and characteristics of the product candidates we pursue;
•
the scope, progress, results, and costs of researching and developing our product candidates, and of conducting preclinical and clinical trials;
•
our ability to obtain regulatory clearance to commence clinical trials for product candidates;
•
the timing of, and the costs involved in, completing our clinical trials, and obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
•
the cost of commercialization activities if any of our product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales, and distribution costs;
•
the cost of manufacturing our product candidates and any products we successfully commercialize;
•
the cost of attracting and retaining skilled personnel;
•
whether and to what extent future proceeds are received under our Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR; and,
•
the timing, receipt and amount of any milestone payments and deferred payments from Medexus with respect to IXINITY.
If we are unable to raise substantial additional capital in the next year, whether on terms that are acceptable to us or at all, then we may be required to:
•
delay, limit, reduce or terminate our clinical trials or other development activities for one or more of our product candidates; and/or,
•
delay, limit, reduce or terminate our establishment of other activities that may be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved.
The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities may result in additional dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities or preferred stock or through credit facilities, these securities and/or the loans under credit facilities could provide for rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Additional funds may not be available when we need them, on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. We also expect to seek additional funds through arrangements with collaborators, licensees or other third parties. These arrangements would generally require us to relinquish or encumber rights to some of our technologies or drug candidates, and we may not be able to enter into such arrangements on acceptable terms, if at all. Due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience delays in clinical trials and non-clinical work, and opportunities to partner our product candidates, due to financial and other impacts on potential partners.
Contractual Obligations
We have an operating lease related to our office and laboratory space in Seattle, Washington. This lease was amended and extended in March 2019. The term of the amended lease is through April 2030 and we have two options to extend the lease term, each by five years, as well as a one-time option to terminate the lease in April 2023.
In January 2020, we entered into a contract with The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society (LLS) to be part of an ongoing national AML master clinical trial called the ‘Beat AML Master Clinical Trial.’ The Beat AML Master Clinical Trial provides access to leading academic cancer centers and allows us to study APVO436 in a front-line AML setting. Once we begin participation in the Beat AML Master Clinical Trial, our purchase obligation for the Beat AML Master Clinical Trial may total up to $8.1 million over four years. As of December 31, 2021, we have not begun participation in the Beat AML Master Clinical Trial and we do not currently intend to participate under the current trial design. The Clinical Trial Participation Agreement contains a termination for convenience clause where we may terminate the agreement with 180 days prior written notice. We may re-assess our participation in the master clinical trial as Part 2 (expansion phase) of our Phase 1b APVO436 clinical trial progresses.
On August 5, 2020, we entered into a new Credit and Security Agreement (Credit Agreement), with MidCap Financial. The Credit Agreement provided us with up to $25 million of available borrowing capacity. The MidCap Financial loan has a 48 month term, is interest-only for the first 18 months, with straight-line amortization for the remaining 30 months and bears interest at a rate of one month LIBOR plus 6.25% per annum, subject to a 1.50% LIBOR floor and a 2.50% LIBOR cap. On March 30, 2021, we amended our Credit Agreement with MidCap Financial and used $10 million of the proceeds received from the Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR to pay down the outstanding principal under this agreement from $25 million to $15 million. Additionally, the Company will use the $10 million milestone payment received on March 8, 2022, pursuant to our Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR to pay down the outstanding principal down to $5 million. The Company’s Credit Agreement currently references LIBOR. The United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which regulates LIBOR, phased out one-week and two-month US Dollar LIBOR settings on December 31, 2021. All other US Dollar LIBOR settings, including the overnight, one-month, three-month, six-month and twelve-month, will be phased out on June 30, 2023. It is unclear if at that time LIBOR will cease to exist or if new methods of calculating LIBOR will be established such that it continues to exist after 2023. Our Credit Agreement with MidCap Financial currently references one-month LIBOR and also provides that we may amend the Credit Agreement to reflect an alternative rate of interest upon the phase out of LIBOR.
On March 30, 2021, we entered into the Royalty Purchase Agreement pursuant to which the Company sold to HCR the right to receive royalty payments made by Pfizer in respect of net sales of RUXIENCE. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we received $35 million at closing and we are eligible to receive additional payments in aggregate of up to an additional $32.5 million based on the achievement of sales milestones in 2022, 2023, and 2024. The Company received $10 million milestone payment in March 2022 and incurred $0.5 million in transaction costs. The Company is eligible to receive additional payments in aggregate of up to $22.5 million based on achievement of sales milestone in 2023 and 2024. We accounted for the Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR, including future milestone payments to be received, as a debt-like instrument within the scope of ASC 470-10-25, Debt - Sales of Future Revenues or Various Other Measures of Income.
Our principal commitments include obligations under vendor contracts to purchase research services and other purchase commitments with our vendors. In the normal course of business, we enter into services agreements with contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations and other third parties. Generally, these agreements provide for termination upon notice, with specified amounts due upon termination based on the timing of termination and the terms of the agreement. The actual amounts and timing of payments under these agreements are uncertain and contingent upon the initiation and completion of the services to be provided.
Critical Accounting Policies, and Significant Judgments, and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors. Although we believe that our judgments and estimates are appropriate, actual results may differ materially from our estimates and changes in these estimates are recorded when known. An accounting policy is considered critical if it is important to a company’s financial condition and results of operations and if it requires the exercise of significant judgment and the use of estimates on the part of management in its application.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Non-Cash Interest Expense and Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalties
The Company accounted for the Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR, including future milestone payments to be received, as a debt-like instrument within the scope of ASC 470-10-25, Debt - Sales of Future Revenues or Various Other Measures of Income. We recorded the proceeds from the Royalty Purchase Agreement as a liability related to the sale of future royalties, net of transaction costs, and amortized the balance using the effective interest method. To determine the amortization of the liability, the Company estimates the total amount of future net royalty payments over the life of the arrangement. The total amount of net royalty payments over the life of the arrangement, less the net proceeds received, will be recorded as non-cash interest expense over the life of the arrangement using the effective interest method. Over the life of the arrangement, the actual effective interest rate will be affected by the amount and timing of the net royalty payments received by HCR and changes in the Company’s royalty forecasts. The Company engages third party consultant services in estimating total future net royalty payments and continually assesses the effective interest rate by comparing projected net royalty payments to actual and adjusts the effective interest rate retrospectively. Future milestone payments will be recorded as additions to the liability related to the sale of future royalties, net of transaction costs. While we believe our estimates are reasonable, actual net royalty payments may be different than our projections. Historically, differences between estimated and actual net royalty payments have not been material.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs primarily consist of internal labor costs, fees paid to outside service providers and the costs of materials used in clinical trials and research and development. Other research and development expenses include facility, maintenance, and related support expenses.
A substantial portion of our preclinical studies and all of our clinical studies have been performed by third-party contract research organizations (CRO). We review the activities performed by the CROs each period. For preclinical studies, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the percentage of work completed to date and contract milestones achieved. For clinical study expenses, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled and percentage of work completed to date. Our estimates are highly dependent upon the timeliness and accuracy of the data provided by our CROs regarding the status of each program and total program spending and adjustments are made when deemed necessary.
Stock-Based Compensation
Under ASC 718, Compensation-Stock-based Compensation, we measure and recognize compensation expense for restricted stock units (RSUs), and stock options granted to our employees and directors based as of the fair value of the awards on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model that requires management to apply judgment and make estimates, including:
•
the expected term of the stock option award, which we calculate using the simplified method, as permitted by the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 110, Share-Based Payment, as we have insufficient historical information regarding our stock options to provide a basis for an estimate;
•
the expected volatility of our underlying common stock, which we estimate based on the historical volatility of a representative group of publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies with similar characteristics to us, and our own historical and implied future volatility;
•
the risk-free interest rate, which we based on the yield curve of U.S. Treasury securities with periods commensurate with the expected term of the options being valued;
•
the expected dividend yield, which we estimate to be zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no present intention to pay cash dividends; and
•
the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant.
Stock-based compensation expense for RSUs, and stock options is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We are required to estimate a forfeiture rate to calculate the stock-based compensation expense for our awards. Our forfeiture rate is based on an analysis of our actual forfeitures since the adoption of our equity award plan. We routinely evaluate the appropriateness of the forfeiture rate based on actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover, and expectations of future option exercise behavior.