Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
Aqua Metals (NASDAQ: AQMS) is engaged in the business of equipment supply, technology licensing and related services to recyclers across the globe. Our recycling process is a patented hydrometallurgical technology that is a novel, proprietary and patented process we developed and named AquaRefining. AquaRefining is a room temperature, water and organic acid-based process that greatly reduces environmental emissions. The modular Aqualyzers cleanly generate ultra-pure metal one atom at a time, closing the sustainability loop for the rapidly growing energy storage economy. Our process was originally designed for lead recycling. Lead is a globally traded commodity with a worldwide market value in excess of $20 billion. We believe our suite of patented and patent pending AquaRefining technologies will allow the lead-acid battery industry to simultaneously improve the environmental impact of lead recycling and scale recycling production to meet demand. Furthermore, our AquaRefining technologies result in high purity lead. We are also applying our commercialized clean, water-based recycling technology principles to develop the cleanest and most cost-efficient recycling solution for lithium-ion batteries. We believe our process can produce higher quality products at a lower operating cost without the damaging effects of furnaces and greenhouse emissions. Aqua Metals estimates its total addressable market for lithium-ion battery recycling will be approximately $9 billion by 2025.
We were formed as a Delaware corporation on June 20, 2014 for the purpose of engaging in the business of recycling metals through a novel, proprietary and patent-pending process that we developed and named “AquaRefining”. Since our formation, we have focused our efforts initially on the development and testing of our AquaRefining process for lead acid batteries, or LAB, and advanced that process by building a demonstration plant located in the Tahoe Reno Industrial Center in McCarran, Nevada (“TRIC”). We have also developed a business plan which focuses equipment supply services and licensing of the AquaRefining technology to recyclers and began research and development on using the AquaRefining process on lithium-ion batteries at our Innovation Center also located at TRIC.
We completed the development of our first LAB recycling facility at TRIC, in McCarran, Nevada and commenced production of battery breaking and limited operations during the first quarter of 2017. From April 2017 through April 2018, we commenced the shipment of products for sale, consisting of lead compounds as well as plastics and limited production of lead bullion, including AquaRefined lead. During 2018, we commenced the sale of pure AquaRefined lead in the form of two tonne blocks and AquaRefined lead in the form of battery manufacturing ready ingots. In November 2018, we received official vendor certification from Clarios for our AquaRefined lead and commenced shipments directly to Clarios owned and partner battery manufacturing facilities. In 2019, we operated our demonstration AquaRefinery at commercial quantity production levels and produced over 35,000 AquaRefined ingots by operating the AquaRefinery twenty-four hours a day and seven days a week for sustained periods of time. The AquaRefining Aqualyzers in operation ran sustained endurance runs for over one month several times.
In order to expand the demonstration AquaRefinery to its full capacity, we chose to idle the AquaRefinery beginning in September 2019 to facilitate contracting work required to increase the plant capacity planned for late 2019 or early 2020. On the evening of November 29, 2019, a fire occurred in the AquaRefining area of the recycling facility at TRIC. The cause of the fire was not due to the technology or process of AquaRefining but rather to contracting activities. The Company and the insurance carriers agreed on a total claim of $30.25 million which was paid in full by the carriers. Plant clean-up and repair of fire damaged areas began in 2021 and were substantially completed by the end of the year.
Following the November 2019 fire, we have been engaged in the pursuit of our business strategy that is based on the pursuit of licensing opportunities within the lead battery recycling marketplace. We believe our business strategy will require less space and less equipment and focus on the needs of our future licensees. The capital light strategy is based on the pursuit of licensing opportunities within the battery recycling marketplace without maintaining and operating a capital-intensive battery recycling facility. Our capital light business strategy is designed to optimize shareholder value by focusing on equipment supply and licensing opportunities, which have always been a core part of our business plans.
During the first half of 2020, we successfully performed test runs on the first and second iterations of our Aqualyzer as part of our V1.25L program. The program consists of three iterations that are classified as V1.25a, V1.25b and the final iteration, V1.25L. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed our V1.25L Aqualyzer program on time and under budget, achieving lead production that is 100% greater compared to the V1.0 Aqualyzer deployed at the AquaRefinery during commercial production in 2018 and 2019. In August 2021, we announced the completion of the V1.5 Aqualyzer. This latest Aqualyzer configuration has now achieved lead production that is over 300% greater than the V1.0 Aqualyzer deployed at the AquaRefinery during commercial production in 2018 and 2019. These results are expected to positively impact capital and operating expenses for the Company’s equipment supply and technology licensing customers. The increase in throughput results in a reduction of more than 60% in the number of Aqualyzers needed for equivalent lead production delivered by the V1.0 model, reducing capital and labor and footprint requirements. This latest iteration has also increased electrical efficiency to 97%, which further improves operating costs.
In February 2021, we announced a strategic investment in LINICO Corporation of up to $2 million to be paid in Aqua Metals shares and cash for a 10% ownership in LINICO as part of our strategy to strengthen growth by potentially applying AquaRefining intellectual property to lithium-ion battery recycling while meeting our lead recycling commercial guidance. In August 2021, we announced that we had established an Innovation Center focused on applying our proven technology to lithium-ion battery recycling research and development and prototype system activities. Our strategic decision to apply our proven clean, closed-loop hydrometallurgical and electro-chemical recycling experience to lithium-ion battery recycling is designed to meet the growing demand for critical metals driven by the global transition to electric vehicles, growth in Internet data centers, and alternative energy applications including solar, wind, and grid-scale storage.
In November 2021, Aqua Metals and LINICO signed a collaboration agreement which sets the parameters for future research and development cooperation, as both companies’ expand into lithium-ion battery recycling and advance our technologies designed to recycle lithium-ion batteries cost-effectively and sustainably. Aqua Metals and LINICO plan to source the necessary lithium-ion feedstock from battery manufacturing scrap and end-of-life cells from various sources, including electric vehicle battery suppliers interested in participating in the eco-network the two companies announced in 2021. LINICO will process the feedstock into high-quality black mass utilizing its proprietary process. The resulting black mass will be used as input feedstock for Aqua Metals’ AquaRefining pilot cells intended to create high purity metals such as nickel, cobalt, and copper as well as other compounds.
Our business model focus is on global licensing opportunities to incorporate AquaRefining in the recycling industry.
We have been engaged in the pursuit of a business strategy that is based on the pursuit of licensing opportunities within the battery recycling marketplace without maintaining and operating a capital-intensive lead recycling facility. Our capital light business strategy is designed to optimize shareholder value by focusing on equipment supply and licensing opportunities, which have always been a core part of our business plans. On July 29, 2021, the Company signed a Definitive Agreement with ACME Metal Enterprise Co., Ltd. (ACME) to deploy AquaRefining equipment at its facility in Keelung, Taiwan. We believe the path of licensing our technology has the potential to maximize shareholder value in that it could be far less capital intensive than our operation of one or more recycling facilities and could be funded in part from a combination of cash on hand and asset dispositions.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 2,995,430 shares of common stock pursuant to an At the Market Issuance Sales Agreement ("ATM") for net proceeds of $10.2 million.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, revenue resulted from the sale of inventory consisting of lead compounds that were generated during operation of the TRIC facility and prior to the November 2019 fire at our TRIC facility. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, product sales consisted of lead bullion, lead compounds and plastics that were generated through the AquaRefining process. The following table summarizes results of operations with respect to the items set forth below for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 together with the percentage change from the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 for those items (in thousands).
Except for nominal sales of inventory, we did not generate revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Plant activity during 2021 consisted of the operation and testing of our improved Aqualyzers.
Cost of product sales includes raw materials, supplies and related costs, salaries and benefits, consulting and outside services costs, depreciation and amortization costs, insurance, travel and overhead costs. Cost of product sales increased approximately 28% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Cost of product sales increased during 2021 as a result of plant clean-up costs in preparation for the lease and eventual sale of the TRIC facility.
Research and development cost included expenditures related to the improvement of the AquaRefining technology. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, research and development costs decreased approximately 9% from the comparable period in 2020. Research and development is a key part of our business strategy and includes our focus on improving the Company's proprietary technology for LAB recycling and advancing our research related to the application of AquaRefining to recycling lithium-ion batteries.
General and administrative expense increased approximately 8% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Increases in general and administrative expenses included changes in stock-based compensation, in addition to an increase in legal expenses and insurance premiums.
The following table summarizes our other income and interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 together with the percentage change in those items (in thousands).
Insurance proceeds net of related expenses resulted from collection and payment activity that began in 2020 following the November 2019 fire. The change from period to period is due to the timing of insurance payments and associated fire clean-up expenses. Both of the Company's two PPP loans totaling $332,000 received in May 2020 have been forgiven. One of the PPP loans for $131,000 was forgiven in January 2021 and the second PPP loan for $201,000 was forgiven in May 2021. In conjunction with our year-end accounting, we recognized a non-cash impairment charge for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 of $0.5 million and $11.7 million, respectively, subsequent to an analysis of our fixed assets and a write down to fair market values. We recognized a loss on the sale of assets held for sale of approximately $1.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as the result of disposals completed in conjunction with the plant clean-up. In addition, we recognized a loss on the sale of assets of $3.5 million recognized in conjunction with the accounting for the lease to purchase arrangement for the Company's McCarran, Nevada facility. The loss on sale of assets held for sale also included $0.7 million resulting from the sale of a battery breaker and related equipment. We recognized interest expense of $21,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.6 million for the comparable period of 2020. The decrease in interest expense from the prior year is due to the retirement of the Veritex loan during the fourth quarter of 2020 and being debt free since that time. We recognized $379,000 in interest and other income during the year ended December 31, 2021. This compares to interest and other income of $48,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary driver of the increase in interest and other income was due to the payments received for scrap material salvaged during the plant clean-up process and payments for electricity credits.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had total assets of $33.3 million and working capital of $8.4 million.
The following table summarizes our cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was $7.6 million and $11.0 million, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities during each of these periods consisted primarily of our net loss adjusted for noncash items such as depreciation, amortization, and stock-based compensation charges as well as net changes in working capital. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a $5.7 million loss on disposal of property and equipment. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $0.5 million expense for impairment on assets held for sale. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an $11.7 million expense for impairment on fixed assets and $0.5 million for the elimination of our asset retirement obligation.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.2 million compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash in investing activities during each of these periods consists primarily of purchases of fixed assets and insurance proceeds received respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $10.2 million net proceeds from ATM shares sales. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $3.7 million in net proceeds from ATM share sales.
As of December 31, 2021, we had total cash of $8.1 million and working capital of $8.4 million. As of the date of this report, we believe that we may require additional capital in order to fund our current level of ongoing costs over the next twelve months and move forward with our current business strategy. There can be no assurance that we will be able to acquire the necessary funding on commercially reasonable terms or at all. We intend to seek funds through the possible sale of equipment, lease revenue, licensing revenue and collection on the sale of the building. However, there can be no assurance that such funds will be available. If needed, we may seek funding through the sale of equity or debt financing. Funding that includes the sale of our equity may be dilutive. If such financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to further pursue our business plan and we may be unable to continue operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses during the period. Significant items subject to such estimates and assumptions include the carrying amount and valuation of long-lived assets, the valuation of conversion features of convertible debt, valuation allowances for deferred tax assets, the determination of estimated asset retirement obligations, the determination of stock option expense, and the determination of the fair value of stock warrants issued. Our actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to assist stockholders and investors reading the consolidated financial statements in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accounts receivable
We have historically sold our products to large well-established companies and extend credit without requiring collateral, based on an ongoing evaluation of the customer’s business prospects and financial condition. In the event that payment of a customer’s account receivable is doubtful, we would reserve the receivable under an allowance for doubtful accounts.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventory cost is recorded on a first-in, first-out basis using the weighted average method. Net realizable value is determined as the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation.
Property and equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost net of accumulated depreciation. Depreciation on property and equipment is calculated on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Leasehold improvements are depreciated over the shorter of the life of the asset or the remaining term of the lease. We periodically evaluate our property and equipment assets for indications that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. At December 31, 2021, management compared the carrying value of the assets held for sale against current fair market values. We determined the carrying value needed to be reduced to align with current fair market values. We recognized a $0.5 million impairment of assets held for sale during 2021. At December 31, 2020, management reviewed the remaining estimated lives of our long-lived assets. Any reduction in the useful life assumption will result in increased depreciation and amortization expense in the period when such determination is made, as well as in subsequent periods. We evaluate the need to record impairment during each reporting period. We determined that the remaining useful lives of the equipment has decreased due to our focus on a capital light strategy. We recognized a $11.7 million impairment during 2020. The impairment expense included a write-down of $7.7 million to equipment under construction that was not yet capitalized. In addition, certain other equipment was written down by $4.0 million to fair values, resulting in the acceleration to depreciation for identified assets.
Intangible and other long-lived assets
The intangible assets consist of a patent application contributed to us by five founding stockholders, patent applications for technology developed by us and trademark applications. The useful life of the intangible assets has been determined to be ten years and the assets are being amortized. We periodically evaluate our intangible and other long-lived assets for indications that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In reviewing for impairment, we compare the carrying value of such assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. When the estimated undiscounted future cash flows are less than their carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the difference between the assets’ fair value and their carrying value. In addition to the recoverability assessment, we routinely review the remaining estimated lives of our long-lived assets. Any reduction in the useful life assumption will result in increased depreciation and amortization expense in the period when such determination is made, as well as in subsequent periods. We evaluate the need to record impairment during each reporting period. No impairment has been recorded. We determined that the estimated life of the intellectual property properly reflected the current remaining economic life of the asset.
Revenue recognition
The Company records revenue recognition in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. ASC 606 provides a single comprehensive model for the recognition of revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. It requires an entity to recognize revenue when the entity transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. ASC 606 creates a five-step model that requires entities to exercise judgment when considering the terms of contract(s), which includes (1) identifying the contract(s) with the customer, (2) identifying the separate performance obligations in the contract, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the separate performance obligations, and (5) recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied. ASC 606 requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts, including qualitative and quantitative information about contracts with customers, significant judgments and changes in judgments and assets recognized from costs incurred to obtain or fulfill a contract.
Insurance proceeds
On November 29, 2019, there was a fire in the Aqua Refining area of the TRIC facility. The Company recorded an insurance proceeds receivable balance of $19.9 million during the fourth quarter of 2019, which was limited by GAAP accounting standards to the net book value of assets written off as a result of the fire. The insurance proceeds receivable balance has been reduced to zero as insurance payments have exceeded the total established insurance proceeds receivable amount. Any amounts received in excess of that total are reported as other income. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has received $30.25 million in insurance payments as a result of the fire damage. The Company does not expect any additional insurance payments related to this matter.
Research and development
Research and development expenditures are expensed as incurred.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the liability method, deferred assets and liabilities are recognized based upon anticipated future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. The provision for income taxes is comprised of the current tax liability and the changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities. We established a valuation allowance to the extent that it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets will not be recoverable against future taxable income.
We recognize the effect of uncertain income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize compensation expense for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation.” For employee stock-based awards, we calculate the fair value of the award on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes-Merton method for stock options; the expense is recognized over the service period for awards to vest.
The estimation of stock-based awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from the original estimates, such amounts are recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. The Company considers many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, employee class and historical experience.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See discussion of recent accounting pronouncements in Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 in this Annual Report.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in the future years (in thousands):
Operating lease obligations
We currently have three operating leases for real estate. We lease our Reno and McCarran, Nevada and Alameda, California spaces under non-cancelable operating leases. The Reno, Nevada lease expires in 2024 and the Alameda, California lease will expire in May of 2022. On February 4, 2019, we entered into a sublease agreement effective as of February 1, 2019 for the Alameda, California facility. The term of the sublease commenced on February 4, 2019, and ends on May 31, 2022, in conjunction with our master lease. Subsequent to year end, the lease on Alameda, California facility was terminated. The initial lease term for our mixed office and warehouse space in McCarran, Nevada expired on December 31, 2021. We elected to exercise our first extension option provided for in the McCarran, Nevada lease agreement, which extended the current term of the lease to December 31, 2024.
Finance lease obligation
We currently maintain two finance leases for equipment. In November, we entered into a finance lease for a modular laboratory which expires in October of 2024. Our second finance lease is for warehouse equipment.
Notes payable
We do not have a current notes payable balance. The notes payable balance for year ended December 31, 2020 is related to Payment Protection Program (PPP) loans. See Note 13 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.