Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect Management’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate” and “continue,” or similar words. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of us and members of its management team as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based and actual results may differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report and in other reports we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
While these forward-looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith and reflect our current judgment regarding the direction of our business, actual results will almost always vary, sometimes materially, from any estimates, predictions, projections, assumptions or other future performance suggested herein. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Overview
Signet International Holdings, Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated on February 2, 2005 in accordance with the Laws of the State of Delaware as 51142, Inc. The Company changed its corporate name to Signet International Holdings, Inc. in conjunction with the September 8, 2005 transaction discussed below.
On September 8, 2005, pursuant to a Stock Purchase Agreement and Share Exchange (Agreement) by and among Signet International Holdings, Inc. (Signet); Signet Entertainment Corporation (SIG) and the shareholders of SIG (Shareholders) (collectively SIG and the SIG shareholders shall be known as the “SIG Group”), Signet acquired 100.0% of the then issued and outstanding preferred and common stock of SIG for a total of 3,421,000 common shares and 5,000,000 preferred shares of Signet’s stock issued to the SIG Group. Pursuant to the agreement, SIG became a wholly owned subsidiary of Signet.
Going forward, we intend to seek, investigate and, if such investigation warrants, engage in a business combination with a private entity whose business presents an opportunity for our shareholders. Our objectives discussed below are extremely general and are not intended to restrict discretion of our board of directors to search for and enter into potential business opportunities or to reject any such opportunities.
We will not restrict our potential candidate target companies to any specific business, industry or geographical location and, thus, may acquire any type of business. Further, we may acquire or combine with a venture that is in its preliminary or early stages of development, one that is already in operation or one that is in a more mature stage of its corporate existence. Accordingly, business opportunities may be available in many different industries and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities difficult and complex.
Recent Developments
On February 28, 2022, the Company,‎ Estate of Ernest W. Letiziano, Ms. Hope Hillabrand, and Mr. Thomas Donaldson ‎‎(collectively, the “Controlling Shareholders”) and Golden Ally Lifetech Group Co., Ltd., a Delaware corporation (“Golden Ally”) entered into a Share Purchase and Exchange Agreement (the “SPA”).
Under the SPA, the Controlling Shareholders of the Company agreed to sell to Golden Ally their capital stock of the Company, consisting of 5,000,000 shares of Series A Convertible Super Preferred Stock (convertible into 50,000,000 common shares) and 4,474,080 common shares for $375,000‎ in cash.
‎‎The SPA contains representations, warranties and covenants customary for a transaction of this nature, as well as certain indemnification obligations of the parties thereto for breaches of representations, warranties and covenants.
The consummation of the transaction is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain customary conditions at or prior to the Closing, including (i) the accuracy of each party’s representations and warranties (subject to certain materiality standards), (ii) each party’s compliance with its covenants contained in the SPA (subject to a customary materiality standard), (iii) the absence of any event, change, effect, occurrence or circumstance that, individually or in the aggregate, has had or would reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on the Company and (iv) the absence of any law or order that restrains, enjoins, makes illegal or otherwise prevents or prohibits the Closing. The parties expect that the transaction will close in the second quarter of 2022.
On May 21, 2021, the Controlling Shareholders of the Company voted to appoint Alysia WolfsKeil, Esq. as the Interim Chief Executive Officer and Interim Chief Financial Officer, in order to fulfill the positions within the Company left vacant by the recent passing of Ernest W. Letiziano, the previous Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the Company.
On March 1, 2022, the Controlling Shareholders took action by written consent appointing Ms. WolfsKeil as the sole director of the Company, effective immediately . On March 1, 2022, Ms. WolfsKeil, in her capacity as the sole director of the Company, took action by written consent to appoint herself as the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of the Company. Ms. WolfsKeil, Esq. shall serve as the sole director, Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer until the next annual meeting of the Company or until her successor has been duly elected and qualified or until her earlier death, resignation, or removal.
On March 16, 2022, the Company filed a Form 14-C Information Statement to give notice to our shareholders of record as of March 1, 2022 of the following corporate actions:
1. to elect Alysia WolfsKeil to be the sole director of the Company effective immediately (the “Election of Sole Director”);
2. to amend and restate our Certificate of Incorporation in the form attached to this Information Statement as Appendix A (the “Amended Charter”), which, among other things, (A) increases the number of authorized shares of our common stock from One Hundred Million (100,000,000) shares, par value $0.001 per share, to Ten Billion (10,000,000,000) shares, par value $0.00001 per share (the “Common Stock”), (B) increases the number of authorized shares of our preferred stock from Fifty Million (50,000,000) shares, par value $0.001 per share, to One Billion (1,000,000,000) shares, par value $0.00001 per share (the “Preferred Stock”), (C) designates all the authorized Preferred Stock as Series A Preferred Stock (the “Series A Preferred Stock”), with holders of the Series A Preferred Stock having ten (10) votes per share held on all matters ‎submitted to the stockholders of the Company for a vote thereon and each share of Series ‎A Preferred Stock convertible at the option of the holder into one (1) share of ‎Common Stock, and (D) changes our name from “Signet International Holdings, Inc.” to “Golden Ally Lifetech Group, Inc.” (the “Change of Name”);
3. to amend and restate our bylaws in the form attached to this Information Statement as Appendix B (the “Amended Bylaws”);
4. to authorize (A) the filings of a Certificate of Correction (the “Certificate of Correction”) and past due annual reports with the Delaware Secretary of State to correct the Certificate of Dissolution erroneously filed with the Delaware Secretary of State on March 1, 2018 and to the extent necessary to reinstate the ‎Company as a Delaware corporation in good standing, and (B) the taking of any actions deemed advisable by the Company and its counsel to cancel and ‎negate the Articles of Conversion filed in the State of Nevada‎ on February 28, 2018 (collectively, the “Reinstatement”).
This notice was mailed out to shareholders. The corporate actions referenced 2 and 3 above are subject to the closing of the SPA and approval by FINRA.
Results of Operations
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue:
The Company is in its development stage. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not have any revenue generating operations, nor did the Company has any related cost of goods sold.
Operating Expenses:
The Company’s operating losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $188,961 and $354,777, respectively, a decrease of $165,816 or 47%. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had total operating expenses of $188,961 primarily consisting of professional fees of $58,584, consulting fees of $8,140, public company expenses of $16,814, lease expense of $13,997, compensation expense of $76,150, research and development expenses of $1,000, storage expenses of $5,081, and other office expenses of $9,195. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had total operating expenses of $354,777 primarily consisting of professional fees of $78,859, consulting fees of $208,029, public company expenses of $13,107, lease expense of $15,245, compensation expense of $16,072, research and development expenses of $6,000, travel and entertainment of $4,482, and other office expenses of $12,983.
Other income:
Other income for the years ended December 31, 2021 was $14,050 which is primarily attributable to the reduction of accounts payable over four years old which is past the statute of limitations. There was no comparable transaction for the prior period.
Net Loss:
The Company’s net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $174,911 and $354,777, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total current assets of $28,672, which primarily consisted of cash of $13,074 and prepaid expenses of $15,598. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total current assets of $123,875, which primarily consisted of cash of $123,493 and prepaid expenses of $382. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020 we had a working capital (deficit) surplus of $(18,558) and $92,781 respectively.
The Company will need additional capital requirements during fiscal year 2022. Currently, the Company does not have any revenue generating business operations, nor does the Company currently have the capital resources required to execute its business strategy. Therefore, the Company will attempt to raise additional capital through the sale of our securities.
The Company cannot assure that we will have sufficient capital to finance our growth and/or business operations or that such capital will be available on terms that are favorable to the Company or at all. The Company is currently incurring operating losses that are expected to continue for the foreseeable future. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received total proceeds of $48,731 from sale of common stock which was used for working capital purposes. We have incurred legal, accounting, consulting, rent, public company expenses, and office expense during our operations.
We anticipate generating losses and, therefore, may be unable to continue operations in the future. If we require additional capital, we would have to issue debt or equity or enter into a strategic arrangement with a third party.
Going Concern Consideration
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had a net loss and net cash used in operations of $174,911 and $159,150, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and had no revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Company had an accumulated deficit, stockholders’ deficit, and working capital deficit of $8,029,435, $18,558 and $18,558, respectively, at December 31, 2021. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months from the issuance date of this report.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to implement its business plan, raise capital, and generate revenues. The Company is looking for merger and acquisition opportunities and therefore will not be continuing the current business plan. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities:
Net cash used in operating activities was $159,150 and $169,196 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
● During the year ended December 31, 2021 cash was used primarily as follows:
o net loss was $174,911;
o an increase in our prepaid expenses and other current asset of $15,216;
o an increase in our total accounts payable and accrued expenses of $28,143 and;
o non-cash operating expense of stock issued for services of $3,400.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020 cash was used primarily as follows:
o net loss was $354,777;
o a decrease in our prepaid expenses and other current asset of $16,250;
o a decrease in our total accounts payable and accrued expenses of $306 and;
o non-cash operating expense of stock issued for services of $169,493.
Net Cash Provided by in Financing Activities:
Net cash provided by financing activities was $48,731 and $186,028 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
● During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received proceeds of $48,731 from sale of Company’s common stock.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received proceeds of $161,028 from sale of Company’s common stock and collected $25,000 from subscription receivable.
We currently have no external sources of liquidity, such as arrangements with credit institutions or off-balance sheet arrangements that will have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition or immediate access to capital. We expect to require additional financing to fund our current operations for calendar year 2022. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing on acceptable terms or at all.
If we are unable to raise the funds required to fund our operations, we will seek alternative financing through other means, such as borrowings from institutions or private individuals. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital we need for our operations from the sale of our securities. We have not located any sources for these funds and may not be able to do so in the future. We expect that we will seek additional financing in the future. However, we may not be able to obtain additional capital or generate sufficient revenues to fund our operations. If we are unsuccessful at raising sufficient funds, for whatever reason, to fund our operations, we may be forced to cease operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and consolidated results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management believes the following critical accounting policies affect the significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and the related disclosures at the date of the financial statements and during the reporting period. Actual results could materially differ from these estimates. Significant estimates include the valuation of equity-based instruments issued for other than cash, valuation of right-of-use assets and liabilities and the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets.
Fair value measurements and fair value of financial instruments
The Company follows ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” (“ASC 820”), for assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis. ASC 820 establishes a common definition for fair value to be applied to existing generally accepted accounting principles that require the use of fair value measurements, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosure about such fair value measurements.
ASC 820 defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Additionally, ASC 820 requires the use of valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. These inputs are prioritized below:
Level 1:
Observable inputs such as quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
Level 2:
Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data
Level 3:
Unobservable inputs for which there is little or no market data, which require the use of the reporting entity’s own assumptions.
The Company analyzes all financial instruments with features of both liabilities and equity under the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) accounting standard for such instruments. Under this standard, financial assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
The estimated fair value of certain financial instruments, including prepaid expenses, accounts payable and accrued expenses are carried at historical cost basis, which approximates their fair value because of the short-term nature of these instruments.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for employee stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718-10, “Share-Based Payment,” which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to non-employees for goods and services, and to employees and directors including employee stock options, restricted stock awards, and employee stock purchases based on estimated fair values,
Determining Fair Value Under ASC 718-10
The Company estimates the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing formula. This fair value is then amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards. The Company’s determination of fair value using an option-pricing model is affected by the stock price as well as assumptions regarding the number of highly subjective variables.
The Company estimates volatility based upon the historical stock price of the Company and estimates the expected term for employee stock options using the simplified method for employees and directors and the contractual term for non-employees. The risk-free rate is determined based upon the prevailing rate of United States Treasury securities with similar maturities.
Leases
The Company follows ASC Topic 842, Leases (Topic 842) and applying the package of practical expedients, which permit it not to reassess under the new standard its prior conclusions about lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs. In addition, the Company elected not to apply ASC Topic 842 to arrangements with lease terms of 12 month or less. Operating lease right of use assets (“ROU”) represents the right to use the leased asset for the lease term and operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As most leases do not provide an implicit rate, the Company use an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the adoption date in determining the present value of future payments. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is amortized on a straight-line basis over the lease term and will be included in general and administrative expenses.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting standards which are not yet effective are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position or results of operations.
Cash Requirements
Our management does not believe that our current capital resources will be adequate to continue operating our company and maintaining our business strategy for much more than 12 months. We require additional capital to implement our business and fund our operations.
Since inception we have funded our operations primarily through equity financings and we expect that we will continue to fund our operations through the equity and debt financing, either alone or through strategic alliances. Additional funding may not be available on favorable terms, if at all. We intend to continue to fund our business by way of equity or debt financing until natural revenues can support the Company. If we raise additional capital through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, the percentage ownership of our company held by existing shareholders will be reduced and those shareholders may experience significant dilution. In addition, new securities may contain certain rights, preferences or privileges that are senior to those of our common stock. We cannot assure you that we will be able to raise the working capital as needed in the future on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
If we are unable to raise capital as needed, we are required to reduce the scope of our business development activities, which could harm our business plans, financial condition and operating results, or cease our operations entirely, in which case, you will lose all of your investment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.