ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. We caution that assumptions, expectations, projections, intentions, or beliefs about future events may, and often do, vary from actual results and the differences can be material. Some of the key factors that could cause actual results to vary from our expectations include changes in natural gas, NGLs and oil prices, the timing of planned capital expenditures, our ability to fund our development programs, uncertainties in estimating proved reserves and forecasting production results, operational factors affecting the commencement or maintenance of producing wells, the condition of the capital markets generally, as well as our ability to access them, impacts of world health events, including the COVID-19 pandemic, and uncertainties regarding environmental regulations or litigation and other legal or regulatory developments affecting our business, as well as those factors discussed below, all of which are difficult to predict. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Also, see the risk factors and other cautionary statements described under the heading “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
In this section, references to “Antero,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer to Antero Resources Corporation and its subsidiaries, unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires.
Our Company
We are an independent oil and natural gas company engaged in the development, production, exploration and acquisition of natural gas, NGLs and oil properties located in the Appalachian Basin. We focus on unconventional reservoirs, which can generally be characterized as fractured shale formations. Our management team has worked together for many years and has a successful track record of reserve and production growth as well as significant expertise in unconventional resource plays. Our strategy is to leverage our team’s experience delineating and developing natural gas resource plays to develop our reserves and production, primarily on our existing multi-year inventory of drilling locations.
We have assembled a portfolio of long-lived properties that are characterized by what we believe to be low geologic risk and repeatability. Our drilling opportunities are focused in the Appalachian Basin. As of December 31, 2021, we held approximately 502,000 net acres in the Appalachian Basin. In addition, we estimate that approximately 174,000 net acres of our leasehold may be prospective for the slightly shallower Upper Devonian Shale.
As of December 31, 2021, our estimated proved reserves were 17.7 Tcfe, consisting of 10.2 Tcf of natural gas, 718 MMBbl of assumed recovered ethane, 501 MMBbl of C3+ NGLs and 36 MMBbl of oil. This represents a 0.5% increase in estimated proved reserves from December 31, 2020. These reserve estimates have been prepared by our internal reserve engineers and management and audited by our independent reserve engineers. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 2,083 potential horizontal well locations on our existing leasehold acreage that were classified as proved, probable and possible.
We operate in the following reportable segments: (i) the exploration, development and production of natural gas, NGLs and oil; (ii) marketing of excess firm transportation capacity; and (iii) midstream services through our equity method investment in Antero Midstream Corporation (“Antero Midstream”). All of our operations are conducted in the United States.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments have tried to slow the spread of the virus by imposing social distancing guidelines, travel restrictions and stay-at-home orders, among other actions, which caused a significant decrease in activity in the global economy and the demand for oil, and to a lesser extent, natural gas and NGLs. As vaccines have become widely available, social distancing guidelines, travel restrictions and stay-at-home orders have eased, activity in the global economy has increased and demand for oil, natural gas and NGLs and related commodity pricing, has improved. However, new variants of the virus could cause further commodity market volatility and resulting financial market instability, and these are variables beyond our control that may adversely impact our generation of funds from operating cash flows, distributions from unconsolidated affiliates, available borrowings under our Credit Facility and our ability to access the capital markets.
As a producer of natural gas, NGLs and oil, we are recognized as an essential business under various federal, state and local regulations related to the COVID-19 pandemic. As such, we have continued to operate throughout the pandemic as permitted under
these regulations while taking steps to protect the health and safety of our workers. We have implemented protocols to reduce the risk of an outbreak within our field operations and corporate offices, and these protocols have not reduced Antero Resources’ production and our throughput in a significant manner. A substantial portion of our non-field level employees currently operate in remote work from home arrangements, and we have been able to maintain a consistent level of effectiveness through these arrangements, including maintaining our day-to-day operations, our financial reporting systems and our internal control over financial reporting. We continue to monitor the COVID-19 environment in order to (i) protect the health and safety of our employees and contract workers and (ii) to determine when a return to in-office working arrangements will be appropriate.
Our supply chain has not experienced any significant interruptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The lack of a market or available storage for any one NGL product or oil could result in our having to delay or discontinue well completions and commercial production or shut in production for other products because we cannot curtail the production of individual products in a meaningful way without reducing production of other products. Potential impacts of these constraints may include partial shut-in of production, although we are not able to determine the extent of shut-ins or for how long they may last. However, because some of our wells produce rich gas, which is processed, and some produce dry gas, which does not require processing, we can change the mix of products that we produce and wells that we complete to adjust our production to address takeaway capacity constraints for certain products. For example, we can shut-in rich gas wells and still produce from our dry gas wells if processing or storage capacity of NGL products becomes limited or constrained. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, we had developed a diverse set of buyers and destinations, as well as in-field and off-site storage capacity for our condensate volumes. As a result of the pandemic, we have expanded our customer base and our condensate storage capacity within the Appalachian Basin.
Our natural gas, NGLs and oil producing properties are located in the liquids-rich Appalachian Basin. We maintain an active hedging program designed to mitigate volatility in commodity prices and to protect certain of our expected future cash flows for our future operations and capital spending plans. All of our hedges are financial hedges and do not have physical delivery requirements. As such, any decreases in anticipated production, such as a result of decreased development activity, would not impact our ability to realize the benefits of or reduce the obligations for our hedges. For the year ending December 31, 2022, we have hedged through fixed price contracts the sale of 422 Bcf of natural gas at a weighted average price of $2.50 per MMBtu, a swaption agreement for 156 Bcf of natural gas production at a weighted average index price of $2.77 per MMBtu and basis swaps for 22 Bcf with a weighted average pricing differential of $0.515 per MMBtu.
In addition, our borrowing capacity is directly impacted by the amount of financial assurance that we are required to provide in the form of letters of credit to third parties, primarily pipeline capacity providers. The amount of financial assurance we provided has not increased during the COVID-19 pandemic and, thus far, we have not experienced any losses due to counterparty risk. However, our ability to limit any additional financial assurance we are required to provide, as well as to protect ourselves from the counterparty risk of our financial hedges, may be limited in the future. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have timely serviced our debt and other obligations.
On October 26, 2021, we entered into the New Credit Facility with a borrowing base of $3.5 billion and lender commitments of $1.5 billion. Lender commitments were reduced by $1.1 billion from the previous commitments of $2.64 billion to better align with our expected future liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings under our New Credit Facility and had outstanding letters of credit of $531 million. We have not materially modified the terms of any other agreements. See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements and “-Capital Resources and Liquidity-Debt Agreements-Credit Facility.”
As the global economy continues to recover from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, economic indicators have continued to strengthen. However, the economy has begun to experience elevated inflation levels as a result of global supply and demand imbalances resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, the United States Bureau of Labor and Statistics (“BLS”) consumer price index for all urban consumers increased 7% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 as compared to the average historical 10-year rate of 2%. Additionally, employment activity has also begun to strengthen as demonstrated by the United States BLS unemployment rate declining from a high of 15% in April 2020 to 4% in December 2021. Inflationary pressures and labor shortages could result in increases to our operating and capital costs that are not fixed, renegotiation of contracts and/or supply agreements and higher labor costs, among others. These economic variables are beyond our control and may adversely impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and future cash flows.
Recent Developments and Highlights
Credit Facility
On October 26, 2021, we entered into an amended and restated senior secured revolving credit facility, the New Credit Facility with a borrowing base of $3.5 billion and lender commitments of $1.5 billion and matures on the earlier of (i) October 26,
2026 or (ii) the day that is 180 days prior to the earliest stated redemption date of any series of our then outstanding senior notes. Lender commitments were reduced by $1.1 billion from the previous commitments of $2.64 billion to better align with our expected future liquidity needs. See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements and “-Capital Resources and Liquidity-Debt Agreements-Credit Facility” for more information.
Issuance of Senior Notes
On January 4, 2021, we issued $500 million of 8.375% senior notes due July 15, 2026 (the “2026 Notes”) at par. On January 26, 2021, we issued $700 million of 7.625% senior notes due February 1, 2029 (the “2029 Notes”) at par. The 2026 Notes and 2029 Notes are unsecured and effectively subordinated to the Credit Facility to the extent of the value of the collateral securing the Credit Facility. The 2026 Notes and 2029 Notes rank pari passu to our other outstanding senior notes. The 2026 Notes and 2029 Notes are guaranteed on a full and unconditional and joint and several senior unsecured basis by our wholly owned subsidiaries and certain of our future restricted subsidiaries. See “-Debt Agreements-Senior Unsecured Notes” below and Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Debt Repurchase Program
We fully redeemed all of our outstanding 5.125% senior notes due December 1, 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) at par, plus accrued and unpaid interest in the first quarter of 2021. During the second quarter of 2021, we fully redeemed all of our outstanding 5.625% senior notes due June 1, 2023 (the “2023 Notes”) at par, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
On July 1, 2021, we redeemed $175 million of the principal amount of our 2026 Notes at a redemption price of 108.375% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest. Immediately following the redemption, there were $325 million aggregate principal amount of 2026 Notes outstanding.
On November 2, 2021, we redeemed $116 million of the principal amount of our 2029 Notes at a redemption price of 107.625% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest. Immediately following the redemption, there were $584 million aggregate principal amount of 2029 Notes outstanding.
On January 27, 2022, we announced that we will redeem all $585 million of the aggregate principal amount of our 5.00% senior notes due March 1, 2025 (the “2025 Notes”) at a redemption price of 101.25% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest on March 1, 2022. Immediately following the redemption, the 2025 Notes will be fully retired. The $7 million premium to the principal amount to be redeemed, along with the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs, will be included in our loss on early debt extinguishment during the first quarter of 2022.
Convertible Notes Equitizations
On January 12, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering (the “January Share Offering”) of an aggregate of 31.4 million shares of our common stock at a price of $6.35 per share to certain holders of our 4.25% convertible senior notes due 2026 (the “2026 Convertible Notes”). We used the proceeds from the January Share Offering and approximately $63 million of borrowings under the Prior Credit Facility to repurchase from such holders $150 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Convertible Notes in privately negotiated transactions (the “January Convertible Note Repurchase,” and, collectively with the January Share Offering, the “January Equitization Transactions”).
On May 13, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering (the “May Share Offering”) of an aggregate of 11.6 million shares of our common stock at a price of $11.01 per share to certain holders of our 2026 Convertible Notes. We used the proceeds from the May Share Offering and approximately $26 million of borrowings under the Prior Credit Facility to repurchase from such holders $56 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Convertible Notes in privately negotiated transactions (the “May Convertible Note Repurchase,” and, collectively with the May Share Offering, the “May Equitization Transactions”). See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Capital Return Program
On February 15, 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program that allows the Company to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of outstanding common stock. The shares may be repurchased from time to time in open market transactions, through privately negotiated transactions or by other means in accordance with federal securities laws. The timing, as well as the number and value of shares repurchased under the program, will be determined by us at our discretion and will depend on a variety of factors, including the market price of our common stock, general market and economic conditions and applicable legal requirements.
The exact number of shares to be repurchased by us is not guaranteed and the program may be suspended, modified or discontinued at any time without prior notice.
Drilling Partnership
On February 17, 2021, we announced the formation of a drilling partnership with QL Capital Partners (“QL”), an affiliate of Quantum Energy Partners, for our 2021 through 2024 drilling program. Under the terms of the arrangement, each year in which QL participates represents an annual tranche, and QL will be conveyed a working interest in any wells spud by us during such tranche year. For 2021 and 2022, we agreed to the estimated internal rate of return (“IRR”) or our capital budget for each annual tranche, and QL agreed to participate in the 2021 and 2022 tranches. For each subsequent year through 2024, we will propose a capital budget and estimated IRR for all wells to be spud during such year and, subject to the mutual agreement of the parties that the estimated IRR for the year exceeds a specified return, QL will be obligated to participate in such tranche. We develop and manage the drilling program associated with each tranche, including the selection of wells. Additionally, for each annual tranche in which QL participates, together with QL, we will enter into assignments, bills of sale and conveyances pursuant to which QL will be conveyed a proportionate working interest percentage in each well spud in that year, which conveyances will not be subject to any reversion.
Under the terms of the arrangement, QL funded 20% of development capital for wells spud in 2021 and (i) is expected to fund 15% of development capital for wells spud in 2022 and (ii) between 15% and 20% of development capital for wells spud in each of 2023 and 2024, which funding amounts represent QL’s proportionate working interest in such wells. Additionally, we may receive a carry in the form of a one-time payment from QL for each annual tranche if the IRR for such tranche exceeds certain specified returns, which will be determined no earlier than October 31 and no later than December 1 following the end of each tranche year. Capital costs in excess of, and cost savings below, a specified percentage of budgeted amounts for each annual tranche will be for our account. Subject to the preceding sentence, for any wells included in a tranche, QL is obligated and responsible for its working interest share of costs and liabilities, and is entitled to its working interest share of revenues, associated with such wells for the life of such wells. If we present a capital budget for an annual tranche with an estimated IRR equal to or exceeding a specified return that QL in good faith believes is less than such specified return and QL elects not to participate, we will not be obligated to offer QL the opportunity to participate in subsequent annual tranches. See Note 3-Transactions to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Overriding Royalty Interest Additional Contributions
On June 15, 2020, we announced the consummation of a transaction with an affiliate of Sixth Street Partners, LLC (“Sixth Street”) relating to certain overriding royalty interests across our existing asset base (the “ORRIs”). In connection with the transaction, we contributed the ORRIs to a newly formed subsidiary, Martica, and Sixth Street at the initial closing contributed $300 million in cash (subject to customary adjustments) and agreed to contribute up to an additional $102 million in cash if certain production thresholds attributable to the ORRIs were achieved in the third quarter of 2020 and first quarter of 2021. All cash contributed by Sixth Street was distributed to us. We met the applicable production thresholds related to the third quarter of 2020 and first quarter of 2021 as of September 31, 2020 and March 31, 2021, respectively. We received a $51 million cash distribution during each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021. See Note 4-Transactions to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Sources of Our Revenues
● Natural gas, NGL and oil sale revenues. Our revenues are primarily derived from the sale of natural gas and oil production, as well as the sale of NGLs that are extracted from our natural gas during processing. Our production is entirely from within the continental United States; however, some of our production revenues are attributable to customers who export our products. During 2021, our production revenues were comprised of approximately 59% from the sale of natural gas and 41% from the sale of NGLs and oil. Natural gas, NGLs and oil prices are inherently volatile and are influenced by many factors outside of our control. All of our production is derived from natural gas wells, some of which also produce NGLs which are extracted through processing, and oil.
● Commodity derivatives. To achieve more predictable cash flows and to reduce our exposure to downward price fluctuations, we utilize derivative instruments to hedge future sales prices on a significant portion of our production. We enter into primarily fixed price natural gas, NGLs and oil swap contracts for natural gas in which we receive or pay the difference between a fixed price and the variable market price received, as well as basis swap contracts that hedge the difference between the NYMEX index price and a local index price. At the end of each accounting period, we estimate the fair value of these swaps and, because we have not elected hedge accounting, we recognize changes in the fair value of these derivative
instruments in earnings. We expect continued volatility in the prices we receive for our production and the fair value of our derivative instruments.
● Marketing revenues. Marketing revenues are primarily derived from activities to purchase and sell third-party natural gas and NGLs and to market excess firm transportation capacity to third parties.
● Gathering, compression, water handling and treatment revenues. Gathering, compression, water handling and treatment revenues are derived from our ownership interest in Antero Midstream.
Principal Components of Our Cost Structure
● Lease operating expenses. These are the operating costs incurred to maintain our production. Such costs include produced water hauling, water handling, water disposal, labor-related costs to monitor producing wells, maintenance, repairs and workover expenses. Cost levels for these expenses can vary based on the volume of water produced, supply and demand for oilfield services, activity levels, and other factors.
● Gathering, compression, processing and transportation. These costs include the costs to purchase services from Antero Midstream and fees paid to other third parties who operate low- and high-pressure gathering systems that transport our gas. They also include costs to process and extract NGLs from our produced gas and to transport our natural gas, NGLs and oil to market. We often enter into fixed price long-term contracts that secure transportation and processing capacity, which may include minimum volume commitments, the cost for which is included in these expenses to the extent that they are not associated with excess capacity. Costs associated with excess capacity are included in marketing expenses.
● Production and ad valorem taxes. Production and ad valorem taxes consist of severance and ad valorem taxes. Severance taxes are paid on produced natural gas and oil based on a percentage of sales prices (not hedged prices) or at fixed per-unit rates established by state authorities. Ad valorem taxes are paid based on the value of our reserves as well as the value of property and equipment.
● Marketing expenses. We purchase and sell third-party natural gas and NGLs and market our excess capacity under long-term contracts. Marketing costs include the cost of purchased third-party natural gas and NGLs. We also classify firm transportation costs related to capacity contracted for in advance of having sufficient production and infrastructure to fully utilize this excess capacity as marketing expenses, because we market this excess capacity to third parties. We enter into long-term firm transportation agreements for a significant portion of our current and expected future production in order to secure capacity on major pipelines.
● Exploration expense. These are primarily costs related to unsuccessful leasing efforts, as well as geological and geophysical costs, including seismic costs, costs of unsuccessful exploratory dry holes and costs of other exploratory activities.
● Impairment of oil and gas properties. These costs include impairment and costs associated with leases expirations, impairment of design and initial costs related to pads that are no longer planned to be placed into service and impairment of proved properties due to lower future commodity prices. We charge impairment expense for expired or soon-to-be expired leases when we determine they are impaired based on factors such as remaining lease terms, reservoir performance, commodity price outlooks and future plans to develop the acreage. We also record impairment charges for proved properties on a geological reservoir basis when events or changes in circumstances indicate that a property’s carrying amount may not be recoverable.
● Depletion, depreciation, and amortization. DD&A includes the systematic expensing of the capitalized costs incurred to acquire, explore and develop natural gas, NGLs and oil. As a successful efforts company, we capitalize all costs associated with our acquisition and development efforts and all successful exploration efforts and allocate these costs using the units of production method. Depreciation is computed over an asset’s estimated useful life using the straight-line basis.
● General and administrative expense. These costs include overhead, including payroll and benefits for our staff, costs of maintaining our headquarters, costs of managing our production and development operations, audit and other professional fees, insurance, legal expenses and other administrative expenses. General and administrative expense also includes noncash equity-based compensation expense. See Note 10-Equity-Based Compensation and Cash Awards to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
● Interest expense. We finance a portion of our capital expenditures, working capital requirements and acquisitions with borrowings under the Prior Credit Facility, which had a variable rate of interest based on LIBOR or the Alternate Base Rate and borrowings under the New Credit Facility, which has a variable rate of interest based on SOFR (defined below in “-Capital Resources and Liquidity-Debt Agreements-Credit Facility”) or the Alternate Base Rate. As a result, we incur substantial interest expense that is affected by both fluctuations in interest rates and our financing decisions. As of December 31, 2021, we had fixed interest rates of (i) 5.00% on our 2025 Notes having a principal balance of $585 million, (ii) 8.375% on our 2026 Notes having a principal balance of $325 million, (iii) 7.625% on our 2029 Notes having a principal balance of $584 million, (iv) 5.375% on our 2030 Notes having a principal balance of $600 million and (v) 4.25% on our 2026 Convertible Notes having a principal balance of $82 million. See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
● Income tax expense. We are subject to state and U.S. federal income taxes but are currently not in a cash tax paying position with respect to U.S. federal income taxes. The difference between our financial statement income tax expense and our U.S. federal income tax liability is primarily due to the differences in the tax and financial statement treatment of oil and gas properties, the effects of noncontrolling interests and the deferral of unsettled commodity derivative gains and losses for tax purposes until they are settled. We do pay some state income or franchise taxes where state income or franchise taxes are determined on a basis other than income. We have recorded deferred income tax expense to the extent our deferred tax liabilities exceed our deferred tax assets. See Note 14-Income Taxes to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Results of Operations
We have three operating segments: (i) the exploration, development and production of natural gas, NGLs and oil; (ii) marketing and utilization of excess firm transportation capacity gathering and processing; and (iii) midstream services through our equity method investment in Antero Midstream. Revenues from Antero Midstream’s operations were primarily derived from intersegment transactions for services provided to our exploration and production operations. All intersegment transactions were eliminated upon consolidation, including revenues from water handling and treatment services provided by Antero Midstream, which we capitalized as proved property development costs. See Note 18-Reportable Segments to the consolidated financial statements for disclosures on our reportable segments. Marketing revenues are primarily derived from activities to purchase and sell third-party natural gas and NGLs and to market and utilize excess firm transportation capacity.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2021
The operating results of our reportable segments were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021 (in thousands):
Exploration and Production Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2021
The following table sets forth selected operating data of the exploration and production segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021:
(1) Production data excludes volumes related to the VPP.
(2) Oil and NGLs production was converted at 6 Mcf per Bbl to calculate total Bcfe production and per Mcfe amounts. This ratio is an estimate of the equivalent energy content of the products and may not reflect their relative economic value.
(3) Average prices reflect the before and after effects of our settled commodity derivatives. Our calculation of such after effects includes gains on settlements of commodity derivatives (but does not include proceeds from the derivative monetizations in 2020 and 2021), which do not qualify for hedge accounting because we do not designate or document them as hedges for accounting purposes.
(4) The average realized price for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes $85 million of net litigation proceeds related to a favorable litigation judgment. See Note 16-Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the litigation proceeds. Excluding the effect of the litigation proceeds received, the average realized price for natural gas would have been $4.06 per Mcf.
Natural gas sales. Revenues from sales of natural gas increased from $1.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.4 billion, which included net litigation proceeds of $85 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.6 billion, or 90%. See Note 16-Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements for more information on the litigation proceeds.
Excluding net litigation proceeds, lower natural gas production volumes during the year ended December 31, 2021 accounted for an approximate $101 million decrease in year-over-year natural gas sales revenue (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price excluding the net proceeds from the litigation), and increases in commodity prices (excluding the effects of derivative settlements) accounted for an approximate $1.6 billion increase in year-over-year gas sales revenue (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price excluding the net proceeds from the litigation times current year production volumes).
NGLs sales. Revenues from sales of NGLs increased from $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $0.9 billion, or 85%. Lower NGLs production volumes during the year ended December 31, 2021 accounted for an approximate $0.2 billion decrease in year-over-year NGL revenues (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price), and increases in commodity prices, excluding the effects of derivative settlements, accounted for an approximate $1.1 billion increase in year-over-year revenues (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price times current year production volumes).
Oil sales. Revenues from sale of oil increased from $112 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $201 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $89 million, or 79%. Lower oil production volumes during the year ended December 31, 2021 accounted for a $23 million decrease in year-over-year oil sales revenues (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price), and changes in our oil prices, excluding the effects of derivative settlements, accounted for an approximate $112 million increase in year-over-year oil sales revenues (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price times current year production volumes).
Commodity derivative fair value gains (losses). To achieve more predictable cash flows, and to reduce our exposure to price fluctuations, we enter into fixed for variable price swap contracts, swaptions, basis swap contracts and collar contracts when management believes that favorable future sales prices for our production can be secured. Because we do not designate these derivatives as accounting hedges, they do not receive hedge accounting treatment. Consequently, all mark-to-market gains or losses, as well as cash receipts or payments on settled derivative instruments, are recognized in our statements of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our commodity hedges resulted in derivative fair value gains of $80 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our commodity hedges resulted in derivative fair value loss of $1.9 billion. Commodity derivative fair value gains included $795 million of net cash proceeds for gains on settled derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as cash proceeds of $9 million related to derivatives that were monetized prior to their contractual settlement dates. For the year ended December 31, 2021, commodity derivative fair value losses included $1.2 billion of net cash payments on commodity derivative losses as well as $5 million for payments on derivatives that were settled prior to their contractual settlement dates.
Commodity derivative fair value gains or losses vary based on future commodity prices and have no cash flow impact until the derivative contracts are settled or monetized prior to settlement. Derivative asset or liability positions at the end of any accounting period may reverse to the extent future commodity prices increase or decrease from their levels at the end of the accounting period, or as gains or losses are realized through settlement. We expect continued volatility in commodity prices and the related fair value of our derivative instruments in the future. Additionally, the percentage of our production that is currently hedged for 2022 and beyond is lower than historic levels. See “-Capital Resources and Liquidity-Overview” for more information.
Amortization of deferred revenue, VPP. Amortization of deferred revenues associated with the VPP increased from $15 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $45 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of the VPP closing in August 2020. Under the terms of the agreement, the production volumes are delivered at approximately $1.61 per MMBtu over the contractual term. See Note 4-Transactions to the consolidated financial statements for more information on this transaction.
Lease operating expense. Lease operating expense decreased from $99 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $97 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $2 million or 2% primarily due to lower production volumes. On a per unit basis, lease operating expenses remained consistent at $0.08 per Mcfe for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021.
Gathering, compression, processing, and transportation expense. Gathering, compression, processing, and transportation expense remained consistent at $2.5 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021. This is primarily a result of higher overall costs between periods, which were fully offset by lower production volumes between periods. Gathering and compression costs increased from $0.64 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.73 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to higher fuel costs as a result of increased natural gas prices and $48 million in incentive fee rebates from Antero Midstream Corporation earned during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $12 million in incentive fee rebates from Antero Midstream earned during the year ended December 31, 2021. Processing costs decreased from $0.69 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.66 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to a decrease in C3+ NGL volumes as compared to total production volumes between periods, partially offset by increased NGL pipeline and terminaling fees from higher NGL volumes taken in-kind between periods. Transportation costs increased from $0.60 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.70 per Mcfe and for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to increased utilization on higher tariff pipelines to the Midwest and Gulf Coast between periods.
Production and ad valorem tax expense. Total production and ad valorem taxes increased from $107 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $198 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $91 million or 85%, primarily due to higher commodity prices between periods and $5 million for the litigation proceeds. On a per Mcfe basis, production and ad valorem
taxes increased from $0.08 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.17 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2021. Production and ad valorem taxes as a percentage of natural gas revenues remained at 6% in each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense (excluding equity-based compensation expense) increased from $111 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $125 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $14 million or 12%, primarily due to higher salary and wage expense between periods, which includes our annual incentive program that was temporarily and significantly reduced during 2020. We had 522 and 519 employees as of December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. On a per unit basis, general and administrative expense excluding equity-based compensation increased by 25%, from $0.08 per Mcfe during the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.10 per Mcfe during the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of higher overall costs and lower production volumes between periods.
Equity-based compensation expense. Equity-based compensation expense decreased from $23 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $20 million for the year ended December, 2021, a decrease of $3 million or 12%, primarily due to equity award forfeitures partially offset by new awards granted to employees. When an equity award is forfeited, expense previously recognized for the award is reversed. See Note 10-Equity-Based Compensation and Cash Awards to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Depletion, depreciation, and amortization expense. DD&A expense decreased from $862 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $742 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $120 million or 14%. DD&A per Mcfe decreased from $0.66 per Mcfe during the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.62 per Mcfe during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to increases in proved reserves as a result of higher commodity prices between periods.
Impairment of oil and gas properties. Impairment of oil and gas properties decreased from $224 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $91 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $133 million, or 60%, primarily related to lower impairments of expiring leases between periods. During both periods, we recognized impairments primarily related to expiring leases and initial costs related to pads we no longer plan to place into service.
Marketing Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2021
Where feasible, we purchase and sell third-party natural gas and NGLs and market our excess firm transportation capacity, or engage third parties to conduct these activities on our behalf, in order to optimize the revenues from these transportation agreements. We have entered into long-term firm transportation agreements for a significant portion of our current and expected future production in order to secure guaranteed capacity to favorable markets.
Net marketing expense decreased from $159 million, or $0.12 per Mcfe, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $93 million, or $0.08 per Mcfe, for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was driven by higher marketing volumes, which mitigated some of our excess firm transportation expense, and the reduction of our firm transportation commitments between periods.
Marketing revenue. Marketing revenue increased from $311 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $719 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $408 million, or 131%, primarily due to increased commodity prices and marketing volumes between periods. Higher natural gas marketing volumes accounted for a $120 million increase in year-over-year marketing revenues (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price), and changes in our natural gas prices accounted for an approximate $248 million increase in year-over-year marketing revenues (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price times current year marketing volumes). Higher oil marketing volumes accounted for a $7 million increase in year-over-year marketing revenues (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price), and changes in our oil prices accounted for an approximate $22 million increase in year-over-year marketing revenues (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price times current year marketing volumes). Lower ethane marketing volumes accounted for a $4 million decrease in year-over-year marketing revenues (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price), and changes in our ethane prices accounted for an approximate $21 million increase in year-over-year marketing revenues (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price times current year marketing volumes). Higher NGL marketing volumes between periods also contributed to increased marketing revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Marketing expense. Marketing expense increased from $469 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $812 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $343 million, or 73%. Marketing expense includes the cost of third-party purchased natural gas, NGLs and oil as well as firm transportation costs, including costs related to current excess firm capacity. The cost of third-party natural gas, NGL and oil purchases increased approximately $309 million, $20 million and $24 million, respectively, between periods primarily due to higher commodity prices and increased marketing volumes between periods. Firm
transportation costs were $218 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $208 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $10 million due to the reduction in firm transportation commitments between periods.
Antero Midstream Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2021
Antero Midstream revenue. Revenue from the Antero Midstream segment decreased from $901 million, which included amortization of customer relationships of $71 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $898 million, which included amortization of customer relationships of $71 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $3 million, primarily due to lower water handling revenue as a result of decreased well completions period-over-period, partially offset by higher low pressure revenues due to lower fee rebates earned by us as well as higher compression revenues as a result of increased throughput between periods.
Antero Midstream operating expense. Total operating expense related to the segment decreased from $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $342 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to impairments recorded by Antero Midstream during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $98 million on its freshwater pipelines and equipment and impairment of goodwill of $575 million. Antero Midstream’s impairment expense was $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to canceled project write-downs as well as a lower of cost or market adjustment for pipe inventory.
Discussion of Items Not Allocated to Segments for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2021
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased from $200 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $182 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $18 million, or 9%, primarily due to the reduction in debt as a result of repurchases of our unsecured senior notes, paydown of our Credit Facility and increased interest income between periods, partially offset by interest that accrued on the (i) 2026 Convertible Notes, which were issued in August 2020 and (ii) 2026 Notes, 2029 Notes and 2030 Notes, each of which was issued after December 31, 2020. Interest expense includes approximately $12 million of amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discounts and premiums for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021.
Gain (loss) on early extinguishment of debt. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a gain on early extinguishment of debt of $176 million related to $1.4 billion principal amount of debt that we repurchased at a weighted average discount of 13%. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we equitized $206 million aggregate principal amount of our 2026 Convertible Notes in privately negotiated exchange transactions, and as a result, we recognized a loss of $61 million, which represents the difference between the fair value of the liability component of the 2026 Convertible Notes and the carrying value of such notes. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we redeemed (i) the remaining balance of $661 million of our 2022 Notes at par, plus accrued and unpaid interest; (ii) the remaining balance of $574 million of our 2023 Notes at par, plus accrued and unpaid interest; (iii) $175 million of our 2026 Notes at a redemption price of 108.375% of par, plus accrued and unpaid interest; and (iv) $116 million of our 2029 Notes at a redemption price of 107.625% of par, plus accrued and unpaid interest. For such redemptions, we recognized a $32 million loss on early extinguishment of debt. See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Loss on convertible note equitization. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a loss of $51 million for the January Equitization Transactions and the May Equitization Transactions, which represents the consideration paid in excess of the original terms of the 2026 Convertible Notes. See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Impairment of equity method investment. In 2020, we determined that events and circumstances indicated that the carrying value of our investment in Antero Midstream had experienced an other-than-temporary decline, and we recorded impairment of $611 million. The fair value of the equity method investment in Antero Midstream was based on the quoted market share price of Antero Midstream as of March 31, 2020.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit decreased from $397 million, with an effective tax rate of 24%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $74 million, with an effective tax rate of 32%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to a lower book loss between periods and the effects of a West Virginia apportionment tax law change enacted in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our overall effective tax rate was different than the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the effects of state income taxes, the dividends received deduction, non-deductible equity-based compensation expenses and the effects of a West Virginia apportionment tax law change enacted in 2021. See Note 14-Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements more
for information regarding our income tax provision for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2021, we had U.S. federal and state net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of approximately $2.3 billion. Many of these NOLs expire at various dates between 2025 and 2041 while others have no expiration date. Potential future legislation or the imposition of new or increased taxes may have a significant effect on our future taxable position. The impact of any such change would be recorded in the period in which such interpretation is received or legislation is enacted.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Refer to “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for a discussion of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity have been through net cash provided by operating activities including proceeds from derivatives, borrowings under our Credit Facility, issuances of debt and equity securities, dividends from unconsolidated affiliates and proceeds from our asset sale program. Our primary use of cash has been for the exploration, development and acquisition of oil and natural gas properties. As we develop our reserves, we continually monitor what capital resources, including equity and debt financings, are available to meet our future financial obligations, planned capital expenditure activities and liquidity requirements. Our future success in growing our proved reserves and production will be highly dependent on net cash provided by operating activities and the capital resources available to us. For information about the impacts of COVID-19 on our capital resources and liquidity, see “-COVID-19 Pandemic.”
The New Credit Facility has a borrowing base of $3.5 billion and current lender commitments of $1.5 billion. The borrowing base is redetermined semi-annually based on certain factors including our reserves, natural gas, NGLs and oil commodity prices, and the value of our hedge portfolio. The next redetermination of the borrowing base is scheduled to occur in April 2022. For a discussion of the risks of a decrease in the borrowing base under the New Credit Facility, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-The borrowing base under the New Credit Facility may be reduced if commodity prices decline, which could hinder or prevent us from meeting our future capital needs. We may also be required to post additional collateral as financial assurance of our performance under certain contractual arrangements, which could adversely impact available liquidity under our New Credit Facility.”
Our commodity hedge position provides us with additional liquidity because it provides us with the relative certainty of receiving a significant portion of our future expected revenues from operations despite potential declines in the price of natural gas. For the year ended December 31, 2021, approximately 70% of our volumes were hedged through fixed price commodity swap. Assuming our 2022 production is the same as our production in 2021, approximately 54% of our production for 2022 will be hedged through fixed price commodity swap. Our ability to make significant additional acquisitions for cash would require us to utilize borrowings on the New Credit Facility or obtain additional equity or debt financing, which we may not be able to obtain on terms acceptable to us, or at all. The New Credit Facility is funded by a syndicate of 15 banks. We believe that the participants in the syndicate have the capability to fund up to their current commitment. If one or more banks should not be able to do so, we may not have the full availability of the New Credit Facility.
2021 Capital Spending and 2022 Capital Budget
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our total consolidated capital expenditures were approximately $749 million, including drilling and completion expenditures of $627 million, leasehold additions of $79 million and other capital expenditures of $43 million. Our net capital budget for 2022 is $740 million to $775 million. Our budget includes: a range of $675 million to $700 million for drilling and completion and a range of $65 million to $75 million for leasehold expenditures. We do not budget for acquisitions. During 2022, we plan to complete 60 to 65 net horizontal wells in the Appalachian Basin. We periodically review our capital expenditures and adjust our budget and its allocation based on liquidity, drilling results, leasehold acquisition opportunities and commodity prices.
Our capital budget may be adjusted as business conditions warrant as the amount, timing and allocation of capital expenditures is largely discretionary and within our control. If natural gas, NGLs and oil prices decline, or costs increase, to levels that do not generate an acceptable level of corporate returns, we may defer a significant portion of our budgeted capital expenditures
until later periods to achieve the desired balance between sources and uses of liquidity, and to prioritize capital projects that we believe have the highest expected returns and potential to generate near-term cash flows.
Based on strip prices as of December 31, 2021, we believe that net cash provided from operating activities and available borrowings under the New Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements, including normal operating needs, debt service obligations, capital expenditures, and commitments and contingencies for at least the next 12 months. For more information on our outstanding indebtedness, see “-Debt Agreements.”
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements other than contractual commitments for firm transportation, gas processing and fractionation, gathering and compression services and land payment obligations.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2021
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $736 million and $1.7 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. Net cash provided by operating activities increased primarily due to increases in commodity prices both before and after the effects of settled commodity derivatives, decreased net marketing expense as well as decreased cash utilized for working capital, partially offset by decreased production and increased ad valorem taxes between periods.
Our net operating cash flows are sensitive to many variables, the most significant of which is the volatility of natural gas, NGLs and oil prices, as well as volatility in the cash flows attributable to settlement of our commodity derivatives. Prices for natural gas, NGLs and oil are primarily determined by prevailing market conditions. Regional and worldwide economic activity, weather, infrastructure capacity to reach markets, storage capacity and other variables influence the market conditions for these products. For example, the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak reduced global demand for natural gas, NGLs and oil. These factors are beyond our control and are difficult to predict. For additional information on the impact of changing prices on our financial position, see “