Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage oncology company developing transformative treatments designed to halt the progression of life-threatening diseases, including cancer and fibrosis.
Our lead product candidate, batiraxcept (formerly AVB-500), is an ultrahigh-affinity, decoy protein that targets the GAS6-AXL signaling pathway. By capturing serum GAS6, batiraxcept starves the AXL pathway of its signal, potentially halting the biological programming that promotes disease progression. AXL receptor signaling plays an important role in multiple types of malignancies by promoting metastasis, cancer cell survival, resistance to treatments, and immune suppression.
Our current development program benefits from the availability of a proprietary serum-based biomarker that has accelerated batiraxcept drug development by allowing us to select a pharmacologically active dose and may potentially identify the cancer patients that have the best chance of responding to batiraxcept.
In our completed Phase 1 clinical trial in healthy volunteers with our lead product candidate, batiraxcept, we have demonstrated proof of mechanism for batiraxcept in neutralizing GAS6. Importantly, batiraxcept had a favorable safety profile preclinically and in the first in human trial and Phase 1b clinical trial in cancer patients.
In August 2018, the FDA designated as a Fast Track development program the investigation of our lead development candidate, batiraxcept, for platinum-resistant recurrent ovarian cancer.
In December 2018, we initiated our Phase 1b clinical trial of batiraxcept combined with standard of care therapies in patients with PROC, for which we reported results in July 2020.
In April 2020, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with WuXi, the objective of which is to identify and develop novel high-affinity bispecific antibodies against CCN2, also known as CTGF, implicated in cancer and fibrosis and identified from a similar target discovery screen that identified the significance of the AXL/GAS6 pathway in cancer. The goal is to generate a best-in-class therapeutic targeting desmoplasia and tumor growth for initial investigation in the clinic in 2023.
In November 2020, we entered into 3D Medicines Agreement, whereby we granted 3D Medicines an exclusive license to develop and commercialize products that contain batiraxcept as the sole drug substance, for the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of human oncological diseases, in the Territory.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we initiated our Phase 1b portion of the Phase 1b/2 trial of batiraxcept in ccRCC and we dosed our first patient in the trial in March 2021.
During the first quarter 2021, we initiated our registrational Phase 3 trial of batiraxcept in PROC and we dosed our first patient in the trial in April 2021.This global, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled adaptive trial is designed to evaluate efficacy and safety of batiraxcept at a dose of 15 mg/kg in combination with PAC versus PAC alone. As noted previously, we have experienced delays in patient enrollment due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In May 2021, we announced expansion of batiraxcept development programs into first line pancreatic adenocarcinoma ("PA") with the goal of initiating the trial by end of 2021. We dosed our first patient in August 2021.
In June 2021, we announced positive initial safety, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic results from the batiraxcept Phase 1b portion of the Phase 1b/2 clinical trial in ccRCC.
In October 2021, the EMA granted orphan drug designation for batiraxcept for the treatment of ovarian cancer, following a recommendation from the Committee for Orphan Medicinal Products.
In November 2021, we announced positive preliminary data from our Phase 1b trial evaluating batiraxcept in combination with cabozantinib for treatment of ccRCC.
In March 2022, we announced updated positive data and new biomarker data from our Phase 1b trial of batiraxcept in ccRCC.
As we advance our clinical programs, we are in close contact with our CROs and clinical sites and are continually assessing the impact of COVID-19 on our planned trials and current timelines and costs. We have experienced delays in patient enrollment due to the COVID-19 pandemic. To date, we are on track to meet all of our recently announced clinical milestones. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues and persists for an extended period of time or increases in severity, we could experience significant disruptions to our clinical development timelines and, if we experience delays in patient enrollment and deems it necessary or advisable to improve patient recruitment by, among other things, opening additional clinical sites, we could incur increased clinical program expenses. Any such disruptions or delays would, and any such increased clinical program expenses could, adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects.
Recent Clinical Developments
In January 2022, we announced that we had dosed the first patient in the Phase 2 portion of the Phase 1b/2 study of batiraxcept in combination with cabozantinib for treatment of ccRCC.
In January 2022, we entered into an investment agreement (the “Investment Agreement”) with Eshelman Ventures, LLC and, solely for purposes of Article IV and Article V of the Investment Agreement, Dr.. Eshelman relating to the issuance of a pre-funded warrant to purchase up to 4,545,455 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at a price of $2.20 per share, which was the consolidated closing bid price of our common stock on Nasdaq on December 31, 2021, for an aggregate purchase price of $10 million. The closing of the transaction occurred on January 5, 2022. Pursuant to the terms of the Investment Agreement, we were required to file a registration statement registering the shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrant. The registration statement was filed on January 5, 2022 and declared effective by the SEC on January 18, 2022.
In March 2022, we announced updated safety and clinical activity data from the 26 patients from the Phase Ib trial evaluating batiraxcept in combination with cabozantinib for treatment of ccRCC. We also announced updated clinical activity for 13 patients in a trial evaluating batiraxcept in combination with gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel in patients with advanced or metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma eligible to receive gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel as first-line treatment.
Recent Financial Developments
On March 31, 2022, we closed a registered direct offering of our common stock with a single healthcare-focused institutional investor and Eshelman Ventures, LLC, pursuant to which we issued 3,185,216 shares of common stock, 1,665,025 pre-funded warrants and common stock warrants to purchase up to 4,850,241 shares of common stock in a registered direct offering priced at-the-market under Nasdaq rules. The purchase price per share and accompanying common stock warrant was $2.005 for the institutional investor and $2.325 for Eshelman Ventures, LLC. The purchase price per pre-funded warrant and accompanying common stock warrant was $2.004 for the institutional investor. The net proceeds from the offering was $9.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commission and offering expenses. The common stock warrants issued to the institutional investor are exercisable immediately, will expire five years from the exercisable date and will have an exercise price of $1.88 per share. The common stock warrants issued to Eshelman Ventures, LLC will be exercisable upon the approval by our stockholders of the exercise of previously issued securities, will expire five years following the exercise date and will have an exercise price of $2.20 per share. We could receive additional gross proceeds of $9.4 million, if the warrants are fully exercised.
Important Note
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes a discussion of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
References in this report to “we,” “us,” “our” and similar first-person expressions refer to Aravive, Inc. (formerly known as Versartis, Inc.) and its subsidiaries, including Private Aravive. References to “Versartis, Inc.” or “Private Aravive” refer to those respective companies prior to the completion of their merger in October 2018.
Financial overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from commercial sales of any of our product candidates. However, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated approximately $7.4 million and $5.7 million from the 3D Medicine Agreement, which represents a portion of initial signing and milestone payments received from 3D Medicines that is recognized at the time of the receipt and a portion of the payments that is deferred and recognized over the PROC trial period.
In the future, we may generate revenue from a variety of sources, including product sales if we develop products which are approved for sale, license fees, milestones, research and development and royalty payments in connection with strategic collaborations or government contracts, or licenses of our intellectual property.
Research and development expenses
We recognize both internal and external research and development expenses as incurred. Our external research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial and other materials, including expenses incurred under agreements with contract manufacturing organizations;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites, and consultants that conduct our clinical trials;
•
other costs associated with development activities, including additional studies; and
Internal research and development costs consist primarily of salaries and related fringe benefit costs for our employees (such as workers’ compensation and health insurance premiums), stock-based compensation charges and travel costs.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs, professional fees for legal, consulting, audit and tax services, rent and other general operating expenses not included in research and development.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net is primarily comprised of sublease income for our 1020 Marsh Facility lease and gains and losses on foreign currency transactions related to third party contracts with foreign-based contract manufacturing organizations.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our net loss during the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)
Not meaningful.
Collaboration revenue
In November 2020, we entered into the 3D Medicines Agreement. Collaboration revenue was approximately $7.4 million and $5.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense increased by $19.9 million, or 113%, to $37.5 million in 2021 from $17.6 million for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to the continued progress of our clinical programs, including our Phase 3 trial of batiraxcept in PROC, our Phase 1b/2 trial of batiraxcept in ccRCC, and our Phase 1 trial of batiraxcept in pancreatic cancer. The increase in research and development expense was also driven by an increase in our compensation expense as we further built out research and development teams to manage our ongoing clinical trials. The initiation and advancement of our Phase 3 trial of batiraxcept in PROC is the most significant driver to the increase in expense in 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020. There were also increased manufacturing activities during 2021 due to the initiation of the Phase 3 PROC trial.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense decreased by $2.5 million, or 19%, to $10.6 million in 2021 from $13.1 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a lower stock-based compensation expense along with reduced rent expense, legal and consulting fees.
Loss on impairment of long-lived assets
We incurred non-cash charges for impairment of our long-lived assets of $5.8 million for 2020 related to our former sublease tenant's inability to pay future sublease rental payments as compared to no charges in 2021.
Other income (expense), net
Other income, increased by approximately $1.5 million, to approximately $1.5 million other income net in 2021 from $14 thousand of other expense for the same period in 2020. The increase relates our sublease income received from our new Subtenant with no write-down incurred in 2021 as compared to the failure to receive sublease income in 2020 from our prior sublease tenant, which was offset by the write-down of $1.4 million related to our sublease receivable balance and previously capitalized commission charges due to the default in 2020 and 2021 by the prior sublease tenant under its sublease with us.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception and through December 31, 2021, we have financed our operations through private placements of our equity securities, public offerings of our common stock, debt financing, CPRIT grant proceeds, sales of common stock through our at-the-market facility as well as upfront payments received from license agreements. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $539.8 million and working capital of $44.8 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $59.4 million, a majority of which is invested in money market funds at several highly rated financial institutions.
During 2020 and 2021, our primary sources of funding have been grant revenue from our CRIT Grant, revenue from 3D Medicines and proceeds from the sale of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share. In March 2020, we received approximately $1.6 million of additional funding from our CPRIT Grant related to a receivable balance recorded at December 31, 2019. In November 2020, June 2021 and August 2021, we received $12 million, $6 million and $3 million, respectively, in upfront and milestone payments from 3D Medicines pursuant to the 3D Medicines Agreement with them. On February 18, 2021, we received approximately $21 million from the purchase by Eshelman Ventures of 2,875,000 shares of our common stock. In September 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC which was declared effective by the SEC on November 20, 2020. On September 4, 2020, we entered into an equity distribution agreement (the "Equity Distribution Agreement"), with Piper Sandler and Cantor Fitzgerald, to sell shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, from time to time, through an “at the market offering” program having an aggregate offering price of up to $60,000,000 through which Piper Sandler and Cantor Fitzgerald will act as sales agents. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 1,432,627 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $9.8 million under the Equity Distribution Agreement and subsequent to December 31, 2021 through March 15, 2022, we sold 54,763 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $0.1 million under the Equity Distribution Agreement. On January 5, 2022, we received approximately $10.0 million from the purchase by Eshelman Ventures, LLC of pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 4,545,455 shares of our common stock. In March 2022, we received approximately $9.3 million in net proceeds, in the aggregate, from the purchase by Eshelman Ventures, LLC and a single healthcare-focused institutional investor of 3,185,216 shares of our common stock, 1,665,025 pre-funded warrants and warrants to purchase up to 4,850,241 shares of our common stock in a registered direct offering.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $59.4 million, which does not include approximately $19.3 million received subsequent to year end from the investments made by Eshelman Ventures and a single healthcare-focused institutional investor. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to sustain operations into the first quarter of 2023 and that we will need to obtain additional financing in order to advance our clinical development program to later stages of development, build out our pipeline and fund operations for the foreseeable future and we will continue to seek funds through equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources, or through other sources of financing. These factors raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements included in this annual report do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability of the recorded assets or the classification of liabilities that may be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern. Although management has been successful in raising capital in the past, there can be no assurance that we will be successful or that any needed financing will be available in the future at terms acceptable to us. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. We anticipate that we will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements of which will depend on many factors, including:
•
the rate of progress and cost of our clinical studies;
•
the timing of, and costs involved in, seeking and obtaining approvals from the FDA and other regulatory authorities;
•
the cost of preparing to manufacture on a larger scale;
•
the costs of commercialization activities if any future product candidate is approved, including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution;
•
the degree and rate of market acceptance of any products launched by us or future partners;
•
the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•
our ability to enter into additional collaboration, licensing, commercialization or other arrangements and the terms and timing of such arrangements; and
•
the emergence of competing technologies or other adverse market developments.
If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license to others technologies or clinical product candidates or programs that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves.
Cash flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below:
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $32.2 million and $12.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which was primarily due to the use of funds in our operations related to the development of batiraxcept, our product candidate. Cash used in operating activities in 2021 increased compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to the ramp up in our Phase 3 trial of batiraxcept in PROC along with continuing costs related to our trial of our second oncology indication, ccRCC and our new third oncology indication, pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Cash provided by investing activities
Net cash from investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was zero.
Cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $31.1 million and $7.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Financing activities related to the year ended December 31, 2021 included a registered direct offering with proceeds of $20.9 million along with at the market offering proceeds of $9.8 million. Financing activities related to the year ended December 31, 2020 included a private placement offering with proceeds of $5.0 million in April 2020 along with at the market offering proceeds of $2.3 million.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable in the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue for 2021 and 2020 has been generated through our collaboration and license agreement which is within the scope of ASC 606. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i)
identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii)
identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii)
determine the transaction price;
(iv)
allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v)
recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Our collaboration and license agreement contains multiple elements including (i) intellectual property licenses and (ii) research and development services. Consideration received under these arrangements may include upfront payments, research and development funding, cost reimbursements, milestone payments, payments for product sales and royalty payments. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under the agreement, we implement the five-step model noted above. As part of the accounting for the arrangement, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine whether the individual promises should be accounted for as separate performance obligations or as a combined performance obligation, and to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. A deliverable represents a separate performance obligation if both of the following criteria are met: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer, and (ii) the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. We use key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include forecasted revenues, development timelines, estimated costs to be incurred, discount rates, and probabilities of technical and regulatory success.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expense includes payroll and personnel expenses; consulting costs; external contract research and development expenses; and allocated overhead, including rent and utilities, and relate to both company-sponsored programs as well as costs incurred pursuant to reimbursement arrangements. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized and recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, reviewing the terms of our license agreements, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each consolidated balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees to:
•
contract manufacturers in connection with the production of clinical trial materials;
•
contract research organizations and other service providers in connection with clinical studies;
•
investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
•
vendors in connection with preclinical development activities; and
•
professional service fees for consulting and related services.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract, and may result in uneven payment flows and expense recognition. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amount actually incurred. However, due to the nature of these estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical studies or other research activity.
Right-of-Use Lease Accounting
The most significant estimates used by management in accounting for right-of-use leases and the impact of these estimates are as follows:
•
Lease term - We estimate our lease term and lease obligation based upon our signed commitment to make the lease payments arising from our leases. We consider any lease extensions and if we determine those extensions are reasonably certain that we will exercise that option those extensions, if any, are included in the lease term.
•
Incremental borrowing rate - Our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use an estimated incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease inception in determining the present value of lease payments.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, stock-based compensation expense was $2.3 million and $2.0 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $3.6 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.6 years. The intrinsic value of all outstanding stock options as of December 31, 2021 was approximately $1.6 million, of which all related to vested options. We expect to continue to grant equity incentive awards in the future as we seek to retain our existing employees.
Stock-based compensation costs related to stock options granted to employees are measured at the date of grant and to the options assumed in connection with the Merger are measured at the date of the Merger based on the estimated fair value of the award, net of estimated forfeitures. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of stock-based awards is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. Stock options we grant to employees generally vest over four years.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to estimate the fair value of stock-based awards. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense, net loss and net loss per share of common stock could have been significantly different. These assumptions include:
•
Expected volatility: The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the most recent period commensurate with the estimated expected term of our stock options.
•
Expected term: We do not believe we are able to rely on our historical exercise and post-vesting termination activity to provide accurate data for estimating the expected term for use in estimating the fair value-based measurement of our options. Therefore, we have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of options.
•
Risk-free rate: The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of U.S. Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected time to liquidity.
•
Expected dividend yield: We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
See Note 9 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of employee stock options. In addition to the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, we must also estimate a forfeiture rate to calculate the stock-based compensation expense for our awards. We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms, and forfeiture rates utilized for our stock-based compensation expense calculations on a prospective basis.
Income Taxes
We file U.S. federal income tax returns, Texas, California and other various state tax returns. To date, we have not been audited by the Internal Revenue Service or any state income tax authority; however, all tax years remain open for examination by federal and state tax authorities. We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. We assess the likelihood that the resulting deferred tax assets will be realized. A valuation allowance is provided when it is deemed more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2021, our total gross deferred tax assets were $23.6 million. Due to our lack of earnings history and uncertainties surrounding our ability to generate future taxable income, the net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance. The deferred tax assets were primarily comprised of federal and state tax net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Utilization of net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards may be limited by the “ownership change” rules, as defined in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code (any such limitation, a “Section 382 limitation”). Similar rules may apply under state tax laws. We have performed an analysis to determine whether an “ownership change” occurred from inception up to the Aravive Biologics acquisition date. Based on this analysis during 2018, management determined that both Versartis, Inc. and Aravive Biologics did experience ownership changes, which resulted in a significant impairment of the net operating losses and credit carryforwards. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, no additional ownership changes were noted.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements that we have adopted or are currently evaluating are described in detail within “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10K.