ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this annual report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 1, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $6,350,527, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $1,024,317, offset by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,240,000 and interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $134,844.
For the period from September 1, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $4,143,636, which consisted of operating expenses of $169,446, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $3,620,000 and transaction costs of $373,435, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $19,245.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 24, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 20,000,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 4,000,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant in a private placement to our stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $6,000,000.
On December 2, 2020, we sold an additional 3,000,000 units for total gross proceeds of $30,000,000 in connection with the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option. Simultaneously with the closing of the over-allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 400,000 private placement warrants at $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating total proceeds of $600,000.
Following the initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $13,092,230 in transaction costs, including $4,600,000 of underwriting fees, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $442,230 of other offering costs, of which $250,000 of legal services fees in connection with the initial public offering was paid through the transfer of 350,000 founder shares. Our legal counsel has also provided up to $120,000 of legal services in connection with the company’s ongoing reporting obligations under the Exchange Act for no additional cash compensation.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $549,317. Net income of $6,350,527 was impacted by the increase in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,240,000 and interest earned on marketable securities of $134,844 offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $475,000 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from September 1, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $520,748. Net loss of $4,143,636 was affected by formation costs paid through a promissory note of $1,478, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $3,620,000 and transaction costs of $373,435 and an interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $19,245. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $352,780 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $230,154,089. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $745,727 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
We have until November 24, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after November 24, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support provided to the company. We began incurring these fees on November 19, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the company’s consummation of a business combination and its liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) 480 and ASC 815. We account for the private placement warrants, warrants as part of the units (“public warrants”), and warrants convertible from the working capital loans (together with the private placement warrants and public warrants, the “warrants”) in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The private placement warrants and the public warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a binomial lattice model. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the public warrants from the units, the public warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value for the public warrants and the private placement warrants as of each relevant date.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Share of Common Stock
In connection with the change in presentation for the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, we also revised our earnings per share calculation to allocate net income (loss) pro rata to Class A and Class B common stock. This presentation contemplates a business combination as the most likely outcome, in which case, both classes of common stock share pro rata in the income (loss) of the company.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standard Board issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective as of January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.