ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
ArcBest Corporation™ (together with its subsidiaries, the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our”) provides a comprehensive suite of freight transportation and integrated logistics services to deliver innovative solutions. Our operations are conducted through our three reportable operating segments:
● Asset-Based, which consists of ABF Freight System, Inc. and certain other subsidiaries (“ABF Freight”);
● ArcBest, our asset-light logistics operation; and
● FleetNet.
The ArcBest and FleetNet reportable segments combined represent our Asset-Light operations. See additional segment descriptions in Part I, Item 1 (Business) and in Note N to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References to the Company, including “we,” “us,” and “our,” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are primarily to the Company and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis.
ORGANIZATION OF INFORMATION
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is provided to assist readers in understanding our financial performance during the periods presented and significant trends which may impact our future performance. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. MD&A includes forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from the statements made in this section due to a number of factors that are discussed in Part I (Forward-Looking Statements) and Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. MD&A is comprised of the following:
● Results of Operations includes:
● an overview of consolidated results with 2021 compared to 2020, and a consolidated Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) reconciliation to net income;
● a financial summary and analysis of our Asset-Based segment results of 2021 compared to 2020, including a discussion of key actions and events that impacted the results;
● a financial summary and analysis of the results of our Asset-Light operations for 2021 compared to 2020, including a discussion of key actions and events that impacted the results; and
● a discussion of other matters impacting operating results, including effects of inflation, current economic conditions, environmental and legal matters, and information technology and cybersecurity.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources provides an analysis of key elements of the cash flow statements, borrowing capacity, and contractual cash obligations, including a discussion of financing arrangements and financial commitments.
● Income Taxes provides an analysis of the effective tax rates and deferred tax balances, including deferred tax asset valuation allowances.
● Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates discusses those accounting policies that are important to understanding certain material judgments and assumptions incorporated in the reported financial results.
● Recent Accounting Pronouncements discusses accounting standards that are not yet effective for our financial statements but are expected to have a material effect on our future results of operations or financial condition.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Results of Operations section of MD&A generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the Results of Operations section of MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Consolidated Results
(1) Includes the operations of MoLo since the November 1, 2021 acquisition date.
(2) Includes a noncash impairment charge of $26.5 million (pre-tax), or $19.8 million (after-tax) and $0.75 per diluted share, in 2019 related to a portion of the goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment associated with the acquisition of truckload and dedicated businesses within the ArcBest segment.
(3) Includes after-tax nonunion defined benefit pension expense, including settlement expense, of $7.7 million and $0.29 per diluted share in 2019. Pension settlement expense for 2019 relates to lump sum and other distributions to settle the plan benefit obligation and a pension termination expense. Termination of the nonunion pension plan was completed in 2019. See Note J to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our consolidated revenues, which totaled $4.0 billion for 2021, increased 35.4% compared to 2020, primarily reflecting increased customer demand and higher pricing for shipping and logistics services in an improving economic environment. The year-over-year increase in consolidated revenues for 2021 reflects a 23.0% increase in our Asset-Based revenues and a 58.0% increase in revenues of our Asset-Light operations (representing the combined operations of our ArcBest and FleetNet segments). The increased elimination of revenues reported in the “Other and eliminations” line of consolidated revenues in 2021, compared to 2020, includes the impact of increased intersegment business levels among our operating segments, reflecting continued integration of our logistics services.
Our Asset-Based revenue improvement reflects a 14.7% increase in billed revenue per hundredweight, including fuel surcharges, a 7.6% increase in tonnage per day, and a 4.3% increase in shipments per day in 2021, compared to 2020, reflecting solid customer demand in a strong pricing environment. The increase in revenues of our Asset-Light operations for 2021, compared to 2020, was due to a 31.0% increase in revenue per shipment associated with higher market pricing in a tighter truckload capacity environment, and a 30.6% increase in shipments per day (metric excludes managed transportation shipments), and increased managed transportation revenue within our ArcBest segment. The acquired operations of MoLo Solutions, LLC (“MoLo”), which were included in the ArcBest segment since the November 1, 2021 acquisition date, also contributed to the revenue increase. (The acquisition of MoLo is more fully described in the Asset-Light Overview section of Asset-Light Operations.) The Asset-Light revenue increase includes higher revenue for our FleetNet segment due to increases in revenue per event and service event volume. Our Asset-Light operations, on a combined basis, generated 38% and 32% of total revenues before other revenues and intercompany eliminations for 2021 and 2020, respectively, as we advanced toward our goal of achieving a more balanced revenue mix and ultimately toward a revenue mix that is more reflective of our customers’ needs for logistic services.
Consolidated operating income increased $182.7 million in 2021, compared to 2020, primarily due to the improved operating results of our operating segments. The year-over-year comparisons of consolidated operating income were also impacted by items described in the following paragraphs, including costs related to investments in innovative technology, costs related to the MoLo acquisition, a gain on the sale of a subsidiary, and gains on the sale of property and equipment.
Transaction costs associated with the MoLo acquisition impacted consolidated results by $6.0 million (pre-tax), or $4.4 million (after-tax) and $0.16 per diluted share, for 2021. Amortization of acquired intangible assets related to the acquisition of MoLo and previously acquired businesses in the ArcBest segment of Asset-Light operations impacted consolidated results by $5.3 million (pre-tax), or $3.9 million (after-tax) and $0.15 per diluted share, for 2021. For 2020, amortization of acquired intangible assets related to previously acquired business in the ArcBest segment impacted consolidated results by $3.7 million (pre-tax), or $2.8 million (after-tax) and $0.11 per diluted share.
Consolidated operating results also benefited from the sale of a portion of our ArcBest segment’s moving labor services business in second quarter 2021, which resulted in a gain of $6.9 million (pre-tax), or $5.4 million (after-tax) and $0.20 per diluted share, and gains on the sale of property and equipment, which increased $6.1 million in 2021, compared to 2020.
Innovative technology costs related to our freight handling pilot test program at ABF Freight, as further discussed in the Asset-Based Segment Results section, and other initiatives to optimize our performance through technological innovation, including costs related to our investment in human-centered remote operation software which are reported in the “Other and eliminations” line of consolidated operating income, impacted consolidated results by $32.8 million (pre-tax), or $24.9 million (after-tax) and $0.93 per diluted share, for 2021, compared to $25.6 million (pre-tax), or $19.6 million (after-tax) and $0.74 per diluted share, for 2020. On a consolidated basis, we expect these innovative technology costs to approximate $9.5 million (pre-tax) for first quarter and $38 million (pre-tax) for full-year 2022.
In addition to the above items, consolidated net income and earnings per share were impacted by income from changes in the cash surrender value of variable life insurance policies, tax benefits from the vesting of share-based compensation awards, tax credits, and other changes in the effective tax rate as described within the Income Taxes section of MD&A. A portion of our variable life insurance policies have investments, through separate accounts, in equity and fixed income securities and, therefore, are subject to market volatility. Changes in the cash surrender value of life insurance policies, which are reported below the operating line in the consolidated statements of operations, increased consolidated net income by $4.1 million and $0.15 per diluted share in 2021, versus $2.3 million and $0.09 per diluted share in 2020.
Consolidated net income and earnings per share were impacted by $2.0 million and $0.08 per diluted share in 2021, and $2.1 million and $0.08 per diluted share in 2020, for a research and development tax credit. The vesting of restricted stock units resulted in a tax benefit of $7.6 million and $0.29 per diluted share for 2021, compared to a tax expense of $0.5 million and $0.02 per diluted share in 2020. The tax benefits and credits, as well as other changes in the effective tax rates, which impacted the year-over-year comparisons of consolidated net income and earnings per share for 2021 and 2020 are further described within the Income Taxes section of MD&A and in Note F to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Consolidated Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”)
We report our financial results in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). However, management believes that certain non-GAAP performance measures and ratios, such as Adjusted EBITDA, utilized for internal analysis provide analysts, investors, and others the same information that we use internally for purposes of assessing our core operating performance and provides meaningful comparisons between current and prior period results, as well as important information regarding performance trends. Accordingly, using these measures improves comparability in analyzing our performance because it removes the impact of items from operating results that, in management’s opinion, do not reflect our core operating performance. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a key measure of performance and for business planning. The measure is particularly meaningful for analysis of our operating performance, because it excludes amortization of acquired intangibles and software of the Asset-Light businesses, which are significant expenses resulting from strategic decisions rather than core daily operations. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is a primary component of the financial covenants contained in our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (see Note H to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently; therefore, our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as a better measurement than operating income, operating cash flow, net income, or earnings per share, as determined under GAAP. The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to our net income, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure for the periods presented.
(1) Includes amortization of intangibles associated with acquired businesses.
(2) Includes pre-tax settlement expense related to the nonunion defined benefit pension plan of $4.2 million in 2019 and pre-tax settlement expense related to the supplemental benefit plan of $0.1 million and $0.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. For 2019, also includes a $4.0 million noncash pension termination expense. See Note J to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3) The noncash impairment charge recognized in 2019 relates to a portion of the goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment associated with the acquisition of truckload and dedicated businesses within the ArcBest segment.
(4) Transaction costs are associated with the acquisition of MoLo.
Asset-Based Operations
Asset-Based Segment Overview
The Asset-Based segment consists of ABF Freight System, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of ArcBest Corporation, and certain other subsidiaries. Our Asset-Based segment operates a less-than-truckload (“LTL”) network across North America to provide freight transportation services. Our customers trust the LTL solutions ABF Freight has provided for nearly a century and rely on us to solve their transportation challenges. We are strategically investing in our Asset-Based operations to utilize technology to improve freight handling processes and provide better experiences for our customers.
Our Asset-Based operations are affected by general economic conditions, as well as a number of other factors that are more fully described in Item 1 (Business) and in Item 1A (Risk Factors) of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Note N to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of the Asset-Based segment and additional segment information, including revenues, operating expenses, and operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
The key indicators necessary to understand the operating results of our Asset-Based segment are outlined below. These key indicators are used by management to evaluate segment operating performance and measure the effectiveness of strategic initiatives in the results of our Asset-Based segment. We quantify certain key indicators using key operating statistics which are important measures in analyzing segment operating results from period to period. These statistics are defined within the key indicators below and referred to throughout the discussion of results of our Asset-Based segment:
● Overall customer demand for freight transportation services, including the impact of economic factors.
● Volume of transportation services provided and processed through our network, which influences operating leverage as the level of tonnage and number of shipments vary, primarily measured by:
Pounds or Tonnage - total weight of shipments processed during the period in U.S. pounds or U.S. tons.
Pounds per day or Tonnage per day (average daily shipment weight) - pounds or tonnage divided by the number of workdays in the period.
Shipments per day - total number of shipments moving through the Asset-Based freight network during the period divided by the number of workdays in the period.
Pounds per shipment (weight per shipment) - total pounds divided by the number of shipments during the period.
Average length of haul (miles) - total miles between origin and destination service centers for all shipments (including shipments moved with purchased transportation) during the period, with miles based on the size of shipments.
● Prices obtained for services, including fuel surcharges, primarily measured by:
Billed revenue per hundredweight, including fuel surcharges (yield) - revenue per every 100 pounds of shipment weight, including fuel surcharges, systematically calculated as shipments are processed in the Asset-Based freight network. Revenue for undelivered freight is deferred for financial statement purposes in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. Billed revenue used for calculating revenue per hundredweight measurements is not adjusted for the portion of revenue deferred for financial statement purposes.
● Ability to manage cost structure, primarily in the area of salaries, wages, and benefits (“labor”), with the total cost structure primarily measured by:
Operating ratio - the percent of operating expenses to revenue levels.
We also quantify certain key operating statistics which are used by management to evaluate productivity of operations within the Asset-Based freight network and to measure the effectiveness of strategic initiatives to manage the segment’s cost structure from period to period. These measures are defined below and further discussed in the Asset-Based Operating Expenses section within Asset-Based Segment Results:
● Shipments per DSY hour - total shipments (including shipments handled by purchased transportation agents) divided by dock, street, and yard (“DSY”) hours. This metric is used to measure labor efficiency in the segment’s local operations. The shipments per DSY hour metric will generally increase when more purchased transportation is used; however, the labor efficiency may be partially offset by increased purchased transportation expense.
● Pounds per mile - total pounds divided by total miles driven during the period (including pounds and miles moved with purchased transportation). This metric is used to measure labor efficiency of linehaul operations, although it is influenced by other factors including freight density, loading efficiency, average length of haul, and the degree to which purchased transportation (including rail service) is used.
Other companies within our industry may present different key performance indicators or operating statistics, or they may calculate their measures differently; therefore, our key performance indicators or operating statistics may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Key performance indicators or operating statistics should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results. Our key performance indicators or
operating statistics should not be construed as better measurements of our results than operating income, operating cash flow, net income, or earnings per share, as determined under GAAP.
As of December 2021, approximately 82% of the Asset-Based segment’s employees were covered under the ABF National Master Freight Agreement (the “2018 ABF NMFA”), the collective bargaining agreement with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters (the “IBT”), which was implemented on July 29, 2018, effective retroactive to April 1, 2018, and will remain in effect through June 30, 2023. Under the 2018 ABF NMFA, the contractual wage and benefits costs, including the ratification bonuses and vacation restoration, are estimated to increase approximately 2.0% on a compounded annual basis through the end of the agreement. Profit-sharing bonuses based on the Asset-Based segment’s annual GAAP operating ratios for any full calendar year under the contract represent an additional increase in costs under the 2018 ABF NMFA. A profit-sharing bonus was earned by contractual employees under the 2018 ABF NMFA, which totaled $15.1 million and $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, upon the Asset-Based segment achieving an annual GAAP operating ratio of 89.9% in 2021 and 95.3% in 2020.
The major economic provisions of the 2018 ABF NMFA include:
● restoration of one week of vacation that was previously reduced in the prior collective bargaining agreement, which began accruing on anniversary dates on or after April 1, 2018, with the new vacation eligibility schedule being the same as the applicable 2008 to 2013 supplemental agreements;
● wage increases in each year of the contract, beginning July 1, 2018;
● ratification bonuses for qualifying employees;
● contributions to multiemployer pension plans at current rates for each fund;
● continuation of existing health coverage and annual multiemployer health and welfare contribution rate increases in accordance with the contract;
● changes to purchased transportation provisions with certain protections for road drivers as specified in the contract; and
● profit-sharing bonuses based upon the Asset-Based segment’s achievement of annual operating ratios of 96.0% or below for a full calendar year under the contract period.
Tonnage
The level of freight tonnage managed by the Asset-Based segment is directly affected by industrial production and manufacturing, distribution, residential and commercial construction, consumer spending, primarily in the North American economy, and capacity in the trucking industry. Operating results are affected by economic cycles and conditions, customers’ business cycles, and changes in customers’ business practices. The Asset-Based segment actively competes for freight business based primarily on price, service, and availability of flexible shipping options to customers. ArcBest seeks to offer value through identifying specific customer needs, then providing operational flexibility and seamless access to the services of our Asset-Based segment and our Asset-Light operations in order to respond with customized solutions.
Pricing
The industry pricing environment, another key factor impacting our Asset-Based results, influences the ability to obtain appropriate margins and price increases on customer accounts. Generally, freight is rated by a class system, which is established by the National Motor Freight Traffic Association, Inc. Light, bulky freight typically has a higher class and is priced at a higher revenue per hundredweight than dense, heavy freight. Changes in the rated class and packaging of the freight, along with changes in other freight profile factors such as average shipment size, average length of haul, freight density, and customer and geographic mix, can affect the average billed revenue per hundredweight measure.
Approximately 25% our Asset-Based business is subject to base LTL tariffs, which are affected by general rate increases, combined with individually negotiated discounts. Rates on the other 75% of our Asset-Based business, including business priced in the spot market, are subject to individual pricing arrangements that are negotiated at various times throughout the year. The majority of the business that is subject to negotiated pricing arrangements is associated with larger customer accounts with annually negotiated pricing arrangements, and the remaining business is priced on an individual shipment basis considering each shipment’s unique profile, value provided to the customer, and current market conditions. Since pricing is established individually by account, the Asset-Based segment focuses on individual account profitability rather than a single measure of billed revenue per hundredweight when considering customer account or market evaluations. This is due to the difficulty of quantifying, with sufficient accuracy, the impact of changes in freight profile characteristics, which is necessary in estimating true price changes.
We allow shippers without negotiated published rates to instantly access competitive LTL rates for their shipping needs with capacity available in the ABF Freight network at the time of the shipment. The market has been receptive to the pricing option for transactional LTL shipments and this program has been beneficial in optimizing our business levels by improving capacity utilization in the Asset-Based network.
We use a space-based pricing approach for shipments subject to LTL tariffs to align our pricing with freight profile trends in the industry, including bulkier shipments across the supply chain, the acceleration in e-commerce, and the unique requirements of many shipping and logistics solutions. Space-based pricing involves the use of freight dimensions (length, width, and height) to determine applicable cubic minimum charges (“CMC”) that supplement weight-based metrics when appropriate. Traditional LTL pricing is generally weight-based, while our linehaul costs are generally space-based (i.e., costs are impacted by the volume of space required for each shipment). We believe space-based pricing better aligns our pricing mechanisms with the metrics which affect our resources and, therefore, our costs to provide logistics services. We seek to provide logistics solutions to our customers’ businesses and the unique shipment characteristics of their various products and commodities, and we believe that we are particularly experienced in handling complicated freight. The CMC is an additional pricing mechanism to better capture the value we provide in transporting these shipments.
Fuel
The transportation industry is dependent upon the availability of adequate fuel supplies. The Asset-Based segment assesses a fuel surcharge based on the index of national on-highway average diesel fuel prices published weekly by the U.S. Department of Energy. To better align fuel surcharges to fuel- and energy-related expenses and provide more stability to account profitability as fuel prices change, we may, from time to time, revise our standard fuel surcharge program which impacts approximately one third of Asset-Based shipments and primarily affects noncontractual customers. While fuel surcharge revenue generally more than offsets the increase in direct diesel fuel costs when applied, the total impact of energy prices on other nonfuel-related expenses is difficult to ascertain. Management cannot predict, with reasonable certainty, future fuel price fluctuations, the impact of energy prices on other cost elements, recoverability of fuel costs through fuel surcharges, and the effect of fuel surcharges on the overall rate structure or the total price that the segment will receive from its customers. While the fuel surcharge is one of several components in the overall rate structure, the actual rate paid by customers is governed by market forces and the overall value of services provided to the customer.
During periods of changing diesel fuel prices, the fuel surcharge and associated direct diesel fuel costs also vary by different degrees. Depending upon the rates of these changes and the impact on costs in other fuel- and energy-related areas, operating margins could be impacted. Fuel prices have fluctuated significantly in recent years. Whether fuel prices fluctuate or remain constant, operating results may be adversely affected if competitive pressures limit our ability to recover fuel surcharges. Throughout 2021, the fuel surcharge mechanism generally continued to have market acceptance among customers; however, certain nonstandard pricing arrangements have limited the amount of fuel surcharge recovered. The negative impact on operating margins of capped fuel surcharge revenue during periods of increasing fuel costs is more evident when fuel prices remain above the maximum levels recovered through the fuel surcharge mechanism on certain accounts. In periods of declining fuel prices, fuel surcharge percentages also decrease, which negatively impacts the total billed revenue per hundredweight measure and, consequently, revenues. The revenue decline may be disproportionate to our fuel costs. Asset-Based revenues for 2021 compared to 2020 were positively impacted by higher fuel surcharge revenue due to an increase in the nominal fuel surcharge rate, while total fuel costs also increased. The segment’s operating results will continue to be impacted by further changes in fuel prices and the related fuel surcharges.
Labor Costs
Our Asset-Based labor costs, including retirement and healthcare benefits for contractual employees that are provided by a number of multiemployer plans (see Note J to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), are impacted by contractual obligations under the 2018 ABF NMFA and other related supplemental agreements. Total salaries, wages, and benefits, amounted to 46.6% and 52.4% of revenues for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Changes in salaries, wages, and benefits expense as a percentage of revenues are discussed in the following Asset-Based Segment Results section.
ABF Freight operates in a highly competitive industry which consists predominantly of nonunion motor carriers. Nonunion competitors have a lower fringe benefit cost structure and less stringent labor work rules, and certain carriers also have lower wage rates for their freight-handling and driving personnel. Wage and benefit concessions granted to certain union competitors also allow for a lower cost structure. ABF Freight has continued to address with the IBT the effect of the segment’s wage and benefit cost structure on its operating results. Lower cost increases throughout the 2018 ABF NMFA contract period and increased flexibility in labor work rules are important factors in bringing ABF Freight’s labor cost
structure closer in line with that of its competitors. However, under its current labor agreement, ABF Freight continues to pay some of the highest benefit contribution rates in the industry. The terms of the 2018 ABF NMFA are expected to allow the Asset-Based segment to maintain low-cost inflation in the current tight labor market while providing some of the best wages and benefits in the industry to our employees.
On March 11, 2021, H.R.1319, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (the “American Rescue Plan Act”) was signed into law. The American Rescue Plan Act includes the Butch Lewis Emergency Pension Plan Relief Act of 2021 (the “Pension Relief Act”). The Pension Relief Act includes provisions to improve funding for multiemployer pension plans, including financial assistance provided through the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (the “PBGC”) to qualifying underfunded plans to secure pension benefits for plan participants. Without the funding to be provided by the Pension Relief Act, many of the multiemployer pension funds to which we contribute could become insolvent in the near future.
On July 9, 2021, the PBGC announced an interim final rule implementing a Special Financial Assistance Program (the “SFA Program”) to administer funds to severely underfunded eligible multiemployer pension plans under the Pension Relief Act. We are currently evaluating the impact of the assistance to be provided by the SFA Program to multiemployer pension plans to which ABF Freight contributes. Through the term of the 2018 ABF NMFA, which extends through June 30, 2023, ABF Freight’s multiemployer pension contribution obligations generally will be satisfied by making the specified contributions when due. Future contribution rates will be determined through the negotiation process for contract periods following the term of the current collective bargaining agreement. While we cannot determine with any certainty the contributions that will be required under future collective bargaining agreements for ABF Freight’s contractual employees, our future contribution rates to multiemployer pension plans may be less likely to increase as a result of the provisions of the Pension Relief Act. If ABF Freight were to completely withdraw from certain multiemployer pension plans, under current law, ABF Freight would have material liabilities for its share of the unfunded vested liabilities of each such plan.
ABF Freight’s benefit contributions for its contractual employees include contributions to multiemployer plans, a portion of which are used to fund benefits for individuals who were never employed by ABF Freight. ABF Freight’s multiemployer pension contributions totaled $146.9 million and $142.2 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Information provided by a large multiemployer pension plan to which ABF Freight contributes indicates that approximately 50% of the plan’s benefit payments are made to retirees of companies that are no longer contributing employers to that plan. As previously outlined, the 2018 ABF NMFA provides for ABF Freight’s contributions to multiemployer pension plans to remain at the rates that were paid under the prior labor agreement with the IBT, while wage rates and health and welfare contribution rates for most plans will increase annually in accordance with the terms of the 2018 ABF NMFA. The contractual wage rate increased 1.7% and 1.6% effective July 1, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The average health, welfare, and pension benefit contribution rate increased approximately 2.4% and 2.2% effective primarily on August 1, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Asset-Based Segment Results
The following table sets forth a summary of operating expenses and operating income as a percentage of revenue for the Asset-Based segment:
(1) Represents costs associated with the freight handling pilot test program at ABF Freight.
The following table provides a comparison of key operating statistics for the Asset-Based segment, as previously defined in the Asset-Based Segment Overview:
(1) Workdays represent the number of operating days during the period after adjusting for holidays and weekends.
Asset-Based Revenues
Asset-Based segment revenues totaled $2.6 billion and $2.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The number of workdays was fewer by one day in 2021, versus 2020. Billed revenue (as described in the Asset-Based Segment Overview) increased 23.5% on a per-day basis in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily reflecting a 14.7% increase in total billed revenue per hundredweight, including fuel surcharges, and a 7.6% increase in tonnage per day. Asset-Based revenues for 2020 were negatively impacted by reduced demand for the segment’s services in the second quarter of the year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The 14.7% increase in total billed revenue per hundredweight for 2021, including fuel surcharges, compared to 2020, was primarily due to a strong pricing environment and changes in freight profile and business mix to optimize revenue on shipments in the Asset-Based network. A higher mix of LTL-rated shipments, as well as a longer average length of haul and higher fuel surcharge revenues associated with higher fuel prices, also positively impacted the total billed revenue per hundredweight measure in 2021, compared to 2020. The Asset-Based segment’s average nominal fuel surcharge rate for 2021 increased approximately 420 basis points from 2020 levels. On-going yield management initiatives, including general rate increases, also contributed to the year-over-year improvement in billed revenue per hundredweight. Excluding the impact of fuel surcharges, the percentage increase in billed revenue per hundredweight on our traditional LTL-rated freight
was in the high-single digits for 2021, compared to 2020. Prices on accounts subject to deferred pricing agreements and annually negotiated contracts that were renewed during 2021 increased an average of 7.8%, compared to the prior year. Pricing on contractual business reflected the highest average increase we have secured in company history, primarily due to tight market capacity and increased customer business levels. The Asset-Based segment implemented nominal general rate increases on its LTL base rate tariffs of 6.9% and 5.95% effective on both November 15, 2021, and January 25, 2021, respectively, although the rate changes vary by lane and shipment characteristics.
The 7.6% increase in tonnage per day for 2021, compared to 2020, reflects increases in weight per shipment on higher daily shipment levels due to solid customer demand. Total shipments increased 4.3% on a per-day basis, reflecting an increase in LTL-rated shipments, partially offset by a decrease in truckload-rated shipments. Year-over-year tonnage and shipment growth is attributable to an emphasis on allocating network resources to serving core LTL customers, from which we experienced strong demand in 2021. Larger-sized LTL-rated shipments, including an increase in pieces per shipment, impacted the 3.1% growth in total weight per shipment for 2021, compared to 2020. The reduction in truckload-rated shipments reflects the intentional moderation of spot-quoted shipments, including fewer U-Pack household goods shipments, in order to better serve core LTL customers in 2021, compared to 2020. However, U-Pack business continued to contribute to our year-over-year revenue increase as pricing on these shipments improved versus the prior-year. The year-over-year increases in tonnage and shipment levels were also impacted by lower shipment levels in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic which disrupted customers’ shipping patterns and reduced demand during the first half of 2020.
Current economic conditions and the Asset-Based segment’s pricing approach, as previously discussed in the Pricing section of the Asset-Based Segment Overview within Results of Operations, will continue to impact the segment’s tonnage levels and the prices it receives for its services and, as such, there can be no assurance that our Asset-Based segment will maintain or achieve improvements in its current operating results. The marketplace pricing environment has been positive and rational in support of our efforts to secure needed price increases; however, the competitive environment could limit the Asset-Based segment from securing adequate increases in base LTL freight rates and could limit the amount of fuel surcharge revenue recovered in future periods.
Asset-Based Operating Income
The Asset-Based segment generated operating income of $260.7 million in 2021, compared to $98.9 million in 2020, with an operating ratio of 89.9% and 95.3%, respectively. The 5.4 percentage point improvement in the Asset-Based segment’s operating ratio for 2021, compared to 2020, primarily reflects the increased revenues and effective capacity utilization in the Asset-Based network, partially offset by higher operating costs associated with the increased business levels. Operating income for 2021 was positively impacted by the sale of an unutilized property which contributed to the $8.7 million of total gains on the sale of property and equipment, compared to $3.3 million in 2020.
Innovative technology costs related to the freight handling pilot test program (the “pilot”) at ABF Freight impacted operating results of the Asset-Based segment by $27.6 million and $22.5 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The pilot test program, which began in early 2019, is in the early stages in a limited number of locations. While ArcBest believes the pilot has potential to provide safer and improved freight-handling, a number of factors will be involved in determining proof of concept and there can be no assurances that pilot testing will be successful or expand beyond current testing locations. We anticipate innovative technology costs associated with the pilot to impact our Asset-Based operating expenses by approximately $6.5 million in first quarter 2022, compared to $6.9 million in first quarter 2021.
The segment’s operating ratio was also impacted by changes in operating expenses as discussed in the following paragraphs.
Asset-Based Operating Expenses
Labor costs, which are reported in operating expenses as salaries, wages, and benefits, amounted to 46.6% and 52.4% of Asset-Based segment revenues for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in salaries, wages, and benefits as a percentage of revenue was partially offset by higher utilization of purchased transportation to meet customer demand for increased shipment levels. The improvement as a percentage of revenue was also influenced by the effect of higher revenues, including fuel surcharges, as a portion of operating costs are fixed in nature and decrease as a percent of revenue with increases in revenue levels. Salaries, wages, and benefits increased $102.6 million for 2021, compared to 2020, primarily due to the increase in business levels, with the year-over-year comparison impacted, in part, by lower labor costs in 2020 due to the negative impact of COVID-19 on business levels and managing labor hours to lower shipment levels. The increase in labor costs also reflects year-over-year increases in contractual wage and benefit contribution rates under
the 2018 ABF NMFA, as previously discussed in the Labor Costs section of the Asset-Based Segment overview; higher expenses for certain performance-based incentive plans, including long-term nonunion incentive plans impacted by shareholder returns relative to peers; and higher workers’ compensation expense reflecting an increase in the average number of claims and the severity of claims experience. As a result of the Asset-Based segment operating ratio achieved for 2021, ABF Freight paid a 3% profit-sharing bonus to qualifying union-represented employees, which is the maximum amount provided in the collective bargaining agreement. Amounts accrued for this union profit-sharing bonus, which was paid to employees in February 2022, increased labor costs by $10.1 million in 2021, compared to 2020.
The Asset-Based segment manages costs with shipment levels; however, increased shipment levels, freight profile changes, challenges with hiring and training an adequate number of personnel, and equipment capacity constraints pressured the efficiency of DSY tasks. Shipments per DSY hour declined 1.3% for 2021, compared to 2020, primarily due to inefficiencies driven by personnel and equipment capacity constraints related to business growth and the effect of handling a higher number of larger LTL-rated shipments, including an increase in the pieces per shipment. While the Asset-Based segment has added employees to service the business growth, the segment had to supplement resources with increased utilization of higher-cost purchased transportation in certain locations to manage service levels during 2021. The decrease in pounds per mile of 3.6% for 2021, compared to 2020, was due to the higher number of miles (including purchased transportation miles) incurred to service the business growth and the increase in average length of haul resulting from intended changes in freight profile, which was compensated by an increase in billed revenue per shipment. Our efforts to manage operational costs in the Asset-Based network may not directly correspond to significant changes in business levels and there can be no assurance that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will not have an adverse effect on our operating results in future periods.
Fuel, supplies, and expenses as a percentage of revenue increased 0.3 percentage points in 2021, for a $57.0 million increase, compared to 2020, primarily due to higher fuel costs. The Asset-Based segment’s average fuel price per gallon (excluding taxes) increased approximately 59% during 2021, compared to 2020. More miles driven as a result of the increase in business levels from 2020 also contributed to the year-over-year increase in fuel, supplies, and expenses.
Operating taxes and licenses and depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of revenue decreased 0.5 and 0.9 percentage points, respectively, in 2021, compared to 2020. The decreases in operating taxes and licenses and depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of revenue was influenced by the effect of higher revenues, as a portion of these costs are fixed in nature and decrease as a percent of revenue with increases in business levels. Operating taxes and licenses and depreciation and amortization expense for 2021 remained relatively consistent with 2020.
Rents and purchased transportation as a percentage of revenue increased 2.2 percentage points in 2021, compared to 2020, primarily due to increases in the utilization of rail, local delivery agents, and linehaul purchased transportation necessary to serve our customers’ needs as freight demand increased across the Asset-Based system during 2021. The year-over-year increase in purchased transportation costs was also impacted by higher fuel surcharges related to these services due to higher fuel costs. Rail miles increased approximately 23% in 2021, compared to 2020.
Shared services as a percentage of revenue decreased 0.2 percentage points in 2021, compared to 2020. The decrease in shared services as a percentage of revenue was influenced by the effect of higher revenues, as these costs increased $46.3 million in 2021, compared to the prior year, due to the impact of higher business levels on shared service allocations and higher expense accruals for certain performance-based incentive plans, including long-term incentive plans impacted by shareholder returns relative to peers.
Asset-Light Operations
Asset-Light Overview
The ArcBest and FleetNet reportable segments, combined, represent our Asset-Light operations. Our Asset-Light operations are a key component of our strategy to offer customers a single source of integrated logistics solutions, designed to satisfy the complex supply chain and unique shipping requirements customers encounter. We are focused on growing and making strategic investments in the development of our Asset-Light operations that enhance the efficient delivery of our services. Our recent acquisition of MoLo demonstrates our commitment to grow our Asset-Light operations as we work to align our overall revenue mix with our customers’ transportation spend. With our acquisition of MoLo and throughout our operations, we are seeking opportunities to expand our revenues by deepening customer relationships,
securing new customers and adding capacity options for our customers. In recent years, we have experienced significant growth in shipment levels and revenues of managed transportation solutions reflecting our strategic efforts to cross-sell our service offerings and the increasing demand for these services, including supply chain optimization services for customers. We expect to benefit from these and other strategic initiatives as we continue to deliver innovative solutions to customers.
As previously mentioned in the Consolidated Results section, our acquisition of MoLo closed on November 1, 2021. MoLo is a Chicago-based company that is one of the fastest-growing truckload brokers in North America. As a result of the acquisition, MoLo became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. The acquired operations are reported within the ArcBest segment of our Asset-Light operations. At closing, we paid $239.4 million in initial consideration, subject to certain post-closing adjustments, with cash on hand. The Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) provides for certain additional cash consideration to be paid by the Company based on achievement of certain Adjusted EBITDA targets for the years ended December 31, 2023, 2024, and 2025. At 100% of the target, the cumulative additional consideration for years 2023 through 2025 would be $215.0 million.
The acquisition of MoLo accelerates the growth of our company by increasing the scale of truckload brokerage services offered within our ArcBest segment and by advancing our position in the large and growing domestic transportation management market. The addition of MoLo talent to our truckload brokerage service offering allows us to better meet the critical needs of our customers with comprehensive supply chain solutions, improves our ability to serve larger customers, and expands our access to truckload capacity partners. Our acquisition of MoLo is discussed further in Note D to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Asset-Light operations are affected by general economic conditions, as well as several other competitive factors that are more fully described in Part I, Item 1 (Business) and in Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Note N to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for descriptions of the ArcBest and FleetNet segments and additional segment information, including revenues, operating expenses, and operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
The key indicators necessary to understand our Asset-Light operating results are outlined below. These key indicators are used by management to evaluate segment operating performance and measure the effectiveness of strategic initiatives in the results of our Asset-Light segments. We quantify certain key indicators using key operating statistics which are important measures in analyzing segment operating results from period to period. These statistics are defined within the key indicators below and referred to throughout the discussion of results of our Asset-Light operations:
● Customer demand for logistics and premium transportation services combined with economic factors which influence the number of shipments or service events used to measure changes in business levels, primarily measured by:
Shipments per day - total shipments (excluding managed transportation solutions as discussed below) divided by the number of working days during the period, compared to the same prior-year period, for the ArcBest segment.
Service events - roadside, preventative maintenance, or total service events during the period, compared to the same prior-year period, for the FleetNet segment.
● Prices obtained for services, primarily measured by:
Revenue per shipment or event - total segment revenue divided by total segment shipments or events during the period (excluding managed transportation solutions for the ArcBest segment as discussed below), compared to the same prior-year period.
● Availability of market capacity and cost of purchased transportation to fulfill customer shipments of the ArcBest segment, with a measure of purchased transportation cost expressed as:
Purchased transportation costs as a percentage of revenue - the expense incurred for third-party transportation providers to haul or deliver freight during the period, divided by segment revenues for the period, expressed as a percentage.
● Management of operating costs, primarily in the area of purchased transportation, with the total cost structure primarily measured by:
Operating ratio - the percent of operating expenses to revenue levels.
Presentation and discussion of the key operating statistics of revenue per shipment and shipments per day for the ArcBest segment exclude statistical data of the managed transportation solutions transactions. Growth in managed transportation solutions has increased the number of shipments for these services to approximately one half of the ArcBest segment’s total shipments, while the business continues to represent less than 20% of segment revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021. Due to the nature of our managed transportation solutions which typically involve a larger number of shipments at a significantly lower revenue per shipment level than the segment’s other service offerings, inclusion of the managed transportation solutions data would result in key operating statistics which are not representative of the operating results of the segment as a whole. As such, the key operating statistics management uses to evaluate performance of the ArcBest segment exclude managed transportation services transactions.
Other companies within our industry may present different key performance indicators or they may calculate their key performance indicators differently; therefore, our key performance indicators may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Key performance indicators should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results. Our key performance indicators should not be construed as better measurements of our results than operating income, operating cash flow, net income, or earnings per share, as determined under GAAP.
Asset-Light Results
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the combined revenues of our Asset-Light operations totaled $1.6 billion and $984.2 million, respectively, accounting for approximately 38% and 32% of our total revenues before other revenues and intercompany eliminations in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our Asset-Light results for 2021, compared to 2020, reflect higher demand in a solid business environment and the revenues of MoLo since the November 1, 2021 acquisition date. Our Asset-Light combined operating income improved to $50.9 million in 2021, compared to $13.0 million in 2020, primarily reflecting revenue growth and changes in costs as described in the following paragraphs.
ArcBest Segment
The following table sets forth a summary of operating expenses and operating income as a percentage of revenue for the ArcBest segment:
(1) Depreciation and amortization includes amortization of intangibles associated with acquired businesses.
(2) Gain relates to the sale of the labor services portion of the ArcBest segment’s moving business in second quarter 2021.
(3) Asset impairment in 2019 represents the noncash charge to a portion of the segment’s goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment.
A comparison of key operating statistics for the ArcBest segment, as previously defined in the Asset-Light Overview section, is presented in the following table:
ArcBest segment revenues totaled $1.3 billion and $779.1 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The 66.9% increase in 2021 revenues, compared to 2020, reflects a 31.0% increase in revenue per shipment associated with higher market prices resulting from tight market capacity and a 30.6% increase in shipments per day (excluding managed transportation shipments) due to strong customer demand for our expedite and truckload services. The acquired operations of MoLo added $120.3 million in truckload brokerage revenues for 2021 and positively impacted the increases in revenue per shipment and shipments per day for 2021. Customers’ growing need for comprehensive, managed logistics solutions also contributed to the year-over-year revenue increase. Lower moving services revenue partially offset the revenue increase in 2021, due to the sale of the labor services subsidiary within the segment’s moving business during the second quarter of 2021. During 2020, ArcBest segment revenues were negatively impacted by a reduction in demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily in the second quarter of 2020, while business levels recovered in the second half of 2020 and revenues were positively impacted by tighter truckload capacity which continued in 2021.
Third-party capacity, particularly for truckload services, has been relatively volatile in recent years and supply chains have been disrupted due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. More available truckload capacity, combined with a softer economic environment throughout 2019 and the first quarter of 2020, resulted in a market-driven reduction in pricing for many services of the ArcBest segment. The negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on demand for transportation and logistics services during the second quarter of 2020 resulted in a further decline in market pricing. Market pricing improvement which began in the second half of 2020 has continued throughout 2021, due to the impact of capacity constraints in the industry. Significant changes in market capacity, such as those experienced during 2020 and 2021, impact the cost of sourcing such capacity which may not correspond to the timing of revisions to customer pricing and our revenue per shipment. There can be no assurance that the strong pricing environment we have experienced since the second half of 2020 will continue.
Operating income totaled $46.4 million and $9.7 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, with the improvement primarily reflecting the increases in revenues. Increased customer shipping levels combined with limited equipment availability in the logistics marketplace positively impacted demand for expedite services in 2021 and contributed to the segment’s operating income improvement, compared to 2020. Operating results for 2021 also benefited from a $6.9 million gain on the sale of a subsidiary within the segment’s moving business, as previously mentioned, contributing 0.5 percentage points to the segment’s operating ratio.
The segment’s operating income was also impacted by changes in operating expenses as discussed in the following paragraphs.
The segment’s purchased transportation costs increased by 1.0 percentage point as a percentage of revenue for 2021, compared to 2020. Due to changes in market conditions and freight mix, the prices paid for purchased transportation increased by a higher percentage than the prices we secured from customers for the total segment during 2021, compared to 2020. Purchased transportation costs of MoLo since the acquisition date impacted the segment’s operating expenses as a percentage of revenue for 2021. The acquired operations of MoLo are expected to continue operating at breakeven levels through most of 2022, which negatively impacts the segment’s comparison of changes in purchased transportation relative to revenue changes. Earnings accretion (before purchase accounting amortization) on the MoLo business is expected to begin in fourth quarter 2022.
The operating income improvement for 2021 was partially offset by higher operating expenses due to increased business levels and growth initiatives, including investments in technology; increased wages and costs to manage higher shipment volumes; higher nonunion healthcare costs; and higher expenses for certain performance-based incentive plans, including long-term nonunion incentive plans impacted by shareholder returns relative to peers. These higher expenses contributed to the $41.2 million increase in shared service costs in 2021, compared to 2020. However, shared service costs as a
percentage of revenue decreased 1.6 percentage points in 2021, compared to 2020, due to the effect of higher revenues, as a portion of these costs are fixed in nature and decrease as a percentage of revenue with increases in revenue levels. Although the ArcBest segment manages costs with shipment levels, portions of operating expenses are fixed in nature and cost reductions can be limited as the segment strives to enhance capacity sources and maintain customer service.
Depreciation and amortization and other expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased 0.4 and 0.5 percentage points, respectively, in 2021, compared to 2020. The decrease in these expenses as a percentage of revenue in 2021, compared to 2020, was influenced by the effect of higher revenues. Other expenses remained consistent with prior year levels and depreciation and amortization increased $1.7 million in 2021, due to the amortization of intangible assets associated with the MoLo acquisition. Intangible asset amortization, primarily reflecting purchase accounting amortization, is expected to total $12.9 million in 2022, compared to $5.3 million in 2021.
FleetNet Segment
FleetNet revenues totaled $254.1 million and $205.0 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The 23.9% increase in revenues in 2021, compared to 2020, was driven by higher service event volumes and increases in revenue per event for roadside and preventative maintenance services. FleetNet’s results reflect higher demand for its services compared to 2020, when business levels were impacted by a reduction in miles driven by customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily in the second quarter of 2020. The increase in roadside service event volumes was also impacted by a higher number of events from customers who experienced an increase in e-commerce business.
FleetNet’s operating income was $4.5 million and $3.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. FleetNet’s operating income margins during 2021 benefited from increases in revenue per event which outpaced the increased costs.
Asset-Light Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”)
We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. However, management believes that certain non-GAAP performance measures and ratios, such as Adjusted EBITDA, utilized for internal analysis provide analysts, investors, and others the same information that we use internally for purposes of assessing our core operating performance and provides meaningful comparisons between current and prior period results, as well as important information regarding performance trends. The use of certain non-GAAP measures improves comparability in analyzing our performance because it removes the impact of items from operating results that, in management’s opinion, do not reflect our core operating performance. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a key measure of performance and for business planning. The measure is particularly meaningful for analysis of our Asset-Light businesses, because it excludes amortization of acquired intangibles and software, which are significant expenses resulting from strategic decisions rather than core daily operations. Management also believes Adjusted EBITDA to be relevant and useful information, as EBITDA is a standard measure commonly reported and widely used by analysts, investors, and others to measure financial performance of asset-light businesses and the ability to service debt obligations. Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently; therefore, our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as a better measurement than operating income, operating cash flow, net income, or earnings per share, as determined under GAAP.
Asset-Light Adjusted EBITDA
(1) The calculation of Adjusted EBITDA as presented in this table begins with operating income (loss), as other income (costs), income taxes, and net income are reported at the consolidated level and not included in the operating segment financial information evaluated by management to make operating decisions. Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is reconciled to consolidated net income in the Consolidated Results section of Results of Operations.
(2) Includes amortization of intangibles associated with acquired businesses. For the ArcBest segment, includes amortization of acquired intangibles of $5.3 million, $3.7 million, and $4.2 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, and amortization of acquired software of $1.0 million in 2019.
(3) Asset impairment in 2019 represents the previously discussed noncash charge related to a portion of the segment’s goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment.
Current Economic Conditions
Economic conditions, which were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, improved during 2021 despite the continued challenges to business operations and supply chains. During the first quarter of 2021, certain COVID-19 vaccines were approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for emergency use and began to be rolled out to qualified individuals. Vaccinations and other health and safety measures implemented in response to the pandemic slowed the spread of COVID-19 in many geographical areas and lessened the severity of COVID-related restrictions throughout portions of the United States. The surge in the Delta and Omicron variants, which became dominant in July 2021 and December 2021, respectively, increased the uncertainty of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy, global supply chains, and business operations.
Economic indicators improved in 2021, compared to the prior year which was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Unemployment rates have improved since the 14.7% high reached in April 2020, and the January 2022 unemployment rate was 4.0%, versus 6.3% for the same period of 2021. The U.S. real gross domestic product (the “real GDP”) has continued to grow since the second quarter of 2020, when the National Bureau of Economic Research declared that a recession began in the United States in February 2020. According to the second estimate released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on February 24, 2022, real GDP increased at an annual rate of 7.0% for fourth quarter 2021. Other recent economic measures have indicated continued growth in the economy, including the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) Purchasing Managers’ Index (the “PMI”) and the Industrial Production Index issued by the Federal Reserve. The Industrial Production Index increased at an annual rate of 4.0% for fourth quarter 2021. In December 2021, total industrial production in December 2021 was 0.6% above its pre-pandemic level in February 2020. The PMI, which is a leading indicator for economic activity in the freight transportation and logistics industry, was 58.8% for December 2021, compared to 60.7% in December 2020. The December 2021 PMI indicates continued economic expansion in the manufacturing sector for the 19th month in a row after the contraction in April 2020. Manufacturing and trade inventory levels relative to sales levels remain low and within a range we consider optimal for freight demand, although there can be no assurance that the economic environment, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, will be favorable for our freight services in future periods.
Given the uncertainties of current economic conditions and the potential continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, there can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions regarding the pricing environment and economic conditions, which are made for purposes of impairment tests related to operating assets and deferred tax assets, will prove to be accurate. Extended periods of economic disruption and resulting declines in industrial production and manufacturing and consumer spending could negatively impact demand for our services and have an adverse effect on our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. Significant declines in our business levels or other changes in cash flow assumptions or other factors that negatively impact the fair value of the operations of our reporting units could result in impairment and a resulting noncash write-off of a significant portion of the goodwill and intangible assets of our ArcBest segment, which would have an adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Effects of Inflation
Global supply chain disruptions and component shortages, due in part to closure of suppliers’ and manufacturers’ operations during the COVID-19 pandemic as well as strong demand in recent quarters, have led to shortages of parts and products pushing costs higher across a broad array of consumer goods. Despite early signs that the inventory depletion may be moderating, the consumer price index (“CPI”) rose 7.5% in January 2022 from January 2021, representing the largest year-over-year increase in the annual inflation rate in 40 years. Most of our expenses are affected by inflation, which generally results in increased operating costs. As such, there can be no assurances of the potential impact of inflationary conditions on our business.
Generally, inflationary increases in labor and fuel costs as they relate to our Asset-Based operations have historically been mostly offset through price increases and fuel surcharges. In periods of increasing fuel prices, the effect of higher associated fuel surcharges on the overall price to customers influences our ability to obtain increases in base freight rates. In addition, certain nonstandard arrangements with some of our customers have limited the amount of fuel surcharge recovered. The timing and extent of base price increases on our Asset-Based revenues may not correspond with contractual increases in wage rates and other inflationary increases in cost elements and, as a result, could adversely impact our operating results.
Generally, inflationary increases in labor and operating costs regarding our Asset-Light operations have historically been offset through price increases. The pricing environment, however, generally becomes more competitive during economic downturns, which may, as it has in the past, affect the ability to obtain price increases from customers both during and following such periods.
The impact of supply chain disruptions and component shortages have limited the availability and production of certain revenue equipment and certain other equipment used in our business operations. Consequently, the prices for these items have also increased. Partly as a result of inflationary pressures, our revenue equipment (tractors and trailers) has been and will very likely continue to be replaced at higher per unit costs, which could result in higher depreciation charges on a per-unit basis. We consider these costs in setting our pricing policies, although the overall freight rate structure is governed by market forces based on value provided to the customer. The Asset-Based segment’s ability to fully offset inflationary and contractual cost increases can be challenging during periods of recessionary and uncertain economic conditions.
In addition to general effects of inflation, the motor carrier freight transportation industry faces rising costs related to compliance with government regulations on safety, equipment design and maintenance, driver utilization, emissions, and fuel economy.
Environmental and Legal Matters
We are subject to federal, state, and local environmental laws and regulations relating to, among other things: emissions control, transportation or handling of hazardous materials, underground and aboveground storage tanks, stormwater pollution prevention, contingency planning for spills of petroleum products, and disposal of waste oil. We may transport or arrange for the transportation of hazardous materials and explosives, and we operate in industrial areas where truck service centers and other industrial activities are located and where groundwater or other forms of environmental contamination could occur. See Note O to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the environmental matters to which we are subject.
Concern over climate change has led to legislative and regulatory efforts to limit carbon and other GHG emissions and we may incur significant costs to comply with increased regulation related to climate change in the future. Customers are increasingly focused on concerns related to climate change and demand for our services may be adversely impacted if we are less effective than our competitors in reducing or offsetting our GHG emissions. In consideration of the environmental impact of our equipment emissions, we have included the purchase of a small number of Class 8 electric tractors in our capital expenditures plans for 2022. These electric tractors are significantly more expensive than new diesel tractors, and we expect the cost of our equipment to comply with more stringent emissions standards, as well as our fuel and maintenance costs, will continue to increase in future periods. Physical effects from climate change, including more severe weather events, have the potential to adversely impact our business levels, increase our operating costs, and cause damage to our property and equipment. Due to the uncertainty of these matters, we cannot estimate the impact of climate-related developments on our operations or financial condition at this time. These and other matters related to climate change and the related risks to our business are further discussed in Part I, Item 1 (Business) and Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are involved in various legal actions, the majority of which arise in the ordinary course of business. We maintain liability insurance against certain risks arising out of the normal course of our business, subject to certain self-insured retention limits. We routinely establish and review the adequacy of reserves for estimated legal, environmental, and self-insurance exposures. While management believes that amounts accrued in the consolidated financial statements are adequate, estimates of these liabilities may change as circumstances develop. Considering amounts recorded, routine legal matters are not expected to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows. See Note O to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the legal matters in which we are currently involved.
Cybersecurity, Data Privacy, and Information Technology
We depend on the proper functioning, availability, and security of our information systems, including communications, data processing, financial, and operating systems, as well as proprietary software programs that are integral to the efficient operation of our business. Any significant failure or other disruption in our critical information systems, including ransomware attacks, other cybersecurity attacks and other cyber incidents that impact the availability, reliability, speed, accuracy, or other proper functioning of these systems or that result in proprietary information or sensitive or confidential
data, including personal information of customers, employees and others, being compromised could have a significant impact on our operations. Any new or enhanced technology that we may develop and implement may also be subject to cybersecurity attacks and may be more prone to related incidents. We also utilize certain software applications provided by third parties; provide underlying data to third parties; grant access to certain of our systems to third parties who provide certain outsourced administrative functions or other services; and increasingly store and transmit data with our customers and third parties by means of connected information technology systems, any of which may increase the risk of a data privacy breach or other cybersecurity incident. Although we strive to carefully select our third-party vendors, we do not control their actions and any problems caused by or impacting these third parties, including cyber attacks and security breaches at a vendor, could result in claims, litigation, losses, and/or liabilities and materially adversely affect our ability to provide service to our customers and otherwise conduct our business.
Our information technology systems are protected through physical and software safeguards as well as backup systems considered appropriate by management. However, these systems are vulnerable to interruption by adverse weather conditions or natural disasters, power loss, telecommunications failures, terrorist attacks, internet failures, computer viruses, and other events beyond our control. It is not practicable to protect against the possibility of these events or cybersecurity attacks and other cyber events in every potential circumstance that may arise. To mitigate the potential for such occurrences at our primary data center, we have implemented various systems, including redundant telecommunication facilities; replication of critical data to an offsite location; fire suppression systems to protect our on-site data centers; and electrical power protection and generation facilities. We also have a catastrophic disaster recovery plan and alternate processing capability available for our critical data processes in the event of a catastrophe that renders one of our data centers unusable. In response to the health and safety risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, we transitioned a significant portion of our office personnel to remote work arrangements during 2020, and many of these employees are still working remotely, which may increase our exposure to cybersecurity risks, including an increased demand for information technology resources, an increased risk of phishing, and an increased risk of other cybersecurity attacks. We continue to implement physical and cybersecurity measures in an attempt to safeguard our systems in order to serve our operational needs in a remote working environment and to provide uninterrupted service to our customers.
Our property and cyber insurance would offset losses up to certain coverage limits in the event of a catastrophe or certain cyber incidents, including certain business interruption events related to these incidents; however, losses arising from a catastrophe or significant cyber incident would likely exceed our insurance coverage and could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations and financial condition. We do not have insurance coverage specific to losses resulting from a pandemic. A significant disruption in our information technology systems or a significant cybersecurity incident, including denial of service, system failure, security breach, intentional or inadvertent acts by employees or vendors with access to our systems or data, disruption by malware, or other damage, could interrupt or delay our operations, damage our reputation, cause a loss of customers, cause errors or delays in financial reporting, expose us to a risk of loss or litigation, and/or cause us to incur significant time and expense to remedy such an event.
We have experienced incidents involving attempted denial of service attacks, malware attacks, and other events intended to disrupt information systems, wrongfully obtain valuable information, or cause other types of malicious events that could have resulted in harm to our business. To our knowledge, the various protections we have employed have been effective to date in identifying these types of events at a point when the impact on our business could be minimized. We must continuously monitor and develop our information technology networks and infrastructure to prevent, detect, address, and mitigate the risk of unauthorized access, misuse, computer viruses, and other events that could have a security impact. We have made and continue to make significant financial investments in technologies and processes to mitigate these risks. We also provide employee awareness training around phishing, malware, and other cyber risks. Despite our efforts, due to the increasing sophistication of cyber criminals and the development of new techniques for attack, we may be unable to anticipate or promptly detect, or implement adequate protective or remedial measures against, the activities of perpetrators of cyber attacks. Management is not aware of any cybersecurity incident that has had a material effect on our operations, although there can be no assurances that a cyber incident that could have a material impact to our operations could not occur.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are unrestricted cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, cash generated by operations, and borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility or accounts receivable securitization program.
This Liquidity and Capital Resources section of MD&A generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flow and Short-Term Investments
Components of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were as follows:
(1) Cash equivalents consist of money market funds and variable rate demand notes.
(2) Short-term investments consist of certificates of deposit and U.S. Treasury securities.
(3) Cash, variable rate demand notes, and certificates of deposit are recorded at cost plus accrued interest, which approximates fair value. Money market funds are recorded at fair value based on quoted prices. U.S. Treasury securities are recorded at amortized cost plus accrued interest. At December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $42.6 million, $156.4 million, and $66.2 million, respectively, were neither FDIC insured nor direct obligations of the U.S. government.
Cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments decreased $244.4 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. During 2021, cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash provided by operations were used to fund $239.4 million in initial cash consideration for the acquisition of MoLo; repay $121.9 million of long-term debt (net of borrowings on our financing arrangements of $50.0 million); fund $108.1 million of treasury stock repurchases and a forward contract for an accelerated share repurchase agreement; fund $44.6 million of capital expenditures, net of proceeds from asset sales (and an additional $59.7 million of certain Asset-Based revenue equipment was financed with notes payable); invest $25.0 million in the Series B Preferred offering of Phantom Auto; fund $20.1 million of internally developed software; and pay dividends of $8.1 million on common stock.
Our cash provided by operating activities during 2021 was $323.5 million, a $117.5 million increase compared to $206.0 million of cash provided by operating activities during 2020. Net income increased by $142.4 million in 2021, compared to 2020. The increase in net income includes a $6.9 million gain on the sale of the labor services subsidiary of ArcBest segment’s moving business during the second quarter of 2021 and a $6.1 million increase in gains on the sale of property and equipment for 2021, compared to 2020, primarily related to the sale of unutilized property in the Asset-Based segment. Changes in operating assets and liabilities, excluding income taxes, resulted in a $15.2 million reduction of cash provided by operations, compared to the prior year. Due to the impact of higher business levels in 2021, the increase in accounts receivable for 2021 was higher than the increase in 2020, resulting in a decrease in cash provided by operating activities. This decrease in cash flows was partially offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses in 2021, related to the impact of higher business levels, along with higher balances accrued for the union profit-sharing bonus and certain nonunion performance-based incentive plans (including our long-term incentive plans which are impacted by shareholder returns relative to peers), which exceeded the increases in these balances in 2020. Cash provided by operating activities also reflected federal, state, and foreign income tax payments, net of refunds, of $58.1 million in 2021, compared to $15.3 million in 2020.
Financing Arrangements
We have a revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) that has an initial maximum credit amount of $250.0 million, including a swing line facility in an aggregate amount of up to $25.0 million and a letter of credit sub-facility providing for the issuance of letters of credit up
to an aggregate amount of $20.0 million. We have the option to request additional revolving commitments or incremental term loans thereunder of up to $125.0 million, subject to certain additional conditions as provided in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Facility matures on October 1, 2024 with interest payments paid monthly and principal paid at maturity. Future payments due under the Credit Facility are calculated using variable interest rates based on the LIBOR swap curve, plus anticipated applicable margin. As of December 31, 2020, we had $70.0 million outstanding under our Credit Facility. We borrowed $50.0 million and repaid $70.0 million under the Credit Facility during 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had $50.0 million outstanding under our Credit Facility. In February 2022, we borrowed $65.0 million under our Credit Facility, including $10.0 million of borrowings under our swing line facility.
We amended our accounts receivable securitization program in June 2021. The amendment extended the maturity date of this program from October 1, 2021 to July 1, 2024, decreased the amount of available cash proceeds under the facility from $125.0 million to $50.0 million, and increased the amount of additional borrowings we may request under the accordion feature from $25.0 million to $100.0 million, subject to certain conditions. As of December 31, 2021, we had $40.0 million available under our accounts receivable securitization program, as reduced for our standby letters of credit issued under the program.
We have financed the purchase of certain revenue equipment, other equipment, and software through promissory note arrangements. Payments under our notes payable due within one year totaled $54.3 million and the obligation for notes payable recognized in our consolidated balance sheet totaled $175.5 million as of December 31, 2021.
See Note H to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of our financing arrangements and presentation of the scheduled maturities of our long-term debt obligations.
Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and commitments that obligate us to make payments in the future. In addition to the obligations discussed within the preceding Financing Arrangements section, we have contractual obligations as described in the following paragraphs. Certain contractual obligations are also further disclosed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
While we own the majority of our larger service centers, distribution centers, and administrative offices, we lease certain facilities and equipment. As of December 31, 2021, future minimum rental commitments under these operating leases total $208.1 million, net of executory costs such as insurance, maintenance, and taxes. Operating lease payments due within one year total $25.6 million.
We sponsor an insured postretirement health benefit plan that provides supplemental medical benefits and dental and vision care to certain executive officers. As of December 31, 2021, estimated projected payments, net of retiree premiums, related to postretirement health benefits total $0.6 million for the next year and $6.6 million for the next 10 years. These projected amounts are subject to change based upon increases and other changes in premiums and medical costs and continuation of the plan for current participants. The accumulated benefit obligation of the postretirement health benefit plan accrued in the consolidated balance sheet totaled $17.0 million as of December 31, 2021.
We have purchase obligations consisting of authorizations to purchase and binding agreements with vendors relating to revenue equipment used in our Asset-Based and Asset-Light operations, other equipment, facility improvements, software, service contracts, and other items for which amounts were not accrued in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. These purchase obligations totaled $78.8 million as of December 31, 2021, with $73.5 million expected to be paid within the next year. We have no investments, loans, or any other known contractual arrangements with unconsolidated special-purpose entities, variable interest entities, or financial partnerships and have no outstanding loans with our executive officers or directors.
ABF Freight has a withdrawal liability that was triggered when its multiemployer pension plan obligation with the New England Teamsters Trucking Industry Pension Fund was restructured under a transition agreement in 2018. As of December 31, 2021, payments due within one year under the withdrawal liability settlement total $1.6 million and total payments, which are due over the next 20 years, total $31.4 million. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding withdrawal liability recognized in the consolidated balance sheet for this obligation totaled $20.8 million. ABF Freight contributes to other multiemployer health, welfare, and pension plans based generally on the time worked by their contractual employees,
as specified in the collective bargaining agreement and other supporting supplemental agreements (see Multiemployer Plans within Note J to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Capital Expenditures
The following table sets forth our historical capital expenditures for the periods indicated below:
(1) Our actions during 2020 to preserve cash and lower costs to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business included a reduction of our 2020 capital expenditure plan by approximately 30%, including a reduction in revenue equipment purchases of $18.0 million. Actual capital expenditures in 2021 fell below our estimates due to delays in the original build schedules of our Asset-Based and Asset-Light revenue equipment caused by parts shortages and manufacturing disruptions.
For 2022, our total capital expenditures, including amounts financed, are estimated to range from $270.0 million to $290.0 million, net of asset sales. These 2022 estimated net capital expenditures include revenue equipment purchases of $160.0 million, primarily for our Asset-Based operations, including tractor purchases which were delayed in 2021 and carried over to our 2022 planned expenditures. As previously mentioned in Environmental and Legal Matters within the Results of Operations section of MD&A, our revenue equipment purchases also include a small number of Class 8 electric tractors that are expected to arrive in the second half of 2022. The remainder of our 2022 expected capital expenditures includes investments above historical annual levels in real estate and facility upgrades to support our growth plans, as well as technology investments across the enterprise. We have the flexibility to adjust certain planned 2022 capital expenditures as business levels dictate. Depreciation and amortization expense, excluding amortization of intangibles, is estimated to be in a range of $125.0 million to $130.0 million in 2022. The amortization of intangible assets is estimated to be approximately $13.0 million in 2022, primarily related to purchase accounting amortization associated with the MoLo acquisition.
Other Liquidity Information
General economic conditions, including the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, along with competitive market factors and the related impact on our business, primarily tonnage and shipment levels and the pricing that we receive for our services in future periods, could affect our ability to generate cash from operations and maintain cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments on hand as operating costs increase. Cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaled $125.0 million at December 31, 2021. We generated $323.5 million, $206.0 million, and $170.4 million of operating cash flow during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Our Credit Facility and our accounts receivable securitization program provide available sources of liquidity with flexible borrowing and payment options. We had available borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility and our accounts receivable securitization program of $200.0 million and $40.0 million, respectively, at December 31, 2021. We believe these agreements provide borrowing capacity options necessary for growth of our businesses. We believe existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash generated by operations, and amounts available under our Credit Facility or accounts receivable securitization program will be sufficient to finance our operating expenses; fund our ongoing initiatives to grow our business, including investments in technology; pay contingent consideration related to the MoLo acquisition as it is earned; and repay amounts due under our financing arrangements over the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future. Notes payable, finance leases, and other secured financing may also be used to fund capital expenditures, provided that such arrangements are available and the terms are acceptable to us.
As previously discussed in Asset-Light Operations within the Results of Operations section of MD&A, our acquisition of MoLo closed on November 1, 2021. We funded the $239.4 million total of initial purchase price and net working capital adjustments with available cash reserves. The Merger Agreement is subject to certain post-closing adjustments which were estimated at closing and provides for additional cash consideration ranging from 44% to 212% of the target payment
relative to the achievement of targets of 80% to 300% for years 2023 through 2025. The cumulative additional consideration through 2025 would be $215.0 million at 100% of the target, consisting of a target earnout of $45.0 million, $70.0 million, and $100.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2023, 2024, and 2025, respectively.
In November 2021, we invested $25.0 million in the Series B Preferred offering of Phantom Auto, the leading provider of human-centered remote operation software. This investment, which is recorded in other long-term assets, aligns with our long-term goals and complements our existing innovation pipeline, technology roadmap, and partnerships. We expect our costs related to innovative technology initiatives, including our freight handling pilot test program at ABF Freight and our investment in human-centered remote operation software to approximate $38 million in 2022, compared to $32.8 million in 2021. The investment in Phantom Auto and remote operations technology utilization is further discussed in Item 1 (Business) of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
During 2021, we continued to take actions to enhance shareholder value with our quarterly dividend payments and treasury stock purchases. On January 28, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.08 per share payable to stockholders of record as of February 11, 2022. We expect to continue to pay quarterly dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future, although there can be no assurance in this regard since future dividends will be at the discretion of the Board of Directors and are dependent upon our future earnings, capital requirements, and financial condition; contractual restrictions applying to the payment of dividends under our Credit Agreement; and other factors.
On November 2, 2021, we entered into a fixed dollar accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) program with a third-party financial institution to effect an accelerated repurchase of $100.0 million of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, 709,287 shares were purchased under the ASR for $75.0 million. The remaining $25.0 million under the forward contract was settled in January 2022 with the purchase of 214,763 shares. In addition to the ASR, we have a program (the “existing share repurchase program”) in place to repurchase our common stock in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. The program has no expiration date but may be terminated at any time at the Board of Directors’ discretion. Repurchases may be made using cash reserves or other available sources. During 2021, we purchased 126,289 shares of our common stock for an aggregate cost of $8.1 million, leaving $41.9 million available for repurchase under the existing share repurchase program as of December 31, 2021. The ASR and the existing share repurchase program are discussed further in Note K to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Credit Facility, accounts receivable securitization program, and interest rate swap agreements utilize interest rates based on LIBOR. LIBOR is the basic rate of interest used in lending between banks on the London interbank market and is widely used as a reference for setting the interest rates on loans globally. In July 2017, the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, announced that it did not plan to persuade or compel banks to submit to LIBOR beyond the end of 2021. Subsequent to that announcement, the ICE Benchmark Administration Limited (IBA), the authorized and regulated administrator of LIBOR, announced it intends to continue to publish LIBOR settings for certain US Dollar LIBOR tenors through June 30, 2023. Our Credit Agreement provides for the use of an alternate rate of interest in accordance with the provisions of the agreement. It is our understanding that replacement of LIBOR with an alternative reference in determining the interest rate under our borrowing arrangements will not have a significant impact on our cost of borrowing; however, there can be no assurances in this regard, as the new rates resulting from the replacement of LIBOR in our borrowing arrangements may not be as favorable to us as those in effect prior to any LIBOR phase-out.
Financial Instruments
We have interest rate swap agreements in place which are discussed in Note H to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As of December 31, 2021, we have no other derivative or hedging arrangements outstanding.
Balance Sheet Changes
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable increased $261.5 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, reflecting the addition of trade accounts receivable related to the MoLo acquisition and higher business levels in December 2021 compared to December 2020.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net
Goodwill increased $212.0 million and net intangible assets increased $71.6 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily due to the acquisition of MoLo. The MoLo acquisition is discussed in Note D to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accounts Payable
Accounts payable increased $140.5 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily due to the addition of trade payables related to the MoLo acquisition and increased business levels in December 2021 compared to December 2020.
Accrued Expenses
Accrued expenses increased $59.1 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily due to increases in accruals for the union profit-sharing bonus and certain nonunion performance-based incentive plans and the timing effect on wage accruals at December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020. Higher accrued balances were also related to increased workers’ compensation and third-party casualty insurance costs, primarily due to an increase in claims activity in excess of net payments for 2021.
INCOME TAXES
This Income Taxes section of MD&A generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the Income Taxes section of MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Our effective tax rate was 23.0% and 23.1% of pre-tax income for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The rates for 2021 and 2020 were impacted by the recognition of federal research and development tax credits of which $2.0 million were recognized in 2021 and $2.1 million were recognized in 2020. Additionally, a portion of the difference in the rates for 2021 and 2020 results from state income taxes, the effect of changes in the cash surrender value of life insurance, life insurance proceeds, non-deductible expenses, adjustments to valuation allowances on deferred taxes, adjustments to uncertain tax positions, and the settlement of share-based payment awards. The settlement of share-based awards resulted in a tax benefit of $6.1 million in 2021 versus a tax expense of $0.4 million in 2020. The difference between our effective rate and the federal statutory rate for 2020 was also impacted by the passage of The Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 in December 2019, which retroactively reinstated the alternative fuel tax credit that previously expired on December 31, 2017, for 2018 and 2019 and extended it through December 31, 2020. As a result, in 2020 we recognized alternative fuel tax credits of $1.3 million.
For 2021, our U.S. statutory tax rate was 21.0%. Our average state tax rate, net of the associated federal deduction, was approximately 5%. However, various factors, including the amount of pre-tax income as well as benefits or deficiencies recognized in the income statement upon settlement of share-based payment awards, caused our full year 2021 effective tax rate to vary significantly from the statutory rate. Due to the impact of non-deductible expenses, lower levels of pre-tax income result in a higher tax rate on income and a lower benefit rate on losses. As pre-tax income or pre-tax losses increase, the impact of non-deductible expenses on the overall rate declines.
We had net deferred tax liabilities after valuation allowances of $59.4 and $66.2 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Valuation allowances for deferred tax assets totaled $2.2 million, $1.3 million, and $0.7 million at December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As the Canadian tax rate is now higher than the U.S. tax rate, it is unlikely that foreign tax credit carryforwards will be useable, as U.S. taxes paid will be at a lower rate than the tax rates in Canada. Thus, the foreign tax credit carryforwards were fully reserved, resulting in valuation allowances of $0.8 million and $0.4 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. At December 31, 2021, we had gross state net operating loss carryforwards of $19.3 million. These state net operating loss carryforwards were reserved by valuation allowances of $1.1 million, and there were additional valuation allowances of $0.2 million related to state research and development tax credits and less than $0.1 million related to state interest expense carryforwards at December 31, 2021. Due to taxable income, there is no need for a valuation allowance on federal net operating loss carryforwards at December 31, 2021. The need for additional valuation allowances is continually monitored by management.
At December 31, 2021, a reserve for uncertain tax positions of $0.9 million was established related to credits taken on federal returns. There was no reserve for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2020.
Financial reporting income differs significantly from taxable income because of items such as bonus or accelerated depreciation for tax purposes, pension accounting rules, and a significant number of liabilities such as vacation pay, workers’ compensation reserves, and other liabilities, which, for tax purposes, are generally deductible only when paid. For the years ended December 31, 2021, taxable income exceeded financial reporting income, and for the year ended December 31, 2020, financial reporting income exceeded taxable income.
We made $77.5 million of federal, state, and foreign tax payments during the year ended December 31, 2021 and received refunds of $19.4 million of federal, state, and foreign taxes that were paid in prior years.
Management expects the cash outlays for income taxes will be less than reported income tax expense in 2022 due primarily to the effect of 100% expensing of qualified depreciable assets in 2019 through 2022 as allowed under the Tax Reform Act. However, in the event we were to become unprofitable, net operating loss carrybacks allowed under the provisions of the Tax Reform Act could be limited in certain circumstances.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Estimates are based on prior experience and other assumptions that management considers reasonable in our circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions, which would affect the related amounts reported in the financial statements.
The accounting policies and estimates that are “critical” to understanding our financial condition and results of operations and that require management to make the most difficult judgments are described as follows.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when or as control of the promised services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Our performance obligations are primarily satisfied upon final delivery of the freight to the specified destination. Revenue is recognized based on the relative transit time in each reporting period with expenses recognized as incurred using a bill-by-bill analysis or standard delivery times to establish estimates of revenue in transit for recognition in the appropriate period. This methodology utilizes the approximate location of the shipment in the delivery process to determine the revenue to recognize, and management believes it to be a reliable method.
Certain contracts may provide for volume-based or other discounts which are accounted for as variable consideration. We estimate these amounts based on the expected discounts earned by customers and revenue is recognized using these estimates. Revenue adjustments may also occur due to rating or other billing adjustments. We estimate revenue adjustments based on historical information and revenue is recognized accordingly at the time of shipment. We believe that actual amounts will not vary significantly from estimates of variable consideration.
Revenue, purchased transportation expense, and third-party service expenses are reported on a gross basis for certain shipments and services where we utilize a third-party carrier for pickup, linehaul, delivery of freight, or performance of services but we remain primarily responsible for fulfilling delivery to the customer and maintain discretion in setting the price for the services. Purchased transportation expense is recognized as incurred.
For our FleetNet segment, service fee revenue is recognized upon response to the service event and repair revenue is recognized upon completion of the service by third-party vendors. Revenue and expense from repair and maintenance services performed by third-party vendors are reported on a gross basis as FleetNet controls the services prior to transfer to the customer and remains primarily responsible to the customer for completion of the services.
Payment terms with customers may vary depending on the service provided, location or specific agreement with the customer. The time between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant. For certain services, we require payment before the services are delivered to the customer.
We expense sales commissions when incurred because the amortization period is one year or less.
Receivable Allowance
We estimate our allowance for credit losses based on historical write-offs, as well as trends and factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers. In order to gather information regarding these trends and factors, we perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers. The allowance for revenue adjustments is an estimate based on historical revenue adjustments and current information regarding trends and business changes. Actual write-offs or adjustments could differ from the allowance estimates due to a number of factors. These factors include unanticipated changes in the overall economic environment or factors and risks surrounding a particular customer. We continually update the history we use to make these estimates so as to reflect the most recent trends, factors, and other information available. Management believes this methodology to be reliable in estimating the allowances for credit losses and revenue adjustments (collectively our receivable allowance). Accounts receivable are written off when the accounts are turned over to a collection agency or when the accounts are determined to be uncollectible. Actual write-offs and adjustments are charged against the allowances for credit losses and revenue adjustments. A 10% increase in the estimate of allowances for credit losses and revenue adjustments would have decreased 2021 operating income by $1.3 million on a pre-tax basis.
Impairment Assessment of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment and capitalized software, which are held and used in our operations, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. If such an event or change in circumstances is present, we will estimate the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the related assets, we will recognize an impairment loss. The evaluation of future cash flows requires management’s judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions. Assumptions require considerable judgment because changes in broad economic factors and industry factors can result in variable and volatile values. Economic factors and the industry environment were considered in assessing recoverability of long-lived assets, including revenue equipment (primarily tractors and trailers used in our Asset-Based operations and trailers used in our expedite and dedicated operations). Our strict equipment maintenance schedules have served to mitigate declines in the value of revenue equipment.
Income Tax Provision and Valuation Allowances on Deferred Tax Assets
Management applies considerable judgment in estimating the consolidated income tax provision, including valuation allowances on deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is determined by evaluating whether it is more likely than not that the benefits of deferred tax assets will be realized through future reversal of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in carryback years in jurisdictions where carrybacks are available, projected future taxable income, or tax-planning strategies. Uncertain tax positions, which also require significant judgment, are measured to determine the amounts to be recognized in the financial statements. The income tax provision and valuation allowances are further complicated by complex rules administered in multiple jurisdictions, including U.S. federal, state, and foreign governments.
Business Combinations
We use the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations, which generally requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. The excess, if any, of the fair value of the consideration transferred by the acquirer and the fair value of any non-controlling interest remaining in the acquiree over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired, is recorded as goodwill.
We acquired MoLo on November 1, 2021. Terms of the transaction included initial consideration paid at closing of $239.4 million, net of cash acquired, subject to certain post-closing adjustments, and contingent consideration based on achievement of certain targets of adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization adjusted for certain items pursuant to the merger agreement for years 2023 through 2025. We funded the initial purchase price with cash on hand. As described in the “Contingent Consideration” section below, the fair value of the contingent consideration at the acquisition date of $93.7 million is included in the purchase consideration of the acquisition.
The preliminary purchase price allocation for the MoLo acquisition included $76.9 million of intangible assets primarily related to customer relationships and $214.0 million of goodwill, with the remainder of the total consideration primarily allocated to working capital and property, plant and equipment. We utilized the assistance of an independent third-party firm to assist in the measurement of the fair values of the intangible assets as of the acquisition date. Significant inputs
into the valuation of intangible assets include projected cash flows attributable to the intangible asset, the discount rate and estimated cost to recreate the asset, as applicable. The purchase price allocation is preliminary as of December 31, 2021 and is subject to finalization of the valuation of intangible assets and net working capital amounts. Adjustments to the preliminary purchase price allocation identified up to one year from the acquisition date are adjusted through goodwill.
Contingent Consideration
We record the estimated fair value of contingent consideration at the acquisition date as part of the purchase price consideration. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability for the MoLo acquisition was determined with the assistance of an independent third-party valuation firm who utilized a Monte Carlo simulation with Level 3 inputs including scenarios of estimated revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to be achieved for the applicable performance periods, volatility factors applied to the simulations, and the discount rate applied, which was 9.0% as of December 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the outstanding contingent consideration of $93.7 million related to the acquisition of MoLo was recorded in other long-term liabilities. A 100 basis point decrease in the discount rate would increase the liability by $4.2 million.
The liability for contingent consideration is remeasured at each quarterly reporting date, and any change in fair value as a result of the recurring assessments is recognized in operating income. Inputs that could impact the measurement of contingent consideration include revised projections of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization; changes in the discount rate due to changes in market interest rates, equity valuations and other factors; and changes in volatility factors based on equity market conditions; and other relevant factors.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Our consolidated goodwill balance of $300.3 million at December 31, 2021 is primarily related to acquisitions in the ArcBest segment, including preliminary goodwill totaling $214.0 million related to the November 2021 MoLo acquisition. Goodwill is recorded as the excess of an acquired entity’s purchase price over the value of the amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. The annual impairment testing on the goodwill balances was performed as of October 1, 2021. The evaluation includes an analysis of qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative valuation of the reporting unit is performed and compared to the carrying value to determine if the reporting unit is impaired and measure impairment loss, if any. For annual and interim impairment tests, we are required to record an impairment charge, if any, by the amount a reporting unit’s fair value is exceeded by the carrying value of the reporting unit, limited to the carrying value of goodwill included in the reporting unit.
Our assessment of the qualitative factors as of October 1, 2021 determined it was not more likely than not that the fair values of the reporting units were less than the carrying value. Key qualitative considerations included the operating performance of the reporting units compared to prior periods and prior year forecast, macroeconomic conditions, industry considerations and the market capitalization of the Company.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets, which include the Panther Premium Logistics trade name, totaled $32.3 million as of December 31, 2021. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but rather are evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss shall be recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We assessed impairment of the indefinite-lived intangible asset qualitatively as of October 1, 2021 and determined no indicators of impairment were present.
Our finite-lived intangible assets consist primarily of customer relationship intangible assets and are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives. Finite-lived intangible assets are also evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. In reviewing finite-lived intangible assets for impairment, the carrying amount of the asset or asset group is compared to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If such cash flows are not sufficient to support the recorded value, an impairment loss to reduce the carrying value of the asset to its estimated fair value will be recognized in operating income.
Insurance Reserves
We are self-insured up to certain limits for workers’ compensation and certain third-party casualty claims. For 2021 and 2020, our self-insurance limits are effectively $1.0 million for each workers’ compensation loss and generally $1.0 million
for each third-party casualty loss. Workers’ compensation and third-party casualty claims liabilities, which are reported in accrued expenses, totaled $109.5 million and $97.6 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We do not discount our claims liabilities.
Liabilities for self-insured workers’ compensation and third-party casualty claims are based on the case-basis reserve amounts plus an estimate of loss development and incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) claims, which is developed from an independent actuarial analysis. The process of determining reserve requirements utilizes historical trends and involves an evaluation of claim frequency and severity, claims management, and other factors. Case reserves established in prior years are evaluated as loss experience develops and new information becomes available. Adjustments to previously estimated case reserves are reflected in financial results in the periods in which they are made. Aggregate reserves represent the best estimate of the costs of claims incurred, and it is possible that the ultimate liability may differ significantly from such estimates, as a result of a number of factors, including increases in medical costs and other case-specific factors. A 10% increase in the estimate of IBNR would increase the total 2021 expense for workers’ compensation and third-party casualty claims by approximately $5.1 million. The actual claims payments are charged against our accrued claims liabilities which have been reasonable with respect to the estimates of the related claims.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
New accounting rules and disclosure requirements can significantly impact our reported results and the comparability of financial statements. There are no accounting pronouncements which have been issued but are not yet effective that would have a material impact on our current financial statements.