ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this report entitled “Risk Factors. ” These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date hereof. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update or revise these forward-looking statements for any reason. Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms “Ardelyx”, “Company”, “we”, “us”, and “our” refer to Ardelyx, Inc.
OVERVIEW
We are a biopharmaceutical company founded with a mission to discover, develop and commercialize innovative first-in-class medicines that meet significant unmet medical needs. This includes adult patients with irritable bowel syndrome with constipation (“IBS-C”), adult patients with chronic kidney disease (“CKD”) on dialysis suffering from elevated serum phosphorus, or hyperphosphatemia; and adult patients with CKD and/or heart failure with elevated serum potassium, or hyperkalemia.
Since commencing operations in October 2007, substantially all our efforts have been dedicated to our research and development (“R&D”) activities, including developing tenapanor and developing our proprietary drug discovery and design
platform. We have not generated any revenues from product sales. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $712.9 million.
We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses for the foreseeable future as we prepare for commercialization of IBSRELA® (tenapanor) in April of this year, seek to gain approval for XPHOZAH® (tenapanor) for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis; prepare for the potential commercialization of XPHOZAH, if approved; incur manufacturing and development cost for, tenapanor; and incur development costs for RDX013. To date, we have funded our operations from the sale and issuance of common stock and convertible preferred stock, funds from our collaboration partnerships, which includes license fees, milestones and product supply revenue, as well as funds from our loan agreements with our lenders.
On February 28, 2022, we received a letter from Nasdaq indicating that we have failed to comply with the minimum bid price requirement of Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2). Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2) requires that companies listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market maintain a minimum closing bid price of at least $1.00 per share. Under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), we have a 180 calendar day grace period to regain compliance by meeting the continued listing standard. To regain compliance, the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock must meet or exceed $1.00 per share for a minimum of ten consecutive business days during this grace period. We are monitoring the bid price of our common stock and will consider options available to us to achieve compliance. There can be no assurances that we will be successful in restoring our compliance with the Nasdaq listing requirements.
OUR PRODUCT PIPELINE
IBSRELA for IBS-C
Our unique discovery platform and deep understanding of the primary mechanism of sodium transport in the intestine resulted in our discovery and development of IBSRELA, a first-in-class, FDA approved, sodium hydrogen exchanger 3 ("NHE3") inhibitor for the treatment of IBS-C in adults. IBSRELA acts locally in the gut and is minimally absorbed. By inhibiting NHE3, IBSRELA exerts a triple action mechanism. First, it blocks dietary sodium absorption, leading to increased intestinal transit time and softer stool to address constipation. Second, it decreases intestinal permeability to reduce abdominal pain, and, third, it decreases visceral hypersensitivity to reduce abdominal pain. The triple action mechanism of IBSRELA is differentiated from existing therapies and has been shown to provide significant improvement in abdominal pain, bloating, and constipation - with a quick onset of action and sustained efficacy. Treatment with IBSRELA has been demonstrated to result in improved quality of life versus placebo and patient treatment satisfaction.
We plan to launch IBSRELA in the U.S. in April 2022.
IBS-C is a gastrointestinal disorder characterized by both abdominal pain and altered bowel movements, estimated to affect 11 million people in the U.S. IBS-C is associated with significantly impaired quality of life, reduced productivity, and substantial economic burden. The introduction of new agents over the last decade has led to an established prescription ("RX") treated market with 9,000 writers accounting for 50% of the RXs. Despite the active use of GCC agonist therapies, 83% of Health Care Providers ("HCPs") report a significant unmet need for new therapies, and report that approximately 35% of the patients currently under their care do not adequately respond to the available treatments. When presented with the IBSRELA product profile, 75% of HCPs respond favorably, with the efficacy profile and novel method of action rated as the most compelling aspects of the product profile.
In preparation for our commercial launch of IBSRELA, we have built a commercial organization highly experienced in launching novel therapies into specialty areas. The established nature of the market, limited number of players, concentration of prescribers, recognized unmet need, and favorable response to the novel mechanism IBSRELA product profile enable a targeted promotional effort centered on the 9,000 health care providers that account for 50% of IBS-C prescriptions. Central to the go to market strategy is a highly experienced specialty sales force, many with existing relationships across their GI target base, full company engagement, and innovative peer-to-peer and digital initiatives leveraging the rapidly evolving market dynamics in how HCPs receive information and interact with industry.
With a concentrated promotional focus on patients currently being managed for IBS-C by high writing HCPs - in contrast to the DTC centered, market building approach taken by the existing GCC agonists - competition for IBSRELA will come largely from the four prescription products indicated for IBS-C: Linzess (linaclotide); Amitiza (lubiprostone); Trulance (plecanatide) and Zelnorm (tegaserod). Additionally, over the counter products are commonly used to treat the constipation component of IBS-C, both alone, and in combination with the IBS-C indicated RX therapies.
We have established commercial agreements with Shanghai Fosun Pharmaceutical Industrial Development Co. Ltd. (“Fosun Pharma”) in China and Knight Therapuetics, Inc. (“Knight”) in Canada for IBSRELA for IBS-C. Knight is currently marketing IBSRELA in Canada.
Development Candidate XPHOZAH: A New Approach for The Control of Serum Phosphorus in Adult Patients with CKD on Dialysis
XPHOZAH is a first-in-class medicine being developed for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. XPHOZAH has a unique mechanism of action and acts locally in the gut to inhibit NHE3. This results in the tightening of the epithelial cell junctions, thereby significantly reducing paracellular uptake of phosphate, the primary pathway of phosphate absorption. If approved, XPHOZAH would be the first therapy for phosphate management that blocks phosphorus absorption at the primary site of uptake. It is not a phosphate binder.
In June 2020, we submitted a new drug application ("NDA") to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for tenapanor the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. The NDA was supported by three Phase 3 trials involving over 1,000 adult patients that evaluated the use of tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis, with two trials evaluating tenapanor as monotherapy and one trial evaluating tenapanor as part of a dual mechanism approach with phosphate binders. All three Phase 3 trials met their primary and key secondary endpoints.
On July 28, 2021, we received a Complete Response Letter ("CRL") from the FDA regarding our NDA for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. According to the CRL, while the FDA agrees “that the submitted data provide substantial evidence that tenapanor is effective in reducing serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis,” the FDA characterizes the magnitude of the treatment effect as “small and of unclear clinical significance.” Following an End-of-Review Type A meeting (“End of Review Meeting”) in October 2021, with the FDA’s Division of Cardiology and Nephrology (the “Division”), we submitted a Formal Dispute Resolution Request (“FDRR”) in December 2021. The FDRR was focused on demonstrating that the data submitted in the NDA supported the clinical significance of the treatment effect of tenapanor.
On February 4, 2022, we received an Appeal Denied Letter (“ADL”) from the FDA’s Office of Cardiology, Hematology, Endocrinology and Nephrology (“OCHEN”). On February 18, 2022, we submitted an appeal of the ADL to the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Office of New Drugs (“OND”). If accepted, we expect a decision on the appeal to the OND in April 2022. While the CRL noted that in order for the NDA to be approved, we need to conduct an additional adequate and well-controlled trial demonstrating a clinically relevant treatment effect on serum phosphorus or an effect on the clinical outcome thought to be caused by hyperphosphatemia in adult patients with CKD on dialysis, the ADL provided a potential additional path forward involving the resubmission of the NDA (without conducting an additional trial) with a number of new analyses of each of our Phase 3 clinical trials; an assessment of tenapanor’s benefits and risks; and a proposal of how to label tenapanor for prescribers. There can be no assurances that the Formal Dispute Resolution (“FDR”) process will result in approval of our NDA, or in a clear path to resubmission of our NDA that is achievable in terms of clinical endpoints, time and cost.
RDX013 Program: Small Molecule for Treating Hyperkalemia
We are also advancing a small molecule potassium secretagogue program, RDX013, for the potential treatment of hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia is a common problem in patients with heart and kidney disease, particularly in patients taking customary blood pressure medications known as renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (“RAAS”) inhibitors. RDX013 is a novel mechanism agent designed to target the underlying biological mechanisms of potassium secretion to lower elevated potassium. While currently available therapies are all ion exchange agents, RDX013 is a first in class secretagogue with demonstrated proof of concept in a Phase 2 dose ranging study evaluating the safety and pharmacodynamics of RDX013 in adult patients with hyperkalemia. The next steps for RDX013 will be determined based on final analyses of the Phase 2 results, continued formulation development, and sufficient financial resources.
RDX020 Program: Small molecule for Treating Metabolic Acidosis
We have an ongoing discovery program targeting the inhibition of bicarbonate exchange inhibitor for the treatment of metabolic acidosis, a highly prevalent comorbidity in CKD patients that is strongly correlated with disease progression and adverse outcomes. We have identified lead compounds that are potent, selective and proprietary inhibitors of bicarbonate secretion. Our research organization was eliminated as part of our October 2021 restructuring, and therefore, we currently expect to continue to advance this discovery program utilizing third-party resources managed by internal non-clinical expertise.
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS OVERVIEW
Revenue
Our revenue to date has been generated primarily through license, research and development collaborative agreements with various collaboration partners. We have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales. We currently expect to commence commercialization of IBSRELA in April 2022. In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of our own product sales and payments in connection with our current or future collaborative partnerships, including license fees, other upfront payments, milestone payments, royalties and payments for drug product and/or drug substance. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate in future periods as a result of, among other factors: the extent to which we are successful in our efforts to commercialize IBSRELA; whether we receive regulatory approval for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorous in adult patients with CKD on dialysis (the “Hyperphosphatemia Indication”), and if such approval is received, the timing of such approval and the extent to which we are successful in our efforts to commercialize XPHOZAH for such indication; the timing and progress of goods and services provided pursuant to our current or future collaborative partnerships; our or our collaborators’ achievement of preclinical, clinical, regulatory or commercialization milestones, to the extent achieved; the timing and amount of any payments to us relating to the aforementioned milestones; and the extent to which any of our product candidates are approved and successfully commercialized by a collaboration partner. If we are not able to obtain market acceptance for IBSRELA; if we are not successful in our efforts to obtain and sustain an adequate level of coverage and reimbursement for IBSRELA by third-party payors; if we fail to obtain regulatory approval for tenapanor for the Hyperphosphatemia indication and/or our current collaboration partners or any future collaboration partners fail to obtain regulatory approval for tenapanor in their respective territories, our ability to generate future revenue from our product sales or from our collaborative arrangements, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially and adversely affected. Our past revenue performance is not necessarily indicative of results to be expected in future periods. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for further details.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue represents payments due to AstraZeneca AB (“AstraZeneca”), which under the terms of a termination agreement entered into in 2015 (the “AZ Termination Agreement”) is entitled to (i) future royalties at a rate of 10% of net sales of tenapanor or other NHE3 products by us or our licensees, and (ii) 20% of non-royalty revenue received from our collaboration partners as a result of the development and commercialization of tenapanor or certain other NHE3 inhibitors. We have agreed to pay AstraZeneca up to a maximum of $75.0 million in the aggregate for (i) and (ii). We recognize these expenses as cost of revenue when we recognize the corresponding revenue that gives rise to payments due to AstraZeneca. To date, we recognized an aggregate of $11.6 million as cost of revenue under the AZ Termination Agreement since 2017. See details in Note 5, Collaboration and Licensing Agreements, under AstraZeneca, in the notes to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and Development
Pursuant to the October 2021 restructuring plan, we have eliminated our internal research organization and expect to continue our discovery efforts with respect to RDX020 through the use of third-parties managed internally by non-clinical expertise. We recognized all research and development expenses as they were incurred to support the discovery, research, development and manufacturing of our product candidates. Research and development expenses include, but are not limited to, the following:
•external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with consultants, third-party contract research organizations (“CROs”) and investigative sites where a substantial portion of our clinical studies are conducted, and with contract manufacturing organizations where our clinical supplies are produced;
•expenses associated with supplies and materials consumed in connection with our research operations;
•expenses associated with producing tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis prior to FDA approval;
•other costs associated with research, clinical development and regulatory activities;
•employee-related expenses, which include salaries, bonuses, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation; and
•facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation and amortization expense, information technology expense and other supplies.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, for certain of our executives, our board members, and our finance, legal, business development, market development, commercial and support staff. Other general and administrative expenses include facility related costs and professional fees for legal, accounting and audit, investor relations, other consulting services and allocated facility related costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense represents the interest paid on our loan payable.
Other Income, net
Other income, net consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and held-to-maturity investments, the periodic revaluation of the exit fee related to our loan and currency exchange gains and losses.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes includes current and deferred tax, including foreign withholding taxes paid on payments received from certain collaboration partners. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Our deferred tax assets continue to be fully offset by a valuation allowance, including deferred tax assets related to our net operating loss carryforwards, which may be subject to annual limitations as a result of ownership changes that may have occurred or could occur in the future.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICES AND ESTIMATES
A detailed discussion of our significant accounting policies can be found in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Critical accounting policies are those that require significant judgment and/or estimates by management at the time that financial statements are prepared such that materially different results might have been reported if other assumptions had been made. These estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
We consider certain accounting policies related to revenue recognition, accrued research and development expenses and stock-based compensation to be critical policies to understanding the judgments and estimates applied in our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from research and collaboration and license agreements with customers. Goods and services in the agreements may include the grant of licenses for the use of our technology, the provision of services associated with the research and development of product candidates, manufacturing services, and participation in joint steering committees. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to us of one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front license fees; research, development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; reimbursement of research and development services; option payments; reimbursement of certain costs; payments for manufacturing supply services; and future royalties on net sales of licensed products.
When two or more contracts are entered into with the same customer at or near the same time, we evaluate the contracts to determine whether the contracts should be accounted for as a single arrangement. Contracts are combined and accounted for as a single arrangement if one or more of the following criteria are met: (i) the contracts are negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective; (ii) the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the price or performance of the other contract; or (iii) the goods or services promised in the contracts (or some goods or services promised in each of the contracts) are a single performance obligation.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, management performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including any constraints on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for contracts with customers, we develop assumptions that require judgment to determine whether promised goods and services represent distinct performance obligations and the standalone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. This evaluation is subjective and requires us to make judgments about the promised goods and services and whether those goods and services are separable from other aspects of the contract. Further, determining the standalone selling price for performance obligations requires significant judgment, and when an observable price of a promised good or service is not readily available, we consider relevant assumptions to estimate the standalone selling price, including, as applicable, market conditions, development timelines, probabilities of technical and regulatory success, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, forecasted revenues, potential limitations to the selling price of the product and discount rates.
We apply judgment in determining whether a combined performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time, and, if over time, concluding upon the appropriate method of measuring progress to be applied for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, as estimates related to the measure of progress change, related revenue recognition is adjusted accordingly. Changes in our estimated measure of progress are accounted for prospectively as a change in accounting estimate. We recognize collaboration revenue by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation using an input measure. In order to recognize revenue over the research and development period, we measure actual costs incurred to date compared to the overall total expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation. Revenues are recognized as the program costs are incurred. We will re-evaluate the estimate of expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation each reporting period and make adjustments for any significant changes. Amounts received prior to satisfying the revenue recognition criteria are recorded as contract liabilities in our balance sheets. If the related performance obligation is expected to be satisfied within the next twelve months, this will be classified in current liabilities. Amounts recognized as revenue prior to receipt are recorded as contract assets in our balance sheets. If we expect to have an unconditional right to receive the consideration in the next twelve months, this will be classified in current assets. A net contract asset or liability is presented for each contract with a customer.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes research and development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Amounts of variable consideration are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur and when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Milestone payments that are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraints, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect earnings in the period of adjustment.
Manufacturing supply services: Arrangements that include a promise for the future supply of drug substance or drug product for either clinical development or commercial supply at the customer’s discretion are generally considered as options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations. If we are entitled to additional payments when the customer exercises these options, any payments are recorded in product supply revenues when the customer obtains control of the goods, which is upon delivery.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and where the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Licenses of intellectual property: If a license granted to a customer to use our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from consideration allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we apply judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over
time, to conclude upon the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue related to consideration allocated to the performance obligation.
Options: Customer options, such as options granted to allow a licensee to choose to research, develop and commercialize licensed compounds are evaluated at contract inception in order to determine whether those options provide a material right (i. e., an optional good or service offered for free or at a discount) to the customer. If the customer options represent a material right, the material right is treated as a separate performance obligation at the outset of the arrangement. We allocate the transaction price to material rights based on the standalone selling price, and revenue is recognized when or as the future goods or services are transferred or when the option expires. Customer options that are not material rights do not give rise to a separate performance obligation, and as such, the additional consideration that would result from a customer exercising an option in the future is not included in the transaction price for the current contract. Instead, the option is deemed a marketing offer, and additional option fee payments are recognized or being recognized as revenue when the licensee exercises the option. The exercise of an option that does not represent a material right is treated as a separate contract for accounting purposes.
Contract modifications: Contract modifications, defined as changes in the scope or price (or both) of a contract that are approved by the parties to the contract, such as a contract amendment, exist when the parties to a contract approve a modification that either creates new or changes existing enforceable rights and obligations of the parties to the contract. Depending on facts and circumstances, we account for a contract modification as one of the following: (i) a separate contract; (ii) a termination of the existing contract and a creation of a new contract; or (iii) a combination of the preceding treatments. A contract modification is accounted for as a separate contract if the scope of the contract increases because of the addition of promised goods or services that are distinct and the price of the contract increases by an amount of consideration that reflects our standalone selling prices of the additional promised goods or services. When a contract modification is not considered a separate contract and the remaining goods or services are distinct from the goods or services transferred on or before the date of the contract modification, we account for the contract modification as a termination of the existing contract and a creation of a new contract. When a contract modification is not considered a separate contract and the remaining goods or services are not distinct, we account for the contract modification as an add-on to the existing contract and as an adjustment to revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis.
We receive payments from our licensees as established in each contract. Upfront payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Where applicable, amounts are recorded as unbilled revenue when our right to consideration is unconditional. We do not assess whether a contract with a customer has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensees and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensees will be one year or less.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•CROs in connection with clinical studies;
•investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
•vendors related to contract manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical supplies;
•collaborator entities in connection with our collaboration agreements; and
•vendors in connection with preclinical development activities.
We record expenses related to clinical studies and manufacturing development activities based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with our CROs and manufacturing vendors that conduct and manage these activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to
contract, and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of subjects and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which each component of a service will be performed, and estimate, with vendor input if appropriate, the resulting level of completion of each component of the service, with such estimates often involving drivers that provide a surrogate measurement of completion such as number of enrolled subjects and/or number of sites activated in the calculation of clinical trial fee accruals. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrued or prepaid expense balance accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Stock-Based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of stock options and Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“the ESPP”) shares using the Black-Scholes valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
Expected Term-We have limited historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior for our stock-option grants. As such, the expected term is estimated using the simplified method whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. Beginning in 2021, we estimate the expected term of our options based upon historical exercises and post-vesting termination behavior, which has not resulted in a material difference as compared to using the simplified method.
Expected Volatility- We use the historic volatility of our own stock over the retrospective period corresponding to the expected remaining term of the options, or the period since our shares were first quoted on The Nasdaq Global Market, if that is shorter, to compute our expected stock price volatility.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on zero-coupon U.S. Treasury instruments on the date of grant with a maturity date consistent with the expected term of our stock option grants.
Expected Dividend- To date, we have not declared or paid any cash dividends and do not have any plans to do so in the future. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
As required, we review our valuation assumptions at each grant date and, as a result, we are likely to change our valuation assumptions used to value employee stock-based awards granted in future periods. Employee and director stock-based compensation costs are to be recognized over the vesting period of the award, and we have elected to use the straight-line attribution method. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We estimate forfeitures based on historical experience.
Restricted stock units ("RSUs") are measured at the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant and expensed over the period of vesting using the straight-line attribution approach.
Performance-based RSUs ("PRSUs") are valued at grant-date fair market value. The vesting of the PRSUs is based on performance conditions. Performance conditions include: (i) a specific performance criteria and (ii) the employee’s continuous employment by the company for a stated period of time in order to earn the right to the related PRSUs to vest. The Company recognizes compensation cost with respect to the vesting of the PRSUs on a ratable basis over the requisite service period, upon the performance conditions being deemed probable of achievement.
Restructuring
We recognize restructuring charges related to reorganization plans that have been committed to by management and when liabilities have been incurred. In connection with these activities, we record restructuring charges at fair value for, (a) contractual employee termination benefits when obligations are associated to services already rendered, rights to such benefits have vested, and payment of benefits is probable and can be reasonably estimated, (b) one-time employee termination benefits when management has committed to a plan of termination, the plan identifies the employees and their expected termination dates, the details of termination benefits are complete, it is unlikely changes to the plan will be made or the plan will be withdrawn and communication to such employees has occurred, and (c) contract termination costs when a contract is terminated before the end of its term.
One-time employee termination benefits are recognized in their entirety when communication has occurred and future services are not required. If future services are required, the costs are recorded ratably over the remaining period of service. Contract termination costs to be incurred over the remaining contract term without economic benefit are recorded in their entirety when the contract is canceled.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Below is a summary of our total revenue (dollars in thousands):
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020: The increase to total revenues is primarily attributable to a $5.0 million development milestone which we earned and recognized as licensing revenue during the current year upon the initiation by KKC of phase 3 clinical studies in Japan to evaluate tenapanor for hyperphosphatemia. The increase was partially offset by lower collaborative development revenue and product supply revenue from KKC during the current year.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019: The increase in our revenue was primarily attributable to $4.9 million higher collaborative development revenue recognized in connection with the KKC Agreement, which was entered into in November 2019, a $0.7 million licensing revenue recognized upon Knight’s achievement of a development milestone pursuant to the Knight Agreement and a $1.4 million increase in manufacturing supply of tenapanor and other materials sold to KKC in accordance with the 2017 KKC Agreement, partially offset by $3.0 million revenue related to achievement of a milestone pursuant to the Fosun agreement during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
Below is a summary of our operating expenses (dollars in thousands):
Cost of Revenue
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020: The increase in cost of revenue was for payment due to AstraZeneca under the AZ Termination Agreement related to the development milestone we earned upon the initiation by KKC of phase 3 clinical studies in Japan to evaluate tenapanor for hyperphosphatemia.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019: Cost of revenue was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.5 million, or 75.8%, compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenue in both periods is the portion of tenapanor-related upfront and milestone payment from our collaboration partners that we are required to make to AstraZeneca under the AstraZeneca Termination Agreement.
Research and Development
Below is a summary of our research and development expenses (dollars in thousands):
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020: The increase in our external R&D expenses is the result of tenapanor manufacturing costs as well as clinical study costs from the advancement of our OPTIMIZE study which were partially offset by lower costs for the PHREEDOM clinical study. The increase in our employee-related expenses is related to compensation and benefits expenses for our research and development workforce. Employee-related expenses for twelve months ended December 31, 2021 include $2.7 million severance payments and other employee-related costs as discussed in Note 11 - Restructuring to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019: The decrease in our external R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily includes a $9.7 million decrease in our tenapanor-related expenses, partially offset by $3.0 million of higher expenses attributable to KKC Research Agreement-related research and general R&D expenses. Of the overall tenapanor-related decrease, approximately $11.0 million relates to lower clinical study costs due to the winding down of expenses associated with our Phase 3 clinical program for tenapanor for the control of hyperphosphatemia, offset by an out-of-period adjustment recorded during 2019 that reduced clinical trial expenses by $3.6 million related to our tenapanor clinical trials for the nine months ended September 30, 2019; and approximately $2.9 million related to lower manufacturing expenses due to reduced validation related expenses for tenapanor in 2020 as compared to 2019; offset by an increase of $3.1 million related to regulatory expenses that includes $2.9 million paid to the FDA for the filing of a NDA for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis in June 2020.
General and Administrative
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020: The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increased costs associated with building and staffing our commercial infrastructure and teams as we prepared for a potential U.S. launch of tenapanor. The increase consisted of headcount and related personnel costs and an increase in external spending for disease awareness initiatives, commercial infrastructure and strategy. General and administrative expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 include $3.5 million severance payments and other employee-related costs as discussed in Note 11 - Restructuring to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019: The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in costs associated with building and staffing our commercial infrastructure and teams as we prepare for the anticipated U.S. launch of tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. The increase consisted of headcount and related personnel costs and an increase in external spending for disease awareness initiatives, commercial infrastructure and strategy.
Other Income, net
Below is a summary of our other income (expense), net (dollars in thousands):
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020: The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower interest rates on our variable-rate term loan. The changes in other income, net were primarily due to lower income earned on our investments, which was largely offset by the revaluation of our derivative liability related to our term loan agreement following receipt of the FDA CRL on July 28, 2021.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019: The decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to lower interest rates on our variable-rate term loan. The decrease in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in investment income, a lower exit fee revaluation adjustment related to our loan agreement and a decrease in currency exchange losses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Below is a summary of our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and investments of approximately $116.7 million. We have incurred operating losses since inception and our accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2021 is $712.9 million. Our current level of cash and investments alone is not sufficient to meet our plans for the next twelve months following the filing of these financial statements on February 28, 2022. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the issuance of these financial statements. We plan to address our operating cash flow requirements with our current cash and investments, cash generated from the product launch of IBSRELA, our potential receipt of anticipated milestone payments from our collaboration partners, our ability to access the capital markets, as well as through the implementation of cash preservation activities to reduce or defer discretionary spending.
There are no assurances that our efforts to meet our operating cash flow requirements will be successful. If our current cash and investments as well as our plans to meet our operating cash flow requirements are not sufficient to fund necessary expenditures and meet our obligations for at least the next twelve months following the issuance of these financial statements, our liquidity, financial condition and business prospects will be materially affected. These financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis and do not include any adjustments to the amounts and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary in the event that we can no longer continue as a going concern.
In July 2020, we filed a Form S-3 registration statement, which became effective in August 2020, containing (i) a base prospectus for the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $250.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units, from time to time in one or more offerings; and (ii) a prospectus supplement for the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $100.0 million of its common stock that may be issued and sold, from time to time, under an Open Market Sales Agreement with Jefferies LLC, as sales agent, deemed to be “at the market offerings” (the "2020 Open Market Sales Agreement"). Pursuant to the 2020 Open Market Sales Agreement, Jefferies, as sales agent, received a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross sales price for shares
of common stock sold under the 2020 Open Market Sales Agreement. We sold a cumulative total of 23.3 million shares and received gross proceeds of $100.0 million at a weighted average sales price of approximately $4.30 per share under the 2020 Open Market Sales Agreement.
In August 2021, we filed an additional prospectus supplement under the Registration Statement for the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $150.0 million of our common stock that may be issued and sold, from time to time, under an additional sales agreement we entered into with Jefferies (the "2021 Open Market Sales Agreement"), pursuant to which we may, from time to time, sell up to $150.0 million in shares of our common stock through Jefferies. We are not required to sell shares under the 2021 Open Market Sales Agreement. Pursuant to the 2021 Open Market Sales Agreement, Jefferies, as our sales agent, receives a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross sales price for shares of common stock sold under the 2021 Open Market Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2021 we have sold 15.7 million shares and received gross proceeds of $25.0 million at a weighted average sales price of approximately $1.60 per share under the 2021 Open Market Sales Agreement.
On May 16, 2018, we entered into a loan and security agreement (the "2018 Loan Agreement") with Solar Capital Ltd. and Western Alliance Bank (“the Lenders”). The 2018 Loan Agreement provides for a $50.0 million term loan facility with a maturity date of November 1, 2022 (”the 2018 Term Loan”). The full amount of the 2018 Term Loan was funded on May 16, 2018. We received net proceeds from the loan of approximately $49.3 million, after deducting the closing fee, legal expenses and issuance costs. On October 9, 2020, we and the Lenders entered into an amendment to the 2018 Loan Agreement (“the 2020 Amendment”), as defined and discussed in Note 6, Borrowing, to extend the date through which we were permitted to make interest-only payments on the 2018 Term Loan by twelve months to December 1, 2021. In May and July 2021, we and the Lenders entered into additional amendments to the 2018 Loan Agreement (“the 2021 Amendments”) which together extended the period of time that we were permitted to make interest-only payments on the loan to December 1, 2021; provided that if we had not received FDA approval for our NDA for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CDK on dialysis on or before October 25, 2021, the interest-only period would expire and principal repayments would be required to begin on November 1, 2021. If principal repayments were required to begin prior to December 1, 2021 under the 2021 Amendments, then the first such repayment was required to include all payments that would have been due if monthly principal repayment had begun on June 1, 2021. During November 2021, in compliance with the terms of our 2018 Loan Agreement, we paid the first principal repayment on the loan in the amount of $16.7 million. See Note 6, Borrowings, in the notes to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8, for details on our 2018 Loan Agreement.
As discussed in Note 18 - Subsequent Events, on February 23, 2022 (the “Closing Date”), we entered into a loan and security agreement (the “2022 Loan Agreement”) with SLR Investment Corp. as collateral agent (the “Agent”), and the lenders listed in the 2022 Loan Agreement (collectively the “2022 Lenders”). The 2022 Loan Agreement provides for a senior secured term loan facility, with $27.5 million (the “Term A Loan”) funded on the Closing Date and an additional $22.5 million that we may borrow on or prior to July 25, 2023; provided that (i) we have received approval by the FDA for our NDA for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in chronic kidney disease patients on dialysis by December 31, 2022, and (ii) we have achieved certain product revenue milestone targets described in the 2022 Loan Agreement (the “Term B Loan”, and collectively, the Term A Loan and the Term B Loan, the “2022 Term Loan”). The Term A Loan funds are being used to repay the 2018 Term Loan with the Lenders as discussed in Note 6 - Borrowings and to fund our ongoing operations. We had $25.0 million principal from the 2018 Term Loan outstanding as of the Closing Date.
Our primary sources of cash have been from the sale and issuance of common stock (in both public offerings and private placements) and private placements of convertible preferred stock, funds from our collaboration partnerships and funds from our 2018 Loan Agreement. Our primary uses of cash have been to fund operating expenses, primarily research and development expenditures and pre-commercial expenses. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Our future funding requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including:
•the extent to which we are able to generate product revenue from sales of IBSRELA;
•whether we are successful in our efforts under the FDR process to secure approval for our NDA for tenapanor for the Hyperphosphatemia Indication, or to reach resolution with the FDA regarding a path to address the deficiencies in the NDA noted in the CRL, and the time and cost associated with such path;
•the sales price and the availability of adequate third-party reimbursement for IBSRELA and XPHOZAH, if approved;
•the manufacturing costs of IBSRELA and XPHOZAH;
•the selling and marketing costs associated with IBSRELA and XPHOZAH, if approved;
•our ability to maintain our existing collaboration partnerships and to establish additional collaboration partnerships, in-license/out-license, joint ventures or other similar arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•the timing, receipt, and amount of sales of, or royalties on, tenapanor, if any;
•the cash requirements of any future acquisitions or discovery of product candidates;
•any clinical trials we are required to or decide to pursue for tenapanor or RDX013;
•the time and cost necessary to respond to technological and market developments;
•the costs of filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation, including costs of defending any claims of infringement brought by others in connection with the development, manufacture or commercialization of tenapanor or any of our product candidates; and
•the payment of interest and principal related to our loan and security agreement entered into with SLR Investment Corp. in February 2022.
CASH FLOW ACTIVITIES
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020: Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $71.1 million as a result of our increased net loss for the period. The increased net loss was primarily driven by costs associated with building and staffing our commercial infrastructure and teams as we prepared for the anticipated U.S. launch of tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. In addition to the increased net loss, cash flows related to our operating assets and liabilities increased in the amount of $8.7 million.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019: Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $5.0 million as compared to the prior year. The most significant factors that contributed to the increase was primarily a $6.2 million decrease to changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily driven by cash received in 2019 and reported as deferred revenue for the KKC Research Agreement that was recognized as revenue in 2020, offset by a $0.6 million increase in non-cash charges and $0.6 million decrease to the net loss.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020: Net cash provided by investing activities increased by $82.4 million as our investment maturities increased to exceed the cost to purchase investments.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019: Net cash provided by investing activities decreased by $54.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was attributable to a $48.2 million
increase in purchases of available-for-sale investments and a decrease in proceeds from maturities and redemptions of short-term investments of $6.6 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020: Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $60.2 million due to net proceeds from issuance of our common stock pursuant to our at-the-market offerings, which were partially offset by principal repayments for our loan payable.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019: Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $132.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was predominantly attributable to $134.9 million in net proceeds received in connection with underwritten public offering initiatives that was received in 2019 but did not recur in 2020. This decrease was partially offset by $2.4 million net additional proceeds received in 2020 as compared to 2019 from sales of our common stock pursuant to our at-the-market sales agreement with Jefferies LLC, employee stock plan purchases and option exercises, and the 2019 sale of common stock in the Private Placement with KKC.
SMALLER REPORTING COMPANY AND NON-ACCELERATED FILER STATUS
On June 28, 2018, the SEC adopted amendments that raise the thresholds in the smaller reporting company ("SRC") definition, whereby we were determined to qualify as an SRC. We elected to reflect that determination and avail ourselves with most of the SRC scaled disclosure accommodations in our filings subsequent to the adoption. On March 12, 2020, the SEC amended its rules to allow SRCs that have less than $100.0 million in annual revenue and a public float of less than $700.0 million to qualify as a non-accelerated filer. As a non-accelerated filer, we were not required to obtain an opinion of our independent auditors with respect to our internal controls over financial reporting for the periods through December 31, 2020.
On June 30, 2021, our public float exceeded $700.0 million and therefore, as of December 31, 2021, we no longer qualify as an SRC and are considered a large accelerated filer. The disclosures contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been expanded accordingly.