Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion of our historical performance, financial condition and prospects in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements as of and for the three years ended December 31, 2021 included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report. The information provided below supplements, but does not form part of, our historical financial statements. This discussion includes forward-looking statements that are based on the views and beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions and estimates made by our management. Actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements because of various risk factors, including those that may not be in the control of management. For further information on items that could impact our future operating performance or financial condition, see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors and the section entitled “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements, except as required by law.
We have applied provisions of the SEC’s FAST Act Modernization and Simplification of Regulation S-K, which limits the discussion to the two most recent fiscal years. This discussion and analysis deals with comparisons of material changes in the consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. For the comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Registration Statement filed with the SEC under Rule 424(b) under the Securities Act on October 25, 2021.
Initial Public Offering
On October 21, 2021, we announced the pricing of the Offering of 17,650,000 shares of our Class A common stock at a price to the public of $13.00 per share. In addition, we granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 2,647,500 shares of our Class A common stock at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. On October 22, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised such option to purchase an additional 2,647,500 shares of Class A common stock. The Class A common stock began trading on the NYSE under the ticker symbol “ARIS” on October 22, 2021, and the Offering, including the underwriters’ option, closed on October 26, 2021.
The IPO closing, including the underwriters’ option, resulted in net proceeds of approximately $246.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other issuance costs. We contributed all the net IPO proceeds to Solaris LLC in exchange for a single class of units in Solaris LLC and shares of our Class B common stock. Solaris LLC distributed approximately $213.2 million of the net proceeds to the Legacy Owners of Solaris LLC units and retained the remaining $33.2 million of the net proceeds for general corporate purposes, which may include capital expenditures, working capital and potential acquisitions and strategic transactions.
On December 6, 2021, 1,486,396 Solaris LLC units were converted to shares of our Class A common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we own approximately 41% of Solaris LLC. On February 28, 2022, an additional 148,087 Solaris LLC units were converted to shares of our Class A common stock.
Our Predecessor and Aris Inc.
Aris Inc. was formed in May 2021 and does not have historical financial operating results. For purposes of this Annual Report, our accounting predecessor is Solaris LLC. Solaris LLC was formed in November 2015. Following our IPO and the transactions related thereto, we became a holding company whose sole material asset consists of Solaris LLC units. We became the managing member of Solaris LLC and are responsible for all operational, management and administrative decisions relating to Solaris LLC’s business and, as a result, consolidate the financial results of Solaris LLC and its subsidiaries. The financial data discussed below reflect the historical results of operations and financial position of Solaris LLC, our predecessor for accounting purposes prior to the date of our IPO closing.
Business Overview
We are a leading, growth-oriented environmental infrastructure and solutions company that directly helps our customers reduce their water and carbon footprints. We deliver full-cycle water handling and recycling solutions that increase the sustainability of energy company operations. Our integrated pipelines and related infrastructure create long-term value by delivering high-capacity, comprehensive produced water management, recycling and supply solutions to operators in the core areas of the Permian Basin.
Year-end Results
Significant financial and operating highlights for the year ended December 31, 2021 include:
● Increase of approximately 69,000 dedicated acres
● Total water volumes handled or sold of 947 kbwpd, an increase of 38% from the prior year
● Recycled produced water volumes sold of 123 kbwpd, an increase of 180% from the prior year
● Total revenue of $229.3 million, an increase of 34% from the prior year
● Net loss of $7.0 million which includes a non-cash charge of $28.5 million associated with the abandonment of a saltwater disposal well (“SWD”)
● Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP financial measure) of $120.5 million, an increase of 63% from the prior year
● Dividend declared on our Class A common stock for the fourth quarter of 2021 of $0.07 per share (which equates to $0.09 per share for the fourth quarter of 2021 pro-rated for the period following completion of the IPO), along with a distribution of $0.07 per unit paid to unit holders of Solaris LLC units
For additional information regarding our non-GAAP financial measures, see Non-GAAP Financial Measures below.
General Trends and Outlook
Oil and Gas Market Dynamics
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the average WTI spot price was $67.99 per barrel, representing a significant rebound from $39.16 for the year ended December 31, 2020. With the increase in WTI spot prices, our customers’ investment in new production activities has resumed and we believe that the activity levels of our customers will continue to increase above 2020 levels.
We believe there are several industry trends that continue to provide meaningful support for future growth. Our key customers are allocating new capital to the Permian Basin including acreage where the water sourcing and production is dedicated to us. Additionally, operators continue to increase horizontal lateral lengths which corresponds to increased water sourcing and produced water handling volumes.
Many industry trends such as simultaneous multi-well operations and the trend towards reuse applications of produced water, particularly in the areas of the Permian Basin where we operate, are improving efficiencies and returns and provide us with significant opportunities for both our Produced Water Handling and Water Solutions businesses.
Inflation
During 2021, the U.S. began experiencing increased wage and price inflation, as evidenced by increases in the CPI, and inflation is expected to continue through 2022. The degree of inflation, and length of time it continues, will be impacted by any steps the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank takes to combat inflationary pressures, such as by adjusting interest rates. Our long-term, fee-based produced water handling contracts are generally subject to annual CPI based adjustments. However, many of our contractual CPI based adjustments are capped at a maximum annual increase and, therefore, our costs may increase more rapidly than the fees that we charge to customers pursuant to our contracts with them. If inflation in the CPI were to increase significantly higher than our contractually allowed fee increases, we could experience negative impacts to our operating margins.
COVID-19 Pandemic
COVID-19 contributed to a significant downturn in oil and gas commodity prices in 2020 and continued to cause significant volatility in 2021. We cannot predict future commodity prices or the impact the pandemic may have on future oil and gas prices. We are not currently experiencing significant disruptions with our workforce due to the pandemic. However, we are experiencing longer lead times when ordering certain equipment which may have an impact on how quickly we can expand our network of pipelines and facilities.
We continue to maintain our focus on safe and reliable performance of our systems, while ensuring the safety of our employees. However, we are unable to predict the future impact of COVID-19, and it is possible that such impact could be negative.
Recent Developments - Induced Seismicity
During the fourth quarter of 2021, our disposal operations in New Mexico and Texas were impacted by state regulator responses to recent seismic events in areas where we operate. In New Mexico, we operate one well which has been partially curtailed due to compliance with the NMOCD’s Seismicity Response Protocol in the Hat Mesa SRA.
In Texas, we operate two deep injection wells and hold one deep injection well permit within the Gardendale SRA where the TRC has recently suspended all active permits to inject oil and gas waste into deep strata. We requested a hearing to continue to operate our wells, and we have been granted approval to recomplete our deep wells to shallow injection intervals.
Due to the integrated nature of our pipeline network and our system-wide redundancy, we have been able to comply with regulator responses to seismic activity, while continuing to provide service to our customers without significant disruption. In addition, we are working with the TRC to amend our injection permits to allow for the recompletion of certain wells to a shallow injection interval.
To date, our compliance with state regulator seismic response actions has not resulted in any material volumetric, revenue or cash flow decreases.
See also:
● Part I, Items 1. and 2. Business and Properties ─ Regulation ─ Environmental and Occupational Safety and Health Matters ─ Water handling facilities and induced seismicity.
● See Part I, Item 1.A. Risk Factors ─ Legislation or regulatory initiatives intended to address seismic activity could restrict our ability to recycle or handle produced water gathered from our E&P customers and, accordingly, could have a material adverse effect on our business.
How We Generate Revenue
We manage our business through a single operating segment comprising two primary revenue streams, Produced Water Handling and Water Solutions. Our Produced Water Handling revenues are driven by the volumes of produced water we gather from our customers, and our Water Solutions revenues are driven by the quantities of recycled produced water and groundwater delivered to our customers to support their well completion activities.
Under our contracts with our customers, which are generally subject to periodic index-based adjustments such as CPI, we receive a fixed fee per barrel of produced water received from our customers, which water is either handled or recycled, and a fixed fee per barrel of recycled water or groundwater sold to our customers. In addition, one of our significant customer contracts provides for rates that periodically fluctuate within a defined range in response to changes in WTI. See