Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations together with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A above.
We have elected to omit discussion on the earliest of the three years covered by the consolidated financial statements presented. Refer to Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations located in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed on February 26, 2021, for reference to discussion of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, the earliest of the three fiscal years presented.
Business and Executive Overview
Arlo combines an intelligent cloud infrastructure and mobile app with a variety of smart connected devices that is transforming the way people experience the connected lifestyle. Arlo’s deep expertise in product design, wireless connectivity, cloud infrastructure and cutting-edge AI capabilities focuses on delivering a seamless, smart home experience for Arlo users that is easy to setup and interact with every day. Our cloud-based platform provides users with visibility, insight and a powerful means to help protect and connect in real-time with the people and things that matter most, from any location with a Wi-Fi or a cellular connection. Since the launch of our first product in December 2014, we have shipped over 22.9 million smart connected devices, and as of December 31, 2021, our smart platform had approximately 6.1 million cumulative registered accounts across more than 100 countries around the world.
We conduct business across three geographic regions-the Americas; Europe, Middle-East and Africa (“EMEA”); and Asia Pacific (“APAC”) and we primarily generate revenue by selling devices through retail, wholesale distribution, wireless carrier channels, security solution providers, Arlo's direct to consumer store and paid subscription services. International revenue was 38.9% and 27.5% of our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated revenue of $435.1 million and $357.2 million, respectively. Loss from operations was $60.1 million and $104.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Loss from operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included separation expense of $1.6 million and $0.2 million, respectively.
Our goal is to continue to develop innovative, world-class connected lifestyle solutions to expand and further monetize our current and future user and subscriber bases. We believe that the growth of our business is dependent on many factors, including our ability to innovate and launch successful new products on a timely basis and grow our installed base, to increase subscription-based recurring revenue, to invest in brand awareness and channel partnerships and to continue our global expansion. We expect to maintain our investment in research and development going forward as we continue to introduce new and innovative products and services to enhance the Arlo platform.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts and make strategic decisions. We believe these key business metrics provide useful information by offering the ability to make more meaningful period-to-period comparisons of our on-going operating results and a better understanding of how management plans and measures our underlying business. Our key business metrics may be calculated in a manner different from the same key business metrics used by other companies. We regularly review our processes for calculating these metrics, and from time to time we may
discover inaccuracies in our metrics or make adjustments to better reflect our business or to improve their accuracy, including adjustments that may result in the recalculation of our historical metrics. We believe that any such inaccuracies or adjustments are immaterial unless otherwise stated.
Cumulative Registered Accounts. We believe that our ability to increase our user base is an indicator of our market penetration and growth of our business as we continue to expand and innovate our Arlo platform. We define our registered accounts at the end of a particular period as the number of unique registered accounts on the Arlo platform as of the end of such particular period, and includes accounts owned by Verisure. The number of registered accounts does not necessarily reflect the number of end-users on the Arlo platform, as one registered account may be used by multiple people. We changed our definition from registered users to registered accounts starting in the fourth quarter of 2019 due to the Verisure transaction. Verisure will own the registered accounts but we will continue to provide services to these European customers under the Verisure Agreements.
Cumulative Paid Accounts. Paid accounts worldwide measured as any account where a subscription to a paid service is being collected (either by the Company or by the Company’s customers or channel partners), plus paid service plans of a duration of more than 3 months bundled with products (such bundles being counted as a paid account after 90 days have elapsed from the date of registration). In the fourth quarter of 2019, we redefined paid subscribers as paid accounts to include customers that were transferred to Verisure as part of the disposal of our commercial operations in Europe because we will continue to provide services to these European customers and receive payments associated with them, under the Verisure Agreements.
Annual Recurring Revenue. Effective as of the third quarter of 2021, we adopted Annual Recurring Revenue ("ARR") as one of the key indicators of our business performance. We believe ARR enables measurement of our business initiatives, and serves as an indicator of our future growth. ARR represents the amount of paid service revenue that we expect to recur annually and is calculated by taking our recurring paid service revenue for the last calendar month in the fiscal quarter, multiplied by 12 months. Recurring paid service revenue represents the revenue we recognize from our paid accounts and excludes prepaid service revenue and NRE service revenue from strategic partners. The ARR for the comparative period presented was derived following the same methodology. ARR is a performance metric and should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue, and is not intended to be a substitute for, or combined with, any of these items.
COVID-19 Effect on Financial Results
We continue to closely monitor developments and are taking steps to mitigate the potential risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic to us, our employees and our customers. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations will depend on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic, the broader implications of the macro-economic recovery and the impact on overall customer demand, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. Our priorities and actions during the COVID-19 pandemic continue to be focused on protecting the health and safety of all those we serve, our employees, our customers, our suppliers and our communities, including implementing continuous updates to our health and safety policies and processes and progress made through vaccinations. We continue to instruct all but a limited number of our global workforce to work remotely as a precautionary measure intended to minimize the risk of the virus to them and the communities in which we operate, while we continue to focus on providing our team with the resources that they need to meet the needs of our customers and deliver new innovations to the markets we serve, despite challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic. We also continue to work with our suppliers to address any supply chain disruptions, which might include larger component backlogs, component cost increases, travel restrictions and logistics changes that can impact our operations. For example, increased demand for electronics as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, effects of the U.S. trade war with China, increased demand for chips in the automotive
industry and certain other factors have led to a global shortage of semiconductors. As a result, we have experienced component shortages, including longer lead times for components and supply constraints, that have affected both our ability to meet scheduled product deliveries and worldwide demand for our products. Also, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our supply chain partners are limited by production capacity, constrained by material availability, labor shortages, factory uptime and freight capacity, each of which constrains our ability to capitalize fully on end market demand. The increased lead time in production due to component shortages and supply chain disruption brought our inventory down to a record low level at $38.4 million as of December 31, 2021. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, international freight capacity has dropped, causing air and ocean freight rates to materially increase. Furthermore, transit times have also increased, causing us to rely more on air freight in order to meet our customers' demands. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we saw a 138% increase in freight-in expense compared to the prior year, as a result of the higher sea and air freight rates and component shortages which necessitated use of air freight to meet customer requested delivery dates. We expect supply chain constraints to persist in 2022. While we have been broadly successful in navigating COVID-19 related challenges to date, any further disruptions brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic to our supply chain and operations could have a significant negative impact on our net revenue, gross and operating margin performance.
In addition, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we could experience material charges from potential adjustments of the carrying value of our inventories and trade receivables, impairment charges on our long-lived assets, intangible assets and goodwill, and changes in the effectiveness of our hedging instruments, among others. During the second quarter of 2021, we evaluated our existing real estate lease portfolio in light the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the changing nature of office space use by our workforce. This evaluation resulted in the decision to sublease our office space in San Jose, California. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge of $9.1 million, which includes $6.8 million associated with the right-of-use assets and $2.3 million associated with other lease related property and equipment. Refer to Note 5, Balance Sheet Components in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information about the impairment of the right-of-use asset and long-lived assets.
Throughout 2021, we remained focused on navigating these on-going challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic through preserving our liquidity and managing our cash flow through taking preemptive action to enhance our ability to meet our short-term liquidity needs. These actions include, but are not limited to, proactively managing working capital by closely monitoring customers' credit and collections, renegotiating payment terms with third-party manufacturers and key suppliers, closely monitoring inventory levels and purchases against forecasted demand, reducing or eliminating non-essential spending, and subleasing excess office space. We continue to monitor this rapidly developing situation and may, as necessary, reduce expenditures further, borrow under our revolving credit facility, or pursue other sources of capital that may include other forms of external financing in order to maintain our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in response to the uncertainty in the United States and global markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Components of Our Operating Results
Revenue
Our gross revenue consists primarily of sales of devices, prepaid and paid service revenue and NRE service revenue from Verisure. We generally recognize revenue from product sales at the time the product is shipped and transfer of control from us to the customer occurs. Our first generation camera products under our old business model come with a prepaid service that provides users with rolling seven-day cloud video storage, the ability to connect up to five cameras and 90 days of customer support. Our second generation camera, doorbell and floodlight products under our new business model come with a prepaid service that includes a one-year free trial period of Arlo Smart bundled with our Arlo Ultra products launched in early 2019, and a three-month free trial period of Arlo Smart bundled with our products launched after September 2019. Upon device shipment, we attribute a portion of the sales price to the prepaid service, deferring this revenue at the outset and subsequently recognizing it ratably over the estimated useful life of the device or free trial period, as applicable. Our paid subscription services relate to sales of subscription plans to our registered accounts. Our services also include certain development services provided to Verisure under a NRE arrangement as part of the disposal of our commercial operations in Europe in the fourth quarter of 2019. Refer to Note 4, Disposal of Business in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a complete discussion of the NRE arrangement.
Our revenue consists of gross revenue, less end-user customer rebates and other channel sales incentives deemed to be a reduction of revenue per the authoritative guidance for revenue recognition, allowances for estimated sales returns, price protection, and net changes in deferred revenue. A significant portion of our marketing expenditure is with customers and is deemed to be a reduction of revenue under authoritative guidance for revenue recognition.
Under the Supply Agreement, Verisure became the exclusive distributor of our products in Europe for all channels, and will non-exclusively distribute our products through its direct channels globally for an initial term of five years. Refer to Note 4, Disposal of Business in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a complete discussion of the Supply Agreement.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of both product costs and costs of service. Product costs primarily consist of: the cost of finished products from our third-party manufacturers; overhead costs, including personnel expense for operation staff, purchasing, product planning, inventory control, warehousing and distribution logistics, third-party software licensing fees, inbound freight, IT and facilities overhead, warranty costs associated with returned goods, write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory, royalties to third parties; and amortization expense of certain acquired intangibles. Cost of service consists of costs attributable to the provision and maintenance of our cloud-based platform, including personnel, storage, security and computing, as well as NRE service costs incurred under the Verisure NRE arrangement.
Our cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue can vary based upon a number of factors, including those that may affect our revenue set forth above and factors that may affect our cost of revenue, including, without limitation: product and service mix, sales channel mix, registered accounts' acceptance of paid subscription service offerings, fluctuation in foreign exchange rates and changes in our cost of goods sold due to fluctuations in prices paid for components, net of vendor rebates, cloud platform costs, warranty and overhead costs, inbound freight and duty product conversion costs, charges for excess or obsolete inventory, and amortization of acquired intangibles. We outsource our manufacturing, warehousing, and distribution logistics. We also outsource certain components of the required infrastructure to support our cloud-based back-end IT infrastructure. We believe this outsourcing strategy allows us to better manage our product and services costs and gross margin.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel-related expense, safety, security, regulatory services and testing, other research and development consulting fees, and IT and facilities overhead. We recognize research and development expense as it is incurred. We have invested in and expanded our research and development organization to enhance our ability to introduce innovative products and services. We believe that innovation and technological leadership are critical to our future success, and we are committed to continuing a significant level of research and development to develop new technologies, products, and services, including our hardware devices, cloud-based software, AI-based algorithms, and machine learning capabilities. We expect research and development expense to stay relatively flat in absolute dollars as we manage our expenses while continuing to develop new product and service offerings. Research and development expense directly attributable to delivering the Verisure NRE is recognized in cost of service.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of personnel expense for sales and marketing staff; technical support expense; advertising; trade shows; corporate communications and other marketing expense; product marketing expense; IT and facilities overhead; outbound freight costs; and credit card processing fees. We expect our sales and marketing expense to increase in the future as we invest in marketing to drive awareness of our brand and drive demand for our products and services.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel-related expense for certain executives, finance and accounting, investor relations, human resources, legal, information technology, professional fees, IT and facilities overhead, strategic initiative expense, and other general corporate expense. We expect our general and administrative expense to fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue in future periods based on fluctuations in our revenue and the timing of such expense.
Impairment Charges
During the second quarter of 2021, we reviewed certain of our right-of-use assets and other lease-related assets for impairment in conjunction with our decision to sublease our office space in San Jose, California. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge for the right-of-use asset and other lease-related assets included in the San Jose office asset group.
Separation Expense
Separation expense consists primarily of costs of legal and professional services for IPO-related litigation associated with our separation from NETGEAR.
Gain on Sale of Business
Gain on sale of business represents the gain on the sale of our commercial operations in Europe in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Interest Income
Interest income represents interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. We expect our interest income in absolute dollars to stay relatively flat as we deploy our short-term investments and cash and cash equivalents to fund our operations, while interest rates are expected to increase.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily represents gains and losses on transactions denominated in foreign currencies, foreign currency contract gain (loss), net, and other miscellaneous income and expense. We have also included any reimbursement for the Verisure TSA and the Employee Retention Credit ("ERC") under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") for qualified wages in Other income.
Results of Operations
We operate as one operating and reportable segment. The following table sets forth, for the periods presented, the consolidated statements of operations data, which we derived from the accompanying consolidated financial statements:
Revenue
We conduct business across three geographic regions: Americas, EMEA, and APAC. We generally base revenue by geography on the ship-to location of the customer for device sales and device location for service sales.
Revenue increased 21.8% across all geographic regions for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. Product revenue increased by $46.8 million, or 16.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily driven by a 117.1% increase in product sales to Verisure. The increase is also driven by customer mix and the associated contractual terms and the decreases in provisions for sales returns, price protection and marketing expenditures deemed to be a reduction of product revenue. Service revenue increased by $31.2 million, or 43.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to increased paid accounts.
Cost of Revenue
The following table presents cost of revenue for the periods indicated:
Cost of revenue increased 8.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year driven by increases in both product revenue and service revenue. Cost of product revenue increased $21.4 million, or 8.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to increases in shipped product costs and freight-in expense as a result of COVID-19 related supply chain disruption, partially offset by lower warranty cost and excess and obsolete inventory provision compared to the prior year. The decrease in warranty cost is a result of a lower scrap rate driven by increased and more profitable refurbished product sales, lower returns and fewer product transitions. The decrease in excess and obsolete inventory provision is due to fewer product transitions and more effective inventory management. Cost of service revenue increased $3.9 million, or 10.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, driven by service revenue growth, offset by cost optimizations implemented.
Gross Margin
The following table presents gross margin for the periods indicated:
Gross margin increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, due to a combination of both product and service margin increases. The product margin increase is primarily due to customer mix driving a decreased provision for price protection and lower marketing expenditures that are deemed to be reductions of revenue, decreased warranty costs and a lower excess and obsolete inventory provision, partially offset by higher freight-in costs as a result of COVID-19 related supply chain disruption. Service margin increased for year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year, primarily due to an increase in paid service revenue coupled with various cost optimizations implemented.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
The following table presents research and development expense for the periods indicated:
Research and development expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, due to a decrease of $2.8 million in IT and facility overhead, partially offset by an increase of $0.9 million in personnel-related expenses and a decrease of $1.0 million in various research and development expenses that were attributed to the Verisure NRE arrangement. For the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development expenses amounting to $2.8 million were attributed to the Verisure NRE arrangement and classified as cost of service revenue.
Sales and Marketing
The following table presents sales and marketing expense for the periods indicated:
Sales and marketing expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decrease of $1.8 million in outside professional services and a decrease of $1.7 million in marketing expenditures, partially offset by an increase of $2.1 million in personnel-related expenses, and an increase of $1.4 million in credit card processing fees driven by the growth in sales from Arlo's direct to consumer store and paid accounts service revenue.
General and Administrative
The following table presents general and administrative expense for the periods indicated:
General and administrative expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decrease of $4.0 million in personnel-related expenditures partially brought about by the one-time charge for stock-based compensation expense recognized in the first quarter of 2020 upon the voluntary forfeiture of our CEO's stock options in January 2020, a decrease of $1.9 million in legal and professional services and a decrease of $0.8 million in Verisure transaction costs which was recognized in the first half of 2020, partially offset by an increase of $1.6 million in IT and facility overhead.
Impairment Charges
The following table presents impairment charges for the periods indicated:
During the second quarter of 2021, we reviewed certain of our right-of-use assets and other lease-related assets for impairment in conjunction with our decision to sublease our office space in San Jose, California. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge of $9.1 million, which included $6.8 million associated with the right-of-use assets and $2.3 million associated with the leasehold improvements and furniture, fixtures and equipment included in the San Jose office asset group. Refer to Note 5, Balance Sheet Components in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information about the impairment of the right-of-use asset and long-lived assets.
Separation Expense
The following table presents separation expense for the periods indicated:
Separation expense consists primarily of the costs of legal and professional services for IPO-related litigation associated with our Separation from NETGEAR.
Gain on sale of business
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we sold our commercial operations in Europe which resulted in a gain on sale of business. In the first quarter of 2020, we recognized an additional gain of $0.3 million as a result of the final working capital adjustment. Refer to Note 4, Disposal of Business in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a complete discussion of this disposal.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense), Net
The following table presents other income (expense), net for the periods indicated:
Interest income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year, primarily due to the decrease in our short-term investments and cash and cash equivalents as we funded our operations and a decline in interest rates. Other income (expense), net increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to the ERC under the CARES Act for qualified wages amounting to $1.8 million, which was recognized as Other income in the second quarter of 2021, partially offset by decreases in Verisure TSA related income. The CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The ERC, as one of the provisions that provide economic relief for individuals and businesses under the CARES Act, is a refundable payroll tax credit that encouraged businesses to keep employees on the payroll during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes and effective tax rate consisted of the following:
Our effective tax rate for 2021 was lower than the U.S. federal income tax rate of 21% primarily due to a lower effective tax rate on foreign earnings and valuation allowance on our net U.S. deferred tax assets and certain foreign tax attributes as it is more likely than not that some or all of our deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The increase in provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to higher foreign earnings in 2021. Refer to Note 9, Income taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have a history of losses and may continue to incur operating and net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $288.8 million.
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. Short-term investments are marketable government securities with an original maturity or a remaining maturity at the time of purchase of greater than three months and no more than 12 months. The marketable securities are held in our company’s name with a high quality financial institution, which acts as our custodian and investment manager. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaling $175.7 million. As of December 31, 2021, 7.4% of our cash and cash equivalents were held outside of the U.S. Starting in 2018, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”) impact on the repatriation of foreign earnings is generally immaterial. The cash and cash equivalents balance outside of the U.S. is subject to fluctuation based on the settlement of intercompany balances. In October 2021, we entered into the Credit Agreement with Bank of America, N.A., providing for a credit facility of up to $40.0 million. In addition, the Credit
Agreement includes an uncommitted accordion feature that allows us to request the lender increase the loan commitments by up to an additional $25.0 million, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions. As of December 31, 2021, we have not borrowed against this credit facility. Refer to Note 10, Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on the Credit Agreement.
Based on our current plans, the Credit Agreement with Bank of America, N.A., and market conditions, we believe that such sources of liquidity will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, in the future we may require or desire additional funds to support our operating expenses and capital requirements or for other purposes, such as acquisitions, and may seek to raise such additional funds through public or private equity or debt financings or collaborative agreements or from other sources. However, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve and has already resulted in a significant disruption of global financial markets. If the disruption persists and deepens, we could experience an inability to access additional capital, which could in the future negatively affect our capacity to support our operating expenses and capital requirements or to make investments for other purposes, such as acquisitions.
We have no commitments to obtain such additional financing and cannot assure you that additional financing will be available at all or, if available, that such financing would be obtainable on terms favorable to us and would not be dilutive. Our future liquidity and cash requirements will depend on numerous factors, including the introduction of new products, the growth in our service revenue, as well as the ability to increase our gross margin dollars and continue to maintain controls over our operating expenditures.
Cash Flow
The following table presents our cash flows for the periods presented.
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities decreased by $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. This decrease comprised a $48.7 million reduction in adjusted net loss for cash flows, offset by an increase in working capital used in operations of $25.4 million, mainly driven by an increase in accounts receivable and a decrease in deferred revenue, partially offset by increased accounts payable and lower inventory balance.
Our days sales outstanding (“DSO”) decreased to 50 days as of December 31, 2021 as compared to 64 days as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to more front-loaded shipments in the fourth quarter and slightly improved quarter end aging. Typically, our DSO in the fourth quarter is higher due to seasonal payment terms provided to our larger customers, while service revenue is typically a lower percentage of our revenue in the fourth quarter. Inventory decreased to $38.4 million as of December 31, 2021 from $64.7 million as of December 31, 2020, driven by longer production lead times, component shortages and supply chain disruptions, which necessitated extensive use of air freight, all of which were brought about by COVID-19-related issues, coupled with lower returns. Our ending inventory turns were 10.5x in the three months ended December 31, 2021 up from 5.0x turns in the three months ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the lower inventory balance and extensive use of air freight, as previously discussed. Our accounts payable increased to $84.1 million as of December 31, 2021 from $62.2 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of higher inventory purchases in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $21.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to maturity of our of short-term investments.
Financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and comprised withholding tax from restricted stock unit releases of $13.2 million, offset by proceeds from our 2018 Employee Stock Purchase Plan contributions and exercises of stock options of $8.23 million.
Backlog
Our backlog consists of products for which customer purchase orders have been received and that are scheduled or in the process of being scheduled for shipment. As of December 31, 2021, we had a backlog of $4.4 million, compared to $5.7 million as of December 31, 2020. As we typically fulfill orders received within a relatively short period after receipt, our revenue in any fiscal year depends primarily upon orders booked and the availability of supply of our products in that year. In addition, most of our backlog is subject to rescheduling or cancellation with minimal penalties. As a result, our backlog as of any particular date may not be an indicator of revenue for any succeeding period. Similarly, there is a lack of meaningful correlation between year-over-year changes in backlog as compared with year-over-year changes in revenue. Accordingly, we do not believe that backlog information is material to an understanding of our overall business, and backlog as of any particular date should not be considered a reliable indicator of our ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance.
Operating Leases
We entered into several office lease agreements under non-cancelable operating leases with various expiration dates through June 2029. The terms of certain of our facility leases provide for rental payments on a graduated scale. We recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease period and have accrued for rent expense incurred but not paid. The amounts presented are consistent with contractual terms and are not expected to differ significantly unless a substantial change in our headcount requires us to exit an office facility early or expand our occupied space. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, gross rent expense was $7.0 million in both years.
Letters of Credit
In connection with the lease agreement for office space located in San Jose, California, we executed a letter of credit with the landlord as the beneficiary. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $3.6 million of unused letters of credit outstanding, of which $3.1 million pertains to the lease agreement.
Purchase Obligations
We enter into various inventory-related purchase agreements with suppliers. Generally, under these agreements, 50% of the orders are cancelable by giving notice of 46 to 60 days prior to the expected shipment date and 25% of orders are cancelable by giving notice 31 to 45 days prior to the expected shipment date. Orders are not cancelable within 30 days prior to the expected shipment date. As of December 31, 2021, we had $32.9 million in non-cancelable purchase commitments with suppliers. We expect to sell all products for which we have committed purchases from suppliers.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and pursuant to the regulations of the SEC. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires management to make assumptions, judgments and estimates that can have a significant impact on the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as our operating environment changes. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates and make changes accordingly. We also discuss our critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
We have listed below our critical accounting estimates which require management to make difficult, subjective and complex judgements often as a result of the need to make estimate on matters that are inherently uncertain and because it is likely that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or assumptions. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue recognition
Revenue from all sales types is recognized at transaction price, the amount we expect to be entitled to in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Transaction price is calculated as selling price net of variable consideration which may include estimates for future returns, sales incentives, and price protection related to current period product revenue. Our standard obligation to our direct customers generally provides for a full refund in the event that such product is not merchantable or is found to be damaged or defective. In determining estimates for future returns, management analyzes historical sales and returns data, channel inventory levels, current economic trends, and changes in customer demand for our products. Sales incentives and price protection are determined based on a combination of the actual amounts committed and estimated future expenditure based upon historical customary business practice. Typically variable consideration does not need to be constrained as estimates are based on predictive historical data or future commitments that we plan and control. However, we continue to assess variable consideration estimates such that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur.
Our standard warranty obligation to our direct customers generally provides for a right of return of any product for a full refund in the event that such product is not merchantable or is found to be damaged or defective. At the time we recognize revenue, we record an estimate of future warranty returns to reduce revenue in the amount of the expected credit or refund to be provided to our direct customers. At the time we record the reduction to revenue related to warranty returns, we include within cost of revenue a write-down to reduce the carrying value of such products to net realizable value. Our standard warranty obligation to end-users provides for replacement of a defective product for one or more years. Factors that affect the warranty obligation include product failure rates, material usage and service delivery costs incurred in correcting product failures. We record the estimated cost associated with fulfilling the warranty obligation to end-users in cost of revenue. Because our products are manufactured by third-party manufacturers, in certain cases we have recourse to the third-party manufacturer for replacement or credit for the defective products. We give consideration to amounts recoverable from our third-party manufacturers in determining our warranty liability. Our estimated allowances for product warranties can vary from actual results, and we may have to record additional revenue reductions or charges to cost of revenue, which could materially impact our financial position and results of operations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, accrued warranty-related returns amounted to $18.0 million and $24.9 million, respectively.
In addition to warranty-related returns, certain distributors and retailers generally have the right to return products for stock rotation purposes. Upon shipment of the product, we reduce revenue by an estimate of potential future stock rotation returns related to the current period product revenue. We analyze historical returns, channel inventory levels, current economic trends and changes in customer demand for our products when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance
for stock rotation returns. Our estimated allowances for returns due to stock rotation can vary from actual results, and we may have to record additional revenue reductions, which could materially impact our financial position and results of operations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, accrued stock rotation amounted to $1.8 million and $4.2 million, respectively
We accrue for sales incentives offered to customers as a marketing expense if we receive an identifiable benefit in exchange and can reasonably estimate the fair value of the identifiable benefit received; otherwise, it is recorded as a reduction to revenue. As a consequence, we record a substantial portion of our channel marketing costs as a reduction of revenue. We record estimated reductions to revenue for sales incentives when the related revenue is recognized or ahead of customer or end customer commitment if customary business practice creates an implied expectation that such activities will occur in the future. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, accrued sales and marketing amounted to $31.4 million and $38.6 million, respectively.
Valuation of Inventory
We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value, cost being determined using the first-in, first-out method. We continually assess the value of our inventory and will periodically write down its value to account for estimated excess and obsolete inventory based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. On a quarterly basis, we review inventory quantities on hand and on order under non-cancelable purchase commitments and compare those quantities to our estimated forecast of product demand for the next nine months to determine what inventory, if any, is not salable. We base our analysis on the product demand forecast but take into account market conditions, product development plans, product life expectancy and other factors. Based on this analysis, we write down the carrying value of the affected inventory to account for estimated excess and obsolete amounts. At the point of loss recognition, a new, lower cost basis for that inventory is established, and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis. As demonstrated during prior years, demand for our products can fluctuate significantly. If actual demand is lower than our forecasted demand and we fail to reduce our manufacturing accordingly, we could be required to write down the value of additional inventory, which would have a negative effect on our gross profit. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, excess and obsolescence reserve amounted to $2.7 million and $6.3 million, respectively.
Long-lived Assets and Right-of-use Assets Impairment
During the second quarter of 2021, we evaluated our real estate lease portfolio in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and the changing nature of office space use by our workforce. This evaluation included a decision to sublease our office space in San Jose, California. This change in the use of our San Jose office space led management to test the recoverability of the carrying amount of the asset group related to the sublease. On May 25, 2021, the carrying amount of the asset group exceeded the anticipated undiscounted value of the sublease income over the sublease term. Accordingly, we reviewed certain of our right-of-use assets and other lease related assets including leasehold improvements, furniture, fixtures and equipment under the sublease asset group for impairment.
As a result of the evaluation, we recorded an impairment charge of $9.1 million, which included $6.8 million associated with the right-of-use assets and $2.3 million associated with other lease related property and equipment, in the second quarter of 2021. The assets found to be impaired were written down to their fair value calculated using a discounted cash flow method (income approach). The fair value of the asset group was determined by utilizing projected cash flows from the sublease, discounted by a risk-adjusted discount rate that reflects the level of risk associated with receiving future cash flows. The inputs utilized in the analyses were classified as Level 3 inputs within the fair value hierarchy. Refer to Note 6, Fair Value Measurements and Note 11, Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for additional information about the fair value measured on a non-recurring basis and for further information about the sublease, respectively.
Goodwill Impairment
On the first day of the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed an annual assessment of goodwill at the reporting unit level. We operate as one operating and reportable segment. We performed a qualitative assessment in consideration of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall company financial performance, and changes in our stock price. We believed that it was more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit was greater than our respective carrying value and therefore performing the next step of impairment test for the reporting unit was unnecessary. No goodwill impairment was recognized in the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. If there are events occurred or circumstances changed (i.e. a decline in our stock price based on market conditions and deterioration of our business) that would more likely than not reduce our fair value below the carrying amount, we may have to record a charge to our earnings for the associated goodwill impairment of up to $11.0 million.
Uncertain Tax Position
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. We apply significant judgement in determining our uncertain tax positions. Although we believe that our reserves of uncertain tax position are reasonably adequate, no assurance can be given that the final outcome of these matters will not be different from our reserves. When facts and circumstances change, our reserves are adjusted, such as the closing of a tax audit, the expiration of statute of limitation for a relevant taxing authority to examine a tax position, or when additional information becomes available. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the reserves recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a complete description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on financial condition and results of operations, refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company Status
As an emerging growth company (“EGC”), under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (“JOBS Act”), we are allowed to delay adoption of new or revised accounting pronouncements applicable to public companies until such pronouncements are made applicable to private companies, unless we otherwise irrevocably elect not to avail ourselves of this exemption. While we have not made such an irrevocable election, we have not delayed the adoption of any applicable accounting standards.