ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
The Company develops medicines that treat intractable diseases by silencing the genes that cause them. Using a broad portfolio of RNA chemistries and efficient modes of delivery, the Company’s therapies trigger the RNAi mechanism to induce rapid, deep and durable knockdown of target genes. RNAi is a mechanism present in living cells that inhibits the expression of a specific gene, thereby affecting the production of a specific protein. RNAi-based therapeutics may leverage this natural pathway of gene silencing to target and shut down specific disease-causing genes.
The Company has focused its resources on therapeutics that exclusively utilize its high levels of pharmacologic activity in multiple animal models spanning several therapeutic areas. TRiMTM enabled therapeutics offer several potential advantages over prior generation and competing technologies, including: simplified manufacturing and reduced costs; multiple routes of administration including subcutaneous injection and inhaled administration; the ability to target multiple tissue types including liver, lung, muscle and others; and the potential for improved safety and reduced risk of intracellular buildup, because there are less metabolites from smaller, simpler molecules.
The Company’s pipeline includes:
•Hypertriglyceridemia - ARO-APOC3
•Dyslipidemia - ARO-ANG3
•Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy - ARO-DUX4
•Complement mediated diseases - ARO-C3
•Muco-obstructive or inflammatory pulmonary conditions - ARO-RAGE and ARO-MUC5AC
•Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis - ARO-MMP7
•Liver disease - ARO-HSD (out-licensed to GSK)
•Uncontrolled gout - ARO-XDH (out-licensed to Horizon)
•Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) - NJ-75220795 (ARO-JNJ1, out-licensed to Janssen)
•Liver disease associated with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (“AATD”) - Fazirsiran (ARO-AAT, a collaboration with Takeda)
•Chronic hepatitis B virus - JNJ-3989 (ARO-HBV, out-licensed to Janssen)
•Cardiovascular disease - Olpasiran (AMG 890 or ARO-LPA, out-licensed to Amgen)
The Company operates lab facilities in San Diego, California and Madison, Wisconsin, where its research and development activities, including the development of RNAi therapeutics, take place. The Company’s principal executive offices are located in Pasadena, California.
The Company continues to develop other clinical candidates for future clinical trials. Clinical candidates are tested internally and through GLP toxicology studies at outside laboratories. Drug materials for such studies and clinical trials are either manufactured internally or contracted to third-party manufacturers. The Company engages third-party contract research organizations (“CROs”) to manage clinical trials and works cooperatively with such organizations on all aspects of clinical trial management, including plan design, patient recruiting, and follow up. These outside costs, relating to the preparation for and administration of clinical trials, are referred to as “candidate costs.” If the clinical candidates progress through human testing, candidate costs will increase.
2022 Business Highlights
During fiscal year 2022, the Company continued to develop and advance its pipeline and partnered candidates and expanded its facilities to support its growing programs. The bullets below highlight some of those key developments; however, it is not all-inclusive and is meant to be read in conjunction with the entirety of management’s discussion and analysis, the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto, and all other items contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•dosed the first patients in its PALISADE study, a Phase 3 clinical study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of ARO-APOC3 in adults with familial chylomicronemia syndrome (FCS);
•filed for regulatory clearance to begin a Phase 1/2a study of ARO-C3 and subsequently dosed the first subjects in AROC3-1001, a Phase 1/2 clinical study of ARO-C3, the Company’s investigational RNA interference (RNAi) therapeutic designed to reduce production of complement component 3 (C3) as a potential therapy for various complement mediated diseases;
•presented additional interim clinical data from AROHSD1001, AROAAT2002, and AROAPOC31001;
•completed enrollment in Phase 2b ARCHES-2 study of investigational ARO-ANG3 for patients with mixed dyslipidemia;
•filed for regulatory clearance to initiate Phase 1/2a study of ARO-RAGE and subsequently dosed first subjects for treatment of Asthma;
•filed for regulatory clearance to initiate Phase 1/2a study of ARO-MUC5AC and subsequently dosed first subjects for treatment of muco-obstructive lung disease;
•filed for regulatory clearance to initiate Phase 1/2a study of ARO-MMP7 for treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF);
•initiated and dosed the first patients in the Phase 2 GATEWAY clinical study of investigational ARO-ANG3 for the treatment of patients with homozygous familial hypercholersterolemia;
•entered into definitive agreements to form a joint venture, Visirna Therapeutics, Inc. with Vivo Capital through which the Company and Vivo Capital intend to expand the reach of innovative medicines in Greater China;
•hosted a pulmonary research & development (R&D) day to discuss the Company’s emerging pipeline of pulmonary targeted RNA interference (RNAi) therapeutic candidates that leverage its proprietary Targeted RNAi Molecule (TRiMTM) platform, including an announcement of its previously undisclosed candidate designed to reduce expression of matrix metalloproteinase 7 (MMP7) as a potential treatment for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF);
•Entered into an exclusive license agreement with GSK for ARO-HSD;
•Janssen presented clinical data from REEF-1, a Phase 2b study of different combination regimens, including JNJ-73763989 (JNJ-3989), formerly called ARO-HBV, and/or JNJ-56136379 (JNJ-6379), and a nucleos(t)ide analog (NA) for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B virus infection (CHB);
•in conjunction with Takeda, announced results from a Phase 2 clinical study (AROAAT-2002) of investigational fazirsiran (TAK-999/ARO-AAT) for the treatment of liver disease associated with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD), and was recently published in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM) and presented in an oral presentation at The International Liver Congress™ 2022 - The Annual Meeting of the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL); and
•completed the purchase of 13 acres of land in the Verona Technology Park in Verona, Wisconsin and held a groundbreaking ceremony on the site. The site is being developed into an approximately 160,000 square foot drug manufacturing facility and an approximately 140,000 square foot laboratory and office facility which will support the Company’s process development and analytical activities. Additionally, the Company entered into a lease agreement for a new 144,000 square foot laboratory and office facility in San Diego, California to support discovery activities, which it currently anticipates to be available in April 2023.
2022 Financial Performance Summary
Net loss was $176.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to net loss of $140.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. Net loss per share - diluted was $1.67 for the year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to net loss per share - diluted of $1.36 for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase in net losses for the year ended September 30, 2022 was due to an increase in research and development and general and administrative expenses as the Company’s pipeline of candidates has expanded and progressed through clinical trial phases, partially offset by an increase in revenue from its license and collaboration agreements, primarily from the License Agreements with GSK, Horizon and Takeda. For further information, see Part I, “Item 1. Business” and “Results of Operations - Revenue” below.
The Company had $108.0 million of cash and cash equivalents, $268.4 million in short-term investments, $105.9 million of long-term investments and $691.9 million of total assets as of September 30, 2022, as compared to $184.4 million of cash and cash equivalents, $126.7 million of marketable securities, $56.6 million in short-term investments, $245.6 million of long-term investments and $710.1 million of total assets as of September 30, 2021. Based upon the Company’s current cash and investment resources and operating plan, the Company expects to have sufficient liquidity to fund operations for at least the next twelve months.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management makes certain judgments and uses certain estimates and assumptions when applying U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. On an
ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its estimates, judgments and assumptions. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes are reasonable, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets, liabilities and equity and the amount of revenue and expense. Actual results may vary from what the Company anticipates and different assumptions or estimates about the future could change its reported results. The Company believes the following accounting policies are the most critical to it, in that they require its most difficult, subjective or complex judgments in the preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. For further information, see Note 1, Organization and Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, “Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.”
Revenue Recognition-The Company adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Topic 606 - Revenue for Contracts from Customers which amended revenue recognition principles and provides a single, comprehensive set of criteria for revenue recognition within and across all industries. The Company has not yet achieved commercial sales of its drug candidates to date, however, this standard is applicable to its ongoing licensing and collaboration agreements. This is discussed further in Note 2, Collaboration and License Agreements of the Notes to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, “Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.”
At contract inception, the Company assesses whether the goods or services promised within each contract are distinct and, therefore, represent a separate performance obligation, or whether they are not distinct and are combined with other goods and services until a distinct bundle is identified. The Company then determines the transaction price, which typically includes upfront payments and any variable consideration that it determines is probable to not cause a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. The Company then allocates the transaction price to each performance obligation and recognizes the associated revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company recognizes the transaction price allocated to upfront license payments as revenue upon delivery of the license to the customer and resulting ability of the customer to use and benefit from the license, if the license is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the contract. These other performance obligations are typically to perform research and development services for the customer, often times relating to the candidate that the customer is licensing. If the license is not considered to be distinct from other performance obligations, the Company assesses the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time. If the performance obligation is satisfied over time, the Company then determines the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from license payments. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the related revenue recognition.
Typically, the Company’s collaboration agreements entitle it to additional payments upon the achievement of milestones or royalties on sales. The milestones are generally categorized into three types: development milestones, generally based on the initiation of toxicity studies or clinical trials; regulatory milestones, generally based on the submission, filing or approval of regulatory applications such as a Clinical Trial Application or a NDA in the United States; and sales-based milestones, generally based on meeting specific thresholds of sales in certain geographic areas. The Company evaluates whether it is probable that the consideration associated with each milestone or royalty will not be subject to a significant reversal in the cumulative amount of revenue recognized. Amounts that meet this threshold are included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method, whereas amounts that do not meet this threshold are excluded from the transaction price until they meet this threshold. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, the Company re-evaluates the probability of a significant reversal of the cumulative revenue recognized for its milestones and royalties, and, if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and net income in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Typically, milestone payments and royalties are achieved after the Company’s performance obligations associated with the collaboration agreements have been completed and after the customer has assumed responsibility for the respective clinical or preclinical program. Milestones or royalties achieved after the Company’s performance obligations have been completed are recognized as revenue in the period the milestone or royalty was achieved. If a milestone payment is achieved during the performance period, the milestone payment would be recognized as revenue to the extent performance had been completed at that point, and the remaining balance would be recorded as deferred revenue.
The revenue standard requires the Company to assess whether a significant financing component exists in determining the transaction price. The Company performs this assessment at the onset of its licensing or collaboration agreements. Typically, a significant financing component does not exist because the customer is paying for a license or services in advance with an upfront payment. Additionally, future royalty payments are not substantially within the control of the Company or the customer.
The revenue standard requires the Company to allocate the arrangement consideration on a relative standalone selling price basis for each performance obligation after determining the transaction price of the contract and identifying the performance obligations to which that amount should be allocated. The relative standalone selling price is defined in the revenue standard as the price at which an entity would sell a promised good or service separately to a customer. If other observable transactions in which the Company has sold the same performance obligation separately are not available, the Company estimates the standalone selling price of each performance obligation. Key assumptions to determine the standalone selling price may include forecasted revenues, development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success.
Whenever we determine that goods or services promised in a contract should be accounted for as a combined performance obligation over time, the Company determines the period over which the performance obligations will be performed and revenue will be recognized. Revenue is recognized using either the proportional performance method or on a straight-line basis if efforts will be expended evenly over time. Labor hours, costs incurred or patient visits in clinical trials are typically used as the measure of performance. Significant management judgment is required in determining the level of effort required under an arrangement and the period over which the Company is expected to complete its performance obligations. If the Company determines that the performance obligation is satisfied over time, any upfront payment received is initially recorded as deferred revenue on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
Collaborative Arrangements-The Company analyzes its collaborative arrangements to assess whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards, and therefore an appropriate recognition method is determined and applied consistently, either by analogy to appropriate accounting literature or by applying a reasonable accounting policy election. For collaborative arrangements that are within the scope of FASB Topic 808-Collaborative Arrangements, the Company evaluates the income statement classification for presentation of amounts due to or owed from other participants associated with multiple units of account in a collaborative arrangement based on the nature of each activity. Payments or reimbursements that are the result of a collaborative relationship instead of a customer relationship, such as co-development and co-commercialization activities, are recorded as increases or decreases to research and development expense or general and administrative expense, as appropriate.
Contingent Consideration-The consideration for the Company’s acquisitions may include future payments that are contingent upon the occurrence of a particular event. The Company estimates the fair value of contingent consideration obligations through valuation models designed to estimate the probability of such contingent payments based on various assumptions and incorporating estimated success rates. These fair value measurements are based on significant inputs not observable in the market. Substantial judgment is employed in determining the appropriateness of these assumptions as of the acquisition date and for each subsequent period. Accordingly, changes in assumptions could have a material impact on the amount of contingent consideration expense the Company records in any given period. The Company determined the fair value of its contingent consideration obligation to be $0 at September 30, 2022 and 2021.
Leases-The Company classifies each of its leases as operating or financing considering factors such as the length of the lease term, the present value of the lease payments, the nature of the asset being leased, and the potential for ownership of the asset to transfer during the lease term. Leases with terms greater than one-year are recognized on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets as right-of-use assets that represent its right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, and lease liabilities that represent its obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the estimated present value of lease payments over the expected lease term minus the present value of any incentives, rebates or abatement expected to be received from the lessor. The Company did not include the extension option in the lease term.
The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As such, the Company utilizes the appropriate incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis an amount equal to the lease payments over a similar term and in a similar economic environment. The Company records expense to recognize fixed lease payments on a straight-line basis over the expected lease term. Costs determined to be variable and not based on an index or rate are not included in the measurement of the lease liability and are expensed as incurred.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following data summarizes the Company’s results of operations for the following periods indicated:
Year Ended September 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2021
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended September 30, 2022 increased to $243.2 million, 75.9% from the same period of 2021. The increase was primarily driven by the revenue recognition associated with GSK, Horizon and Takeda license agreements, as discussed below. The Company has evaluated each agreement in accordance with FASB Topic 808-Collaborative Arrangements and Topic 606-Revenue for Contracts from Customers.
GSK
At the inception of the GSK License Agreement, the Company identified one distinct performance obligation. The Company determined that the key deliverables included the license and certain R&D services, including the Company’s responsibility to complete the Phase 1/2 study (the “GSK R&D Services”). Due to the specialized and unique nature of the GSK R&D Services and their direct relationship with the license, the Company determined that these deliverables represented one distinct bundle and, thus, one performance obligation. Beyond the GSK R&D Services, which are the responsibility of the Company, GSK will be responsible for managing future clinical development and commercialization in its territory.
The Company determined the initial transaction price totaled $120.0 million, including the upfront payment, which was collected in January 2022. The Company has excluded any future estimated milestones or royalties from this transaction price to date. The Company has allocated the total $120.0 million initial transaction price to its one distinct performance obligation for the ARO-HSD license and the associated GSK R&D Services. As the Company has completed its performance obligation related to this agreement, the upfront payment of $120.0 million was fully recognized as of September 30, 2022. There were $0 in contract assets recorded as accounts receivable and $0 in contract liabilities recorded as deferred revenue as of September 30, 2022.
The Company has also performed certain development and manufacturing activities, including drug substance and drug product manufacture under GMP conditions, for GSK pursuant to the GSK License Agreement, for which the Company has been reimbursed for its costs. The Company recognized $4.8 million in connection with these efforts for the year ended September 30, 2022. There were $4.8 million of contract assets recorded as accounts receivable and $0 of contract liabilities recorded as current deferred revenue as of September 30, 2022.
Horizon
At the inception of the Horizon License Agreement, the Company identified one distinct performance obligation. The Company determined that the key deliverables included the license and certain R&D services, including the Company’s responsibilities to conduct all activities through the preclinical stages of development of ARO-XDH (the “Horizon R&D Services”). Due to the specialized and unique nature of these Horizon R&D Services and their direct relationship with the license, the Company determined that these deliverables represented one distinct bundle and, thus, one performance obligation. Beyond the Horizon R&D Services, which are the responsibility of the Company, Horizon will be responsible for managing future clinical development and commercialization of ARO-XDH.
The Company determined the initial transaction price totaled $40.0 million, including the upfront payment. The Company has excluded any future estimated milestones or royalties from this transaction price to date. The Company allocates the total $40.0 million initial transaction price to its one distinct performance obligation for the ARO-XDH license and the associated Horizon R&D Services. Revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated timeframe for completing the Horizon R&D Services. The Company determined that the straight-line basis was appropriate as its efforts will be expended evenly over the course of completing its performance obligation. Revenue for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 were $26.7 million and $6.7 million, respectively. There were $0 in contract assets
recorded as accounts receivable and $6.7 million in contract liabilities recorded as deferred revenue as of September 30, 2022.
In addition, the Company has performed certain development and manufacturing activities, including drug substance and drug product manufacture under GMP conditions, for Horizon pursuant to the Horizon License Agreement. The Company recognized $2.5 million and $0 in connection with these efforts for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. There were $1.3 million of contract assets recorded as accounts receivable and $0 of contract liabilities recorded as current deferred revenue as of September 30, 2022.
Takeda
At the inception of the Takeda License Agreement, the Company identified one distinct performance obligation. The Company determined that the key deliverables included the license and certain R&D services including the Company’s responsibilities to complete the initial portion of the SEQUOIA study, to complete the ongoing Phase 2 AROAAT2002 study and to ensure certain manufacturing of ARO-AAT drug product is completed and delivered to Takeda (the “Takeda R&D Services”). Due to the specialized and unique nature of these Takeda R&D Services and their direct relationship with the license, the Company determined that these deliverables represent one distinct bundle and, thus, one performance obligation. Beyond the Takeda R&D Services, which are the responsibility of the Company, Takeda will be responsible for managing future clinical development and commercialization outside the United States. Within the United States, the Company will also participate in co-development and co-commercialization efforts and will co-fund these efforts with Takeda as part of the 50/50 profit sharing structure within the United States. The Company considers the collaborative activities, including the co-development and co-commercialization, to be a separate unit of account within Topic 808, and as such, these co-funding amounts are recorded as research and development expenses or general and administrative expenses, as appropriate.
The Company determined the initial transaction price totaled $300.0 million, which includes the upfront payment. The Company has excluded any future milestones or royalties from this transaction price to date. The Company has allocated the total $300.0 million initial transaction price to its one distinct performance obligation for the ARO-AAT license and the associated Takeda R&D Services. Revenue is recognized using a proportional performance method (based on actual patient visits completed versus total estimated visits completed for the ongoing SEQUOIA and AROAAT2002 clinical studies). The Company recognized $85.8 million and $90.8 million in connection with these efforts for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. There were $0 of contract assets recorded as accounts receivable and $123.4 of contract liabilities recorded as deferred revenue, of which $67.4 million was classified as current deferred revenue, as of September 30, 2022. The Company also recorded $8.6 million as accrued expenses as of September 30, 2022 that was primarily driven by co-development and co-commercialization activities.
Janssen
At the inception of Janssen License Agreement and Janssen Collaboration Agreement, the Company identified one distinct performance obligation. Regarding the Janssen License Agreement, the Company determined that the key deliverables included the license and certain R&D services including the Company’s responsibility to complete the Phase 1/2 study of JNJ-3989 (ARO-HBV) and the Company’s responsibility to ensure certain manufacturing of JNJ-3989 (ARO-HBV) drug product is completed and delivered to Janssen (the “Janssen R&D Services”). Due to the specialized and unique nature of these Janssen R&D Services and their direct relationship with the license, the Company determined that these deliverables represent one distinct bundle and, thus, one performance obligation. The Company also determined that Janssen’s option to require the Company to develop up to three new targets was not a material right and, thus, not a performance obligation at the onset of the agreement. The consideration for this option is accounted for separately.
The Company determined the transaction price totaled approximately $252.7 million, which includes the upfront payment, the premium paid by JJDC for its equity investment in the Company, two $25.0 million milestone payments related to JNJ-3989 (ARO-HBV), and estimated payments for reimbursable Janssen R&D Services to be performed. The Company has allocated the total $252.7 million initial transaction price to its one distinct performance obligation for the JNJ-3989 (ARO-HBV) license and the associated Janssen R&D Services. The Company has recognized this transaction price in its entirety as of September 30, 2021, as its performance obligations were substantially completed. Future milestones and royalties achieved will be recognized in their entirety when earned. There were no contract assets and liabilities recorded as of September 30, 2022.
The Company has conducted its discovery, optimization and preclinical research and development of JNJ-75220795 (ARO-JNJ1), ARO-JNJ2, and ARO-JNJ3 under the Janssen Collaboration Agreement. All costs and labor hours spent by the Company have been entirely funded by Janssen. Janssen’s option period expired unexercised for two of the three candidates (ARO-JNJ2 and ARO-JNJ3) under the Janssen Collaboration Agreement during 2022. In May 2021, Janssen exercised its option right for JNJ-75220795 (ARO-JNJ1), which resulted in a $10.0 million milestone payment to the Company. This $10.0 million milestone payment was recognized entirely as of September 30, 2021. The Company recognized $3.4 million and $0.5 million of revenue associated with these efforts during September 30, 2022 and 2021,
respectively. There were $0.1 million of contract assets recorded as accounts receivable and $0 of contract liabilities recorded as current deferred revenue as of September 30, 2022.
Amgen
Under the Olpasiran Agreement and the ARO-AMG1 Agreement, the Company has received $35.0 million in upfront payments, $21.5 million in the form of an equity investment by Amgen in the Company’s common stock, and $30.0 million in milestone payments, and may receive up to an additional $400.0 million in remaining development, regulatory and sales milestone payments. The Company is further eligible to receive up to low double-digit royalties for sales of products under the Olpasiran Agreement. The Company has substantially completed its performance obligations under the Olpasiran Agreement and the ARO-AMG1 Agreement. In July 2019, Amgen informed the Company that it would not be exercising its option for an exclusive license for ARO-AMG1, and as such, there will be no further milestone or royalty payments under the ARO-AMG1 Agreement. In July 2020, Amgen initiated a Phase 2 clinical study of Olpasiran, which resulted in a $20.0 million milestone payment to the Company. There was no revenue recorded associated with the Company’s agreement with Amgen for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021. There were no contract assets and liabilities recorded as of September 30, 2022.
Operating Expenses
The analysis below details the operating expenses and discusses the expenditures of the Company within the major expense categories. For purposes of comparison, the amounts for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 are shown in the tables below.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses are related to the Company’s research and development discovery efforts and related candidate costs, which are comprised primarily of outsourced costs related to the manufacturing of clinical supplies, toxicity/efficacy studies and clinical trial expenses. Internal costs primarily relate to discovery operations at the Company’s research facilities in San Diego, California and Madison, Wisconsin, including facility costs and laboratory-related expenses. The Company does not separately track R&D expenses by individual research and development projects, or by individual drug candidates. The Company operates in a cross-functional manner across projects and does not separately allocate facilities-related costs, candidate costs, discovery costs, compensation expenses, depreciation and amortization expenses, and other expenses related to research and development activities.
The following table provides details of research and development expenses:
Candidate costs increased $44.3 million to $136.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 compared to $92.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. This increase was primarily due to the progression of the Company’s pipeline of candidates into and through clinical trials, which resulted in higher outsourced clinical trials, toxicity study and manufacturing costs. For example, the Company’s cardiometabolic candidates, ARO-ANG3 and ARO-APOC3, have advanced into Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trials.
R&D discovery costs increased $21.6 million to $54.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 compared to $32.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. This increase was due to the growth of the Company’s discovery efforts and continued advancement into novel therapeutic areas and tissue types.
Salaries and stock compensation expense consist of salary, bonuses, payroll taxes, related benefits and stock compensation for the Company’s R&D personnel. The increases in salaries and stock comp expenses were primarily due to an increase in R&D headcount that has occurred as the Company has expanded its pipeline of candidates, in addition to annual increases and performance bonuses. Stock compensation expense was based upon the valuation of stock options and restricted stock units granted to employees, directors and certain consultants.
Facilities-related expense included lease costs for the Company’s research and development facilities in San Diego, California and Madison, Wisconsin. Facilities-related costs increased $5.3 million to $12.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, compared to $7.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. This increase was mainly due to the additional lease expense as the Company expands discovery efforts to identify new drug candidates.
The increase of depreciation and amortization expense, a non-cash expense, relates to depreciation on lab equipment and leasehold improvements at the facilities.
The Company anticipates these R&D expenses to continue to increase as its pipeline of candidates grows and progresses to later phase clinical trials, in addition to inflationary pressure on goods/services and the labor market.
General & Administrative Expenses
The following table provides details of the Company’s general and administrative expenses:
Salaries expense increased $3.0 million to $16.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 compared to $13.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase was driven by the combination of annual increases, performance bonuses and increased headcount needed as the Company has grown.
Professional, outside services, and others expense includes legal, consulting, patent expenses, business insurance expenses, other outside services, travel, and communication and technology expenses. This expense increased $1.6 million to $14.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 compared to $13.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase was mainly due to software implementation and additional recruiting and administrative expenses in support of additional headcount.
Facilities related expense primarily includes rental costs for the Company’s corporate headquarters in Pasadena, California. Facilities related expense increased $0.6 million to $2.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 compared to $2.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase was primarily due to additional rental expense.
Stock compensation expense, a non-cash expense, increased by $37.6 million to $88.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 compared to $50.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase in the current period was due to a performance award that was achieved earlier than anticipated, as well as a modification of certain performance awards to include market conditions. The fair value of market condition-based awards was expensed ratably over the service period and was not adjusted for actual achievement.
The increase in depreciation and amortization expense, a noncash expense, was primarily related to amortization of leasehold improvements for the Company’s corporate headquarters.
The Company anticipates these general & administrative expenses to continue to increase as its pipeline of candidates grows and progresses to later phase clinical trials, in addition to inflationary pressure on goods/services and the labor market.
Other Income
Other income is primarily related to interest income and realized and unrealized gain/loss on investments. Other income decreased $2.4 million to $5.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 compared to $8.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was due to lower yields on more recently purchased bonds and a realized loss on the sale of marketable securities, offset by various credits the Company received during 2022.
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2021 for a discussion of changes in its results of operations from the year ended September 30, 2020 to the year ended September 30, 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company has historically financed its operations through the sale of its common stock and revenue from its licensing and collaboration agreements. Research and development activities have required significant capital investment since the Company’s inception and are expected to continue to require significant cash expenditure as the Company’s pipeline continues to expand and matures into later stage clinical trials. Additionally, the Company plans to expand its facilities with its purchase of land in Verona, Wisconsin, and its entry into a new lease in San Diego, California. Each of these expansions is designed to increase the Company’s internal manufacturing and discovery capabilities, and each will require significant capital investment.
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents decreased to $108.0 million at September 30, 2022 compared to $184.4 million at September 30, 2021. Cash invested in short-term fixed income securities was $268.4 million at September 30, 2022 compared to $56.6 million at September 30, 2021. Cash invested in long-term fixed income securities was $105.9 million at September 30, 2022, compared to $245.6 million at September 30, 2021. In April 2022, the Company sold all of its marketable securities for $122.3 million. In August 2020, the Company entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement (the “ATM” agreement), pursuant to which the Company may, from time to time, sell up to $250.0 million in shares of the Company’s common stock through Jefferies LLC. As of the year ended September 30, 2022, no shares have been issued under the ATM agreement. The Company believes its current financial resources are sufficient to fund its operations through at least the next twelve months.
The following table presents a summary of cash flows:
During the year ended September 30, 2022, cash flow used by operating activities was $136.1 million, which was primarily due to the ongoing expenses related to the Company’s research and development programs and general and administrative expenses, partially offset by the receipt of the $120.0 million upfront payment from GSK. Cash used in investing activities was $5.4 million, which was primarily related to the purchase of property and equipment of $52.8 million, offset by net sales of investments of $47.4 million. Cash provided by financing activities of $$65.2 million was primarily related to the formation of the joint venture, Visirna, as well as cash received from stock option exercises.
On November 9, 2022, the Company and Royalty Pharma Investments 2019 ICAV (“Royalty Pharma”) entered into a Royalty Purchase Agreement (the “Royalty Pharma Agreement”), pursuant to which Royalty Pharma agreed to pay up to $410.0 million in cash to the Company in consideration for the Company’s future royalty interest in Olpasiran, a small interfering RNA (siRNA) originally developed by the Company and licensed to Amgen in 2016 under the Olpasiran Agreement. Pursuant to the Royalty Pharma Agreement, Royalty Pharma paid $250.0 million upfront on November 9, 2022. See Note 13 - Subsequent Events of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of Part IV, “Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.”
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company generated $171.3 million in cash from operating activities, which was primarily related to the Takeda license agreement’s $300.0 million upfront payment, partially offset by the ongoing expenses of the Company’s research and development programs and general and administrative expenses. Cash used in investing activities was $141.7 million, which was primarily related to the purchase of investments of $240.7 million and purchase of property and equipment of $23.6 million, partially offset by maturities of fixed-income securities of $122.6 million. Cash provided by financing activities of $11.3 million was due to cash received from stock option exercises.
On December 20, 2021, the Company completed a purchase of 13 acres of land in the Verona Technology Park in Verona, Wisconsin, which is being developed into an approximately 160,000 square foot drug manufacturing facility and an approximately 140,000 square foot laboratory and office facility which will support the Company’s process development and analytical activities. The Company intends to invest between $200.0 million and $260.0 million into the build out of the facilities with cash on hand. As part of this acquisition, the Company entered into a development agreement
with the City of Verona to construct certain infrastructure improvements within the tax incremental district and expects to be reimbursed up to $16.0 million by the City of Verona by future tax increment revenue generated from the developed property. The total amount of funding that City of Verona is expected to pay under the Tax Incremental Financing program is not guaranteed and will depend on future tax revenues generated from the developed property. The Company also expects receive up to $2.5 million of refundable Wisconsin state income tax credits from the Wisconsin Economic Development Corporation (WEDC) as incentives to invest in the local community and create new jobs.
See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2021 for a discussion of cash flows from the year ended Sep 30, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
For information related to the Company’s future commitments for its facility-related obligations and collaboration and licensing agreements, see Notes 8 and 2, respectively, of Notes to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements of Part IV, “Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.” Commitments related to the Company’s clinical, manufacturing and business operation related agreements are $229.6 million as of the year ended September 30, 2022, but many of these agreements are cancellable.