Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “ARYA Sciences Acquisition Corp V,” “ARYA,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to ARYA Sciences Acquisition Corp V. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on February 22, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination that we have not yet identified. Our sponsor is ARYA Sciences Holdings V, a Cayman Islands exempted limited company (the “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on July 12, 2021. On July 15, 2021, we consummated its Initial Public Offering of 14,950,000 Class A ordinary shares (the “Public Shares”), including the 1,950,000 Public Shares as a result of the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, at an offering price of $10.00 per Public Share, generating gross proceeds of $149.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $8.7 million, inclusive of approximately $5.2 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 499,000 Class A ordinary shares (the “Private Placement Shares”), at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Share to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5.0 million (Note 4).
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $149.5 million ($10.00 per Share) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and was invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Shares, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
If we have not completed a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Shares, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
The issuance of additional shares in a Business Combination:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our Initial Public Offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares.
Similarly, if we issue debt or otherwise incur significant debt, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial Business Combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and since the Initial Public Offering, the search for a business combination target. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from February 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $3.0 million, which consisted of general and administrative expenses of $3.0 million, partially offset by unrealized gain on investments of $30,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $776,000 in our operating bank account, and negative working capital of approximately $1.5 million.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from Sponsor to cover for certain offering costs in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, the loan of approximately $151,000 from the Sponsor pursuant to the Note (as defined in Note 4) and advances from the Sponsor, and $2 million in proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note on July 15, 2021. Subsequent to the repayment, the loan facility was no longer available to us. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
We cannot provide any assurance that new financing along the lines detailed above will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. Further, we have until July 15, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination, but we cannot provide assurance that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by that date. If a Business Combination is not consummated by the required date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205-40, “Basis of Presentation - Going Concern,” we have determined that the working capital deficit and mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date we required to liquidate. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern. We intend to complete our initial business combination before the mandatory liquidation date; however, there can be no assurance that we will be able to consummate any business combination by July 15, 2023. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities should we be required to liquidate after July 15, 2023, nor do these financial statements include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements included in this Report. The financial statements included in this Report do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
In February 2022, the Russian Federation and Belarus commenced a military action with the country of Ukraine. As a result of this action, various nations, including the United States, have instituted economic sanctions against the Russian Federation and Belarus. The impact of this action and related sanctions on the world economy are not determinable as of the date of this Report. Further, the specific impact of this action on our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows is also not determinable as of the date of this Report.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the effective date of the registration statement on Form S-1 related to the Initial Public Offering through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination and our liquidation, we agreed to reimburse the Sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us in the amount of $10,000 per month.
We incurred approximately $56,000 in general and administrative expense in the accompanying statements of operations for the period from February 22, 2021 (inception) through the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, all general and administrative expenses incurred up to December 31, 2021 under the administrative services agreement were paid as agreed.
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Shares and Private Placement Shares that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of a Business Combination. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provides that the Company will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period, which occurs (i) in the case of the Founder Shares, in accordance with the letter agreement that our initial shareholders entered into and (ii) in the case of the Private Placement Shares, 30 days after the completion of our Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 1,950,000 additional Public Shares to cover over-allotments at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On July 15, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were paid an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Public Share, or approximately $3.0 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per Public Share, or approximately $5.2 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in FASB ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ deficit. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 14,950,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our consolidated balance sheet.
Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount. The change in the carrying value of redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net loss per ordinary shares
We have two classes of shares: Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the executive compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.