Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside of our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. Waitr does not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
Dollar amounts in this discussion are expressed in thousands, except as otherwise noted.
Overview
Waitr operates online ordering technology Platforms, including the Waitr, Bite Squad and Delivery Dudes mobile applications. On March 11, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Delivery Dudes, a third-party delivery business primarily serving the South Florida market. Our technology platform provides delivery, carryout and dine-in options, connecting restaurants, drivers and diners in cities across the United States. Our strategy is to bring in the logistics infrastructure to underserved populations of restaurants, grocery stores and other merchants and establish strong market presence or leadership positions in the markets in which we operate. Our business has been built with a merchant-first philosophy by providing differentiated and brand additive services to merchants on the Platforms. These merchants benefit from the online Platforms through increased exposure to consumers for expanded business in the delivery market and carryout sales. Our Platforms allow consumers to browse local restaurants and menus, track order and delivery status, and securely store previous orders for ease of use and convenience.
Waitr is also engaged in the business of facilitating the entry into merchant agreements by and between merchants and third-party payment processing solution providers. Revenue from such services primarily consists of residual payments received from third-party payment processing solution providers, based on the volume of transactions a payment processing solution provider performs for the merchant.
During the first half of 2021, we expanded the Company’s market presence in the on-demand delivery service sector in South Florida through the acquisition of Delivery Dudes as well as the launch of new markets in numerous cities and towns in and around our core markets and added a variety of national brands to the Platforms. While we continued to strengthen our market presence in the on-demand delivery sector during the second half of 2021, we also focused our efforts on further supplementing our offerings and diversifying the Company beyond third-party food delivery. Our acquisition of the Cape Payment Companies in August 2021 was an important step in pursuing our overall growth strategy, positioning the Company to offer a full suite of third-party payment processing solutions to its current base of merchants and expanding this offering to future merchants.
On December 17, 2021, the Company announced that it had entered into a non-binding letter of intent (“LOI”) to acquire Retail Innovation Labs Inc. dba Cova (“Cova”). The parties mutually agreed on March 10, 2022 that they are no longer pursuing a business combination as contemplated in the LOI (and as announced in December 2021), but continue to discuss a potential business relationship involving facilitating Cova customers access to third parties that provide payment processing solutions. The Company believes that such an arrangement can be mutually beneficial and will allow both parties to continue to execute their respective business strategies without affecting a business combination. These discussions remain preliminary and there can be no assurance that a definitive agreement with respect to this arrangement will be entered into or consummated in the near term or at all.
Additionally, in accordance with our previously announced rebranding strategy and the goal of better unifying our current and future service offerings, we acquired the “ASAP.com” domain name and several related domains. In conjunction with these domain acquisitions, we have also reserved the Nasdaq trading symbol “ASAP.” We expect that “ASAP” will serve as the foundation of our brand moving forward, as we believe it better embodies the future direction of our Company.
At December 31, 2021, we had over 26,000 restaurants, in approximately 1,000 cities, on the Platforms. Average Daily Orders for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were approximately 32,859, 39,071 and 51,156, respectively, and revenue was $182,194, $204,328 and $191,675, respectively.
Management Appointments
In September 2021, Armen Yeghyazarians was appointed to the position of Chief Accounting Officer of the Company, in January 2022, Timothy Newton was appointed Chief Technology Officer and in February 2022, Matthew Coy was appointed Chief Information Officer.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
We have thus far been able to operate effectively during the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to economic hardships experienced during the COVID-19 pandemic, the U.S. federal government rolled out stimulus payments in the first quarter of 2021 which we believe had a positive impact on order volumes during such period. However, we also believe the stimulus payments resulted in increased driver labor costs as we were faced with challenges in maintaining an appropriate level of driver supply. In addition, early in the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced an increase in revenue and orders due to increased consumer demand for delivery and more restaurants using our platform to facilitate both delivery and take-out. During the second and third quarters of 2021, we believe the impact of the stimulus payments on our order volumes began to decrease.
While the widespread rollout of vaccines is leading to increased confidence that the impacts of the pandemic may be stabilizing, the spread of certain COVID variants and cases rising in areas with low vaccination rates provide continued uncertainty as to the potential short and long-term impacts of the pandemic on the global economy and on the Company’s business, in particular. There remains uncertainty as to whether or not the pandemic will continue to impact diner behavior, and if so, in what manner.
To the extent that the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacts the Company’s business, results of operations, liquidity or financial condition, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks described in the risk factors in the Company’s 2021 Form 10-K. Management continues to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and the possible effects on its financial position, liquidity, operations, industry and workforce.
Nasdaq Compliance
On January 26, 2022, we received written notice from Nasdaq Listing Qualifications staff (the “Staff”) of Nasdaq, indicating that the minimum bid price of our common stock has closed at less than $1.00 per share over the last 30 consecutive business days and, as a result, did not comply with Listing Rule 5550(a)(2), which requires a minimum bid price of $1.00 per share, the “Bid Price Rule”.
The notification has no immediate effect on the listing of the Company’s common stock. In accordance with Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), we are being provided 180 calendar days, or until July 25, 2022, to regain compliance with the Bid Price Rule. If at any time before July 25, 2022, the bid price of our common stock closes at $1.00 per share or more for
a minimum of 10 consecutive business days, the Staff will provide us with written confirmation of compliance with the Bid Price Rule and the matter will be closed.
If we fail to regain compliance with the Bid Price Rule before July 25, 2022, but meet certain other applicable standards, the Company may be eligible for additional time to comply with the Bid Price Rule. To qualify, the Company will be required to meet the continued listing requirement for market value of publicly held shares and all other initial listing standards of The Nasdaq Capital Market, with the exception of the bid price requirement, and will need to provide written notice of its intention to cure the deficiency during the second compliance period. If we are not eligible for an additional grace period, the Company will receive notification from the Staff that its securities are subject to delisting. The Company may then appeal the delisting determination to a Nasdaq Listing Qualifications Hearings Panel.
The Company is actively taking steps to regain compliance with the Nasdaq Listing Rules, including actively monitoring the bid price for its common stock between now and July 25, 2022 and considering available options to resolve the deficiency and regain compliance with the Bid Price Rule, including a reverse stock split.
Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period, along with related disclosures. We regularly assess these estimates and record changes to estimates in the period in which they become known. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Changes in the economic environment, financial markets, and any other parameters used in determining these estimates could cause actual results to differ from estimates. For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Part II, Item 8, Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K. Significant accounting policies including critical accounting estimates and judgements relied upon in preparing these consolidated financial statements include the following:
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Revenue recognition involves judgement in determining whether we are the principal or the agent in the transaction. The majority of our revenue includes transaction fees from restaurants and fees from diners when diners place an order on one of the Platforms. We have determined that the Company is an agent of the restaurant and the diner in the transaction and accordingly, we recognize transaction fees earned on a net basis. The Company acts as an agent for the restaurant in facilitating the sale of products to the diners through our Platform and the diner uses our Platform to identify restaurants and place an order from the restaurant. The Company has no control over the items prior to them being transferred to the diner, and only facilitates the order by the diner from the restaurant. The assessment of whether we are considered principal or agent could impact the accounting for certain payments to restaurants and diners and change the amount of revenue recognized.
In connection with revenue generated from services for facilitating access to third-party payment processing solution providers, we have determined that the Company is an agent in these arrangements and accordingly, we recognize revenue earned from third-party payment processing referral fees on a net basis. The Company acts as an agent of the third-party payment processor in establishing the relationship between the payment processor and merchant. The third-party payment processor is considered the customer of the Company as no direct contract exists with between the merchant and the Company.
Business combinations
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting, in accordance with ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations. Accordingly, we allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their respective fair values at the acquisition date. Any excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
In determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination, the Company uses various recognized valuation methods and makes certain assumptions, including projections of future events and operating performance. Valuations are performed by management or independent valuation specialists under
management’s supervision, where appropriate. We believe that the estimated fair values assigned to the net assets acquired are based on reasonable assumptions that marketplace participants would use. However, such assumptions are inherently uncertain and actual results could differ from those estimates.
Goodwill and other intangible assets, including valuation and recoverability
Goodwill represents the excess purchase price over tangible and intangible assets acquired, less liabilities assumed arising from business combinations. As discussed above, determining the value of goodwill and intangible assets requires the Company to make significant assumptions, including projections of future events and operating performance. Estimates of fair value are inherently uncertain, and as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. The Company conducts its goodwill impairment test annually as of October 1, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. Additionally, the Company reviews the recoverability of its long-lived assets, including acquired technology, capitalized software costs, and property and equipment, when events or changes in circumstances occur that indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable.
The Company has a significant amount of goodwill associated with previous acquisitions, including $106,734 from the Bite Squad Merger, $14,343 from the Delivery Dudes Acquisition and $9,547 from the Cape Payment Acquisition. The Company has determined there was no goodwill impairment during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Useful lives of tangible and intangible assets
Estimating the useful lives of tangible and intangible assets requires judgment. For example, different types of assets will have different useful lives, influenced by the nature of the asset, competitive environment, and rate of change in the industry. Additionally, certain assets may even be considered to have indefinite useful lives. All of these judgments and estimates can significantly impact the determination of the amortization period of the asset, and thus net income.
Stock-based compensation
The Company measures compensation expense for all stock-based awards in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. Stock-based compensation is measured at fair value on grant date and recognized as compensation expense ratably over the course of the requisite service period for awards expected to vest. In the case of an award pursuant to which a performance condition must be met for the award to vest, no stock-based compensation cost is recognized until such time as the performance condition is considered probable of being met, if at all. The fair value of restricted shares is typically determined based on the closing price of the Company’s stock on the date of grant. The Company uses an option-pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options. The determination of the grant date fair value of options using an option-pricing model requires judgment and is affected by the Company’s estimated common stock value, as well as assumptions regarding a number of other complex and subjective variables, including risk-free rate and volatility of the Company’s stock price and expected term. If any of the assumptions used in the option-pricing model change significantly, stock-based compensation for future awards may differ materially compared to the awards granted.
The Company recognized total stock-based compensation expense of $7,974 for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, there was $14,854 of unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to unvested time-based restricted stock units, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.5 years. Unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to stock options was immaterial as of December 31, 2021.
Loss contingencies
The Company is involved in various legal proceedings that arise from the normal course of business activities. Certain of these matters include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. The Company records a liability when the Company believes that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss or a range of loss can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount of loss. The outcome of legal matters and litigation is inherently uncertain. As a result, the outcome of matters in which we are involved could result in unexpected expenses and liability that could adversely affect our operations.
Income taxes
The Company provides for income taxes using an asset and liability approach under which deferred income taxes are provided for based upon enacted tax laws and rates applicable to periods in which the taxes become payable. The calculation of income tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties and complex tax laws. The Company’s tax returns are subject to examination by the various federal and state income-taxing authorities in the normal course of business. Such examinations may result in future assessments of additional tax, interest, and penalties.
Insurance reserves
The Company maintains insurance coverage for business risks in customary amounts believed to be sufficient for our operations, including, but not limited to, workers’ compensation, auto and general liability. These plans contain various self-insured retention levels for which we provide accruals based on the aggregate of the liability for claims incurred and an estimate for claims incurred but not reported. We review our estimates of claims costs at each reporting period and adjust our estimates when appropriate. Ultimate loss results may differ from our estimates, which could result in losses over our reserved amounts. We use third-party actuarial specialists to assist in estimating our claims costs. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, $4,305 and $4,697, respectively, in outstanding workers’ compensation and auto policy reserves are included in the consolidated balance sheet.
Loss exposure related to claims
The Company has an outstanding medical contingency claim (the “Medical Contingency”) which is measured at fair value using various unobservable inputs reflecting the Company’s assumptions used in developing the fair value estimate. The Company engaged third-party actuaries to assist in estimating the fair value of the Medical Contingency. The inputs used in the measurement, particularly life expectancy and projected medical costs, were sensitive inputs to the measurement and changes to either could have resulted in significantly higher or lower fair value measurements. See Part II, Item 8, Note 12 - Commitments and Contingent Liabilities and Note 15 - Fair Value Measurements for additional details. During the three months ended September 30, 2021, as a result of the death of the individual associated with the Medical Contingency, there was a change in accounting estimate of the total outstanding liability. The estimated loss exposure was updated to reflect the liability for remaining unpaid medical expenses and dependent death benefits and reflects the Company's assumptions regarding such expenses.
The Medical Contingency totaled $17,435 as of December 31, 2020. The change in estimate of the Medical Contingency totaled $16,715 and was recognized as other income in the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Medical Contingency totaled $423. The inputs required significant judgments and estimates at the time of the initial valuation of the Medical Contingency.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards and Pending Standards
For a description of accounting standards adopted during the year ended December 31, 2021, see Part II, Item 8, Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K. Also described in Note 2 are pending standards and their estimated effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Through year-end 2020, we qualified as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we were able to take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies”, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Effective January 1, 2021, we are no longer an emerging growth company. Accordingly, for fiscal year 2021, we are required to include an opinion from our independent registered public accounting firm on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting (see Item 9A).
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations
Acquisitions. The Bite Squad Merger, Delivery Dudes Acquisition and Cape Payment Acquisition were considered business combinations in accordance with ASC 805, and have been accounted for using the acquisition method. Under the acquisition method of accounting, total purchase consideration, acquired assets, assumed liabilities and contingent consideration are recorded based on their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. For each of these
acquisitions, the excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair value of the assets less liabilities acquired (and contingent consideration when applicable) has been recorded as goodwill on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. The results of operations of Bite Squad, Delivery Dudes and Cape Payment Companies are included in our consolidated financial statements beginning on the acquisition dates, January 17, 2019, March 11, 2021 and August 25, 2021, respectively.
In connection with the Delivery Dudes Acquisition and Cape Payment Acquisition, the Company incurred direct and incremental costs of $1,614 during the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of legal and professional fees, which are included in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations in such period. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company incurred direct and incremental costs of $6,956, including debt modification expense of $375, related to the acquisition of Bite Squad.
Changes in Fee Structure. Our fee structure has changed at various times since our inception. We continue to review and update our current rate structure, as necessary, as we look to offer new and enhanced value-adding services to our restaurant partners. Any changes to our fee structure (whether externally to comply with governmental imposed caps or as a result of internal decision-making) could affect the comparability of our results of operations from period to period.
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairments. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized non-cash impairment charges totaling $191,194 to write down the carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets to their implied fair values, as a result of our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which concluded that the fair value of the reporting unit at such time (the Company) was less than its carrying amount. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit and intangible assets requires the use of estimates and significant judgments that are based on a number of factors including actual operating results. It is reasonably possible that the judgments and estimates used could change in future periods. There can be no assurance that additional goodwill or intangible assets will not be impaired in future periods. Significant goodwill and intangible asset impairments may impact the comparability of our results from period to period.
Seasonality and Holidays. Our business tends to follow restaurant closure and diner behavior patterns with respect to demand of our service offering. In many of our markets, we have historically experienced variations in order frequency as a result of weather patterns, university summer breaks and other vacation periods. In addition, a significant number of restaurants tend to close on certain major holidays, including Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, among others. Further, diner activity may be impacted by unusually cold, rainy, or warm weather. Cold weather and rain typically drive increases in order volume, while unusually warm or sunny weather typically drives decreases in orders. Furthermore, severe weather-related events such as snowstorms, ice storms, hurricanes and tropical storms have adverse effects on order volume, particularly if they cause property damage or utility interruptions to our restaurant partners. The COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the federal government’s responses thereto, have had an impact on our typical seasonality trends and could impact future periods.
Acquisition Pipeline. We continue to maintain and evaluate an active pipeline of potential acquisition targets and may pursue acquisitions in the future, both in the restaurant delivery space as well as other verticals, such as payments and other complimentary businesses. These potential business acquisitions may impact the comparability of our results in future periods relative to prior periods.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Efficient Market Expansion and Penetration. Our continued revenue growth and improved cash flow and profitability is dependent on successful restaurant, diner and driver penetration of our markets and achieving our targeted scale in current and future markets. Failure in achieving our targeted scale could adversely affect our working capital, which in turn, could slow our growth plans. Our financial condition, cash flows, and results of operations depend, in significant part, on our ability to achieve and sustain our target profitability thresholds in our markets.
Our Restaurant, Diner and Driver Network. A significant part of our growth is our ability to successfully expand our network of restaurants, diners and independent contractor drivers using the Platforms. If we fail to retain existing restaurants, diners and independent contractor drivers using the Platforms, or to add new restaurants, diners and independent contractor drivers to the Platforms, our revenue, financial results and business may be adversely affected.
Key Business Metrics
Defined below are the key business metrics that we use to analyze our business performance, determine financial forecasts, and help develop long-term strategic plans:
Active Diners. We count Active Diners as the number of unique diner accounts from which an order has been placed through the Platforms during the past twelve months (as of the end of the relevant period) and consider Active Diners an important metric because the number of diners using our Platforms is a key revenue driver and a valuable measure of the size of our engaged diner base.
Average Daily Orders. We calculate Average Daily Orders as the number of completed orders during the period divided by the number of days in that period, including holidays. Average Daily Orders is an important metric for us because the number of orders processed on our Platforms is a key revenue driver and, in conjunction with the number of Active Diners, a valuable measure of diner activity on our Platforms for a given period.
Gross Food Sales. We calculate Gross Food Sales as the total food and beverage sales, sales taxes, prepaid gratuities, and diner fees processed through the Platforms during a given period. Gross Food Sales are different than the order value upon which we charge our fee to restaurants, which excludes gratuities and diner fees. Prepaid gratuities, which are not included in our revenue, are determined by diners and may differ from order to order. Gratuities other than prepaid gratuities, such as cash tips, are not included in Gross Food Sales. Gross Food Sales is an important metric for us because the total volume of food sales transacted through our Platforms is a key revenue driver.
Average Order Size. We calculate Average Order Size as Gross Food Sales for a given period divided by the number of completed orders during the same period. Average Order Size is an important metric for us because the average value of food sales on our Platforms is a key revenue driver.
_______________
(1)The key business metrics include the operations of Bite Squad and Delivery Dudes beginning on their respective acquisition dates, January 17, 2019 and March 11, 2021.
Basis of Presentation
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily when diners place an order on one of the Platforms. We recognize revenue from diner orders when orders are delivered. Our revenue consists primarily of net Delivery Transaction Fees. Additionally, effective August 25, 2021, we generate revenue by facilitating access to third-party payment processing solution providers.
Cost and Expenses:
Operations and Support. Operations and support expense consists primarily of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation, and bonuses for employees engaged in operations and customer service, as well as territory managers, market success associates, restaurant onboarding, and driver logistics personnel, and payments to independent contractor drivers for delivery services. Operations and support expense also includes payment processing costs incurred on customer orders and the cost of software and related services providing support for diners, restaurants and drivers.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries, commissions, benefits, stock-based compensation and bonuses for personnel supporting sales and marketing efforts, including restaurant business development managers, marketing employees and contractors, and third-party marketing expenses such as social media and search engine marketing, online display advertisements, sponsorships and print marketing.
Research and Development. Research and development expense consists primarily of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and bonuses for employees and contractors engaged in the design, development, maintenance and testing of the Platforms, net of costs capitalized for the development of the Platforms. This expense also includes such items as software subscriptions that are necessary for the upkeep and maintenance of the Platforms.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and bonuses for executive, finance and accounting, human resources and other administrative employees as well as third-party legal, accounting, and other professional services, insurance (including workers’ compensation, auto liability and general liability), travel, facilities rent, and other corporate overhead costs.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of amortization of capitalized costs for software development, trademarks and customer relationships and depreciation of leasehold improvements and equipment, primarily tablets deployed in restaurants. We do not allocate depreciation and amortization expense to other line items.
Other Expenses (Income) and Losses (Gains), Net. Other expenses (income) and losses (gains), net, includes interest expense on outstanding debt, as well as any other items not considered to be incurred in the normal operations of the business, including accrued legal settlements and contingencies and the change in estimate for the Medical Contingency.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated, with line items presented in thousands of dollars and as a percentage of our revenue:
_______________
(1)Percentages may not foot due to rounding.
The following section includes a discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Details of results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found under Part II, Item 7,
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K. The results of operations of Bite Squad, Delivery Dudes and Cape Payment Companies are included in our consolidated financial statements beginning on their respective acquisition dates, January 17, 2019, March 11, 2021 and August 25, 2021 (see Part II, Item 8, Note 4 - Business Combinations of this Form 10-K).
Revenue
Revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of decreased order volumes. Partially offsetting the impact of decreased order volumes was an increase in the Average Order Size in such period as well as revenue from the Cape Payment Companies and Delivery Dudes acquisitions, beginning on their respective acquisition dates. The Average Order Size was $45.23 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $41.86 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an improvement of 8%.
Operations and Support
As a percentage of revenue, operations and support expenses were higher in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as we strategically invested in our customer, driver and restaurant support operations.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased in dollar terms and as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to increased digital advertising as we further invested in market expansion as well as solidifying our presence in existing territories. Additionally, sales and marketing expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 includes referral agent commission expense related to the Cape Payment Companies acquisition.
Research and Development
Research and development expense decreased in dollar terms in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the capitalization of increased software development costs as further product features and functionality were incorporated into the Platforms. Partially offsetting the decrease were expenses related to the hiring of product and engineering personnel to further refine our Platforms. Research and development expense as a percentage of revenue remained flat for the year ended December 31, 2021 in relation to the comparable 2020 period.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased in dollar terms and as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased stock-based compensation expense and recruiting costs primarily associated with hiring software development personnel, partially offset by decreased insurance expense.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased in dollar terms and as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by an increase in depreciation expense related to computer tablets for restaurants on the Platforms and amortization expense on intangible assets acquired in the Delivery Dudes Acquisition and Cape Payment Acquisition.
Intangible and Other Asset Impairments
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized intangible and other asset impairments for previously capitalized software development costs.
Other Expenses (Income) and Losses (Gains), Net
Other expenses (income) and losses (gains), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of $16,715 of income from the change in estimate of the Medical Contingency, $4,700 of other expense for a legal settlement,
$1,250 of other expense for an accrued legal contingency and $6,917 of interest expense associated with the Term Loan and Notes. Other expenses (income) and losses (gains), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $9,318 of interest expense associated with the Term Loan and Notes and a $1,023 stock-based compensation expense accrual related to the settlement of a lawsuit. See Part II, Item 8, Note 10 - Debt for definitions of Term Loan and Notes, and Note 12 - Commitments and Contingent Liabilities for additional details on the Medical Contingency and accrued legal contingency.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $24 and $122, respectively, entirely related to state taxes in various jurisdictions. We have historically generated net operating losses; therefore, a valuation allowance has been recorded on our net deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash on hand of $60,111. Our primary sources of liquidity have been cash flow from operations and proceeds from the issuance of stock in fiscal 2021 and 2020.
During 2021, we made investments in our business with numerous new market launches and the Delivery Dudes Acquisition, expanding our scope of delivery in multiple small and medium sized markets. Additionally, a key step in pursuing our overall growth strategy is to offer through third parties a full suite of payment processing services to our current base of merchants. The Delivery Dudes Acquisition included $11,500 in cash, subject to certain purchase price adjustments, and 3,562,577 shares of the Company’s common stock. The Cape Payment Acquisition included $12,000 in cash, subject to certain purchase price adjustments, 2,564,103 shares of the Company’s common stock and an earnout provision valued at $1,686 as of the acquisition date.
In August and November 2021, we entered into amended and restated open market sale agreements with respect to our ATM Program. From August 31 through December 17, 2021, we fully sold the $30,000 available under the August 2021 ATM Program, including 24,322,975 shares of the Company’s common stock. Pursuant to the November 2021 ATM Program, we sold 1,679,631 shares of the Company’s common stock as of December 31, 2021 for gross proceeds of $1,398, and from January 1, 2022 through January 7, 2022, we sold 7,907,933 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $5,691. As of March 11, 2022, we have approximately $42,911 available under the ATM Program.
Pursuant to an amendment to the Credit Agreement in the first quarter of 2021, the Company made a $15,000 prepayment on the Term Loan on March 16, 2021. The aggregate principal amount of outstanding long-term debt totaled $84,511 as of December 31, 2021, consisting of $35,007 for the Term Loan and $49,504 of Notes. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $3,142 of outstanding short-term loans for insurance premium financing.
We currently expect that our cash on hand and estimated cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs for at least the next twelve months; however, there can be no assurance that we will generate cash flow at the levels we anticipate. We may use cash on hand to repay additional debt or to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, services and technologies. We continually evaluate additional opportunities to strengthen our liquidity position, fund growth initiatives and/or combine with other businesses by issuing equity or equity-linked securities (in both public or private offerings) and/or incurring additional debt. However, market conditions, future financial performance or other factors may make it difficult for us to access sources of capital, on favorable terms or at all, should we determine in the future to raise additional funds.
We are continuously reviewing our liquidity and anticipated working capital needs, particularly in light of the uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus far, we have been able to operate effectively during the pandemic, however, the potential impacts and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic (including those related to variants) on the economy and on our business, in particular, is difficult to predict.
Capital Expenditures
Our main capital expenditures relate to the purchase of tablets for restaurants on the Platforms and investments in the development of the Platforms, which are expected to increase as we continue to grow our business. Our future capital
requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth under Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Form 10-K.
Cash Flow
The following table sets forth our summary cash flow information for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows Provided By (Used In) Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $2,341, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $38,445 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash flows from operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 from the comparable 2020 period was primarily driven by a decrease in revenue and increased sales and marketing expenses, partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the net change in operating assets and liabilities decreased net cash provided by operating activities by $4,508, primarily consisting of a decrease in accrued payroll of $2,062 and an increase in capitalized contract costs of $2,151. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the net change in operating assets and liabilities increased net cash provided by operating activities by $2,220.
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 reflected the effects of the implementation of various initiatives aimed at improving operations and profitability. Additionally, net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 included the payment of business combination-related expenses of $6,956.
Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities consisted primarily of $25,435 for the acquisitions of Delivery Dudes and Cape Payment Companies and related intangible assets, $8,752 of costs for internally developed software and $3,006 for the acquisition of domain names during the fourth quarter of 2021 in connection with our proposed rebranding. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $3,982 of costs for internally developed software. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of $192,568 for the acquisition of Bite Squad and $1,805 of costs for internally developed software.
Cash Flows Provided By Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities included $30,895 of net proceeds from the sales of common stock under the Company’s ATM Program and $8,671 of proceeds from short-term loans for insurance financing, less a $14,472 principal prepayment on the Term Loan and $8,256 of payments on short-term loans for insurance financing. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities included $47,574 of net proceeds from the sales of common stock under the Company’s ATM Program and $4,753 of proceeds from short-term loans for insurance financing, less $22,594 of payments on the Term Loan and $5,632 of payments on short-term loans for insurance financing. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities included net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $45,823, proceeds from the issuance of the Term Loan of $42,080 and $7,875 of proceeds from a short-term loan for insurance financing, less $4,931 of payments on short-term loans for insurance financing.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
At December 31, 2021, our long-term debt obligations totaled $84,511, with a maturity date of November 2023, and short-term loans for insurance financing totaled $3,142. See Part I, Item 8, Note 10 - Debt for additional details
regarding our outstanding debt and related interest rates. Additionally, at December 31, 2021, we had operating lease agreements for office facilities in various locations in the United States, which expire on various dates through August 2026 (see Part I, Item 8, Note 12 - Commitments and Contingent Liabilities).