ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 11, 2020 for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,632,762, which consists of formation and operational costs of $1,655,964, transaction costs associated with the Initial Public Offering of $17,428 and change in fair value of warrant liability of $154,565, offset by interest income from the bank of $10, change in fair value of overallotment liability of $134,105, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $61,080.
For the period from August 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $627, which consists of formation and operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 8, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 15,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 430,000 Private Placement Unit a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit in a private placement to the Sponsor generating gross proceeds of $4,300,000.
On February 18, 2021, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, we consummated the sale of an additional 2,250,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $22,500,000. In addition, we also consummated the sale of an additional 45,000 Private Units at $10.00 per Private Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $450,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $172,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $3,916,059 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $3,450,000 of underwriting fees and $466,059 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,541,075. Net loss of $1,632,762 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $61,080, change in fair value of warrant liability of $154,565, change in fair value of overallotment liability of $134,105 and transaction costs associated with the Initial Public Offering of $17,428. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $114,879 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from August 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $177. Net loss of $627 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities which provided $450 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $172,561,080 (including $61,080 of interest income) consisting of money market funds, which primarily invest in U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $67,689. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Units.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we determined that there was substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through one year from the date of the December 31, 2021 report. We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, officers or directors. Our Sponsor, officers or directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions resulted in the conclusion that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through February 8, 2023, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a total of up to $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial support services. We began incurring these fees on February 3, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
We engaged EarlyBirdCapital, the representative of the underwriters in the Initial Public Offering, as an advisor in connection with our Business Combination to assist in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with our initial Business Combination, assist in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination and assist with press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial Business Combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $6,037,500 (exclusive of any applicable finder’s fees which might become payable).
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Convertible Instruments
The Company accounts for its promissory notes that feature conversion options in accordance with ASC No. 815, Derivatives and Hedging Activities
(“ASC No.
815”
). ASC No. 815 requires companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as freestanding derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria includes circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) a promissory note that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured
at fair value under otherwise applicable GAAP with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Private Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40
under which the Private Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Private Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Private Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. The Private Warrants are valued using binomial lattice model.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the periods. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the respective periods. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt
with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06
removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06
is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU2020-06
would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.