ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or Report.
The information in this discussion and elsewhere in this Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). Such statements are based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Any statements contained herein that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. For example, the words “may,” “will,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “expect,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” “continue” and similar expressions or variations identify forward-looking statements.
Although we believe that we have a reasonable basis for each forward-looking statement contained in this Report, we caution you that these statements are based on a combination of facts and factors currently known by us and our projections of the future, about which we cannot be certain. We caution you that forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and that our actual results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the development of the industry in which we operate may differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this Report. Factors that might cause such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to:
·
Our ability to obtain financing as and when needed on acceptable terms.
·
Our failure to develop or acquire and publish new Apps that achieve market acceptance or we do not continue to enhance our existing Apps.
·
Our inability to maintain a good relationship with the markets where our Apps are distributed.
·
Our inability to keep pace with technological changes and market conditions in the Apps industry.
·
Our inability to compete against a wide range of companies that market Apps, many of which have significantly greater resources than we do.
We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements made by us, which speak only as of the date they are made. We disclaim any obligation, except as specifically required by law and the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission, to publicly update or revise any such statements to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statements may be based, or that may affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
We develop, publish and market Apps for smartphones and tablet devices. We derive revenue from sales, or downloads, of our Apps and from advertisements published on our ad-supported game titles. During 2021, we did not generate any revenue. Over the course of 2022, we expect to generate revenue from the sale of software titles that we are developing for own account, from titles that were developed by third-parties which we acquired and from titles that have been developed for our benefit. Operating margins are dependent in part upon our ability to release new, commercially successful software products and to manage effectively their development costs. We also expect to generate revenue from
Our Apps titles include games designed to appeal to a broad cross section of consumers. We offer all of our game titles in both a free advertisement-supported version and a paid version that does not display ads. We believe that the ad supported versions allow for wider dissemination of our titles to consumers who might not otherwise spend money for an App without first playing the game.
We market, sell and distribute our games through as Apple’s App Store, a direct-to-consumer digital storefront. We currently expect to advertise our Apps through the digital storefronts, our own website, social media, such as Facebook and LinkedIn, through mobile ad networks and search engine optimization, or SEO, tools.
We will develop and acquire new Apps to expand our existing product offerings, as our resources permit. We rely on third party designers, developers and programs to develop new Apps. We also solicit ideas for new titles from unrelated parties. We evaluate prospects based on a variety of factors. If we conclude that a particular prospect is worth pursuing, we may fund the development of the App through launch and beyond.
We have been constrained in our development and acquisition activities by a lack of cash. Our ability to pursue and achieve our objectives is predicated on our receipt of meaningful revenue from sales of our existing Apps and those we may release in the future and from our ability to raise capital from outside sources.
Growth Strategies and Outlook
Our principal growth strategy entails developing and acquiring new Apps to supplement our existing Apps portfolio. Our primary focus will be to release new game titles. We seek to solicit new games and concepts that we may acquire from third parties. We also will seek to develop and publish free-to-play games. Free-to-play games are games that a player can download and play for free, but which allow players to access a variety of additional content and features for a fee, through “in-app purchases” utilizing virtual currency that may be purchased through digital storefronts, and to engage with various advertisements and offers that generate revenues for us. We may seek to acquire franchises around which we develop games, including movies, television programs, toys and other cultural phenomena that lend themselves to gamification.
During the first quarter of 2022, we launched a video game incubator, Gamerfy.com, which will seek to acquire and commercialize the next generation of game titles with particular focus on community play, the Metaverse and NFT’s, each of which would allow us to sell into rapidly growing market segments. We expect Gamerfy to be the principal source of new games for us for the foreseeable future.
During the second quarter of 2021, we launched Esportsreporter.com, a news channel for a broad spectrum of esports and gaming. We are currently building a following on digital media and expect to monetize the site and our audience utilizing an array of proven techniques, including generating revenue from sales, sponsorships, merchandise, and advertiser supported content. We expect to direct a significant percentage of our capital resources on Esportsreporter.com during 2022.
Our revenues will depend significantly on growth in the mobile games market and our ability to develop or acquire and publish Apps that are well-received by consumers. In addition, because our products are purchased with disposable income, our success is dependent on the overall strength of the economy in the United States. We expect to invest resources in research and development, analytics and marketing to introduce new Apps and continue to update our existing Apps, and to the extent that Apps into which we have invested significant capital are not successful, our business and financial condition could be harmed. We operate in an environment that is extremely competitive for users against a continually increasing number of developers, many of which are significantly larger than us and have other competitive advantages. We expect to allocate a material portion of our operating revenue and capital that we receive to sales and marketing initiatives in connection with the launch and promotion of our games in an effort to drive sales.
Our ability to achieve and sustain profitability will depend not only on our ability to generate meaningful our revenues, but also on our ability to manage our operating expenses. Currently, we have one full-time employee, who receives compensation when and as determined by the board of directors. For the foreseeable further, we expect to utilize the services of independent contractors and consultants, who we believe are readily available for our purposes, in order to manage our personnel costs. We also will continue to maintain a virtual office as long as our operations permit us to do so to contain our office space overhead.
We require significant additional capital to fund the development of Apps in process that we have developed internally or acquired from third parties during the last year. We also require capital to fund marketing initiatives for our existing products and the launch and marketing of Apps in development. We cannot be sure that the additional capital we require will be available on acceptable terms or at all. If adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms or at all, we may be unable to develop or enhance our services and products, take advantage of future opportunities, repay debt obligations as they become due, or respond to competitive pressures, any of which would have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition, and results of operations.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table presents our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate cash to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity include funds generated by operations, the availability of credit facilities, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures.
As of December 31, 2021, we had total assets of $325 and total liabilities of $338,818, of which $303,941 is attributable to the principal and interest due under a promissory note we issued in 2018 which replaced promissory notes issued during the prior three years. Comparably, as of December 31, 2020, we had total assets of $213 and total liabilities of $287,852, of which $241,220 is attributable to the principal and interest due under promissory notes issued during the three prior years. As of December 31, 2021, we had a working capital deficit of $34,562 and a working capital deficit of $46,626 as of December 31, 2020.
Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are to fund the development and acquisition of new Apps and for sales and marketing initiatives in connection with the launch and promotion of our games, as well as for working capital to fund our general corporate needs, including filing reports under the federal securities laws. We work with independent game designers, developers and programmers who provide us with new ideas and titles to publish. We also are soliciting new games and concepts that we may acquire from third parties. When we receive an idea for a new App, we research the commercial viability of the concept, undertaking an analysis of the cost to develop the App against its potential economic return. If we determine that the App is commercially viable, we may fund the cost of development, publication and marketing. Upon completion of development we will own the App title. Developing and publishing free-to-play games will require considerable capital to develop, maintain and update, particularly games we may seek to develop around popular movie, television, toy other cultural phenomena that lend themselves to gamification.
Since our customers pay for their purchases by credit or debit card at the time of sale, neither inventories nor receivables are relevant to our business.
Our cash on hand and cash flow from operations are not sufficient to fund our existing operations or support our desired development and acquisition strategy or required in connection with launching, marketing and promoting our games. Over the last several years, we have relied on loans from entities related to a shareholder for operating capital. These loans are represented by promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of $160,314, which matured on December 31, 2021 which were extended by the lenders to mature on December 31, 2025, and a promissory note that allows us to drawdown up to $150,000, of which $63,087 remained available for advances December 31, 2021, which matures on December 31, 2022. The capital we received from these borrowings was not sufficient to allow us to undertake development or marketing activities but provided the capital required to support the Company’s minimal operations while we formulated our strategies for the next few years, which include launching Esportsreporter.com and the Gamerfy site. We are seeking to identify sources of capital to fund the entire range of our operations and development activities; however, such capital may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Financing transactions may include the issuance of equity or debt securities, obtaining credit facilities or through other financing mechanisms. Even if we are able to raise the funds required, it is possible that we could incur unexpected costs and expenses or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force us to seek alternative financing. Furthermore, if we issue additional equity or debt securities, stockholders may experience additional dilution or the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of our common stock. The inability to obtain additional capital will continue to constrain our operations, including App development and marketing, and restrict our ability to grow. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may possibly have to cease our operations.
Cash Flows:
The following table presents summary cash flow information for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Cash used in operations was $62,402 and $38,800 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021 and 2020, cash was mainly used to pay selling, general and administrative expenses and the cost of our outside professionals.
Investing Activities
We did not use any cash in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financing Activities
Cash flow from financing activities was $62,721 and $38,800 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These amounts were attributable to loans received periodically over the course of the year.
Off-Balance Sheet and Other Arrangements
As of the date of this report, the Company does not have any off-balance sheet or similar arrangements.
Going Concern
The report of our independent auditor and Note B to the financial statements filed with this annual report on Form 10-K indicate that the Company’s minimal operations to date and lack of fully established sources of revenue raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. For these reasons, our financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern, which assumes we will realize our assets and discharge our liabilities in the normal course of business. If we are unable to achieve these ends, we cannot assure you that we will be able to generate revenue to support our operations and continue operations.
The presence of the going concern explanatory paragraph suggests that we may not have sufficient liquidity, or minimum cash levels, to operate our business. Since our inception, we have incurred losses and anticipate that we will continue to incur losses until such time as our Apps generate sufficient revenue to offset our research and development, general and administrative and sales and marketing expenses. We will need to raise additional capital to fund our near-term operational plans described elsewhere in this report. We cannot assure you that we will be successful in our operational plans. We cannot be sure that the additional capital we require will be available on acceptable terms or at all. If adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms or at all, we may be unable to develop or enhance our services and products, take advantage of future opportunities, repay debt obligations as they become due, or respond to competitive pressures, any of which would have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition, and results of operations.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. If our costs were to become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we might not be able to fully offset these higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could harm our business, operating results and financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, of GAAP, requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances in making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Accounting policies are an integral part of our financial statements. A thorough understanding of these accounting policies is essential when reviewing our reported results of operations and our financial position. Management believes that the critical accounting policies and estimates discussed below involve the most difficult management judgments, due to the sensitivity of the methods and assumptions used. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are the most critical. Some of them involve significant judgments and uncertainties and could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions.
Revenue Recognition - The Company applies paragraph 605-10-S99-1 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification for revenue recognition. The Company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned less estimated future doubtful accounts. The Company considers revenue realized or realizable and earned when all of the following criteria are met:
(i)
persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists,
(ii)
the services have been rendered and all required milestones achieved,
(iii)
the sales price is fixed or determinable, and
(iv)
collectability is reasonably assured.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Emerging Growth Company Critical Accounting Policy Disclosure: We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the 2012 JOBS Act. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. As an emerging growth company, we can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period.
There are no recent accounting pronouncements published after December 31, 2019 that have a material effect on the financial statements presented herein.