Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operation
Forward-Looking Statements
This Report on Form 10-K contains certain statements that are “forward-looking” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Litigation Reform Act”). These forward looking statements and other information are based on our beliefs as well as assumptions made by us using information currently available.
The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “will,” “should” and similar expressions, as they relate to us, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those described herein as anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended or using other similar expressions.
In accordance with the provisions of the Litigation Reform Act, we are making investors aware that such forward-looking statements, because they relate to future events, are by their very nature subject to many important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements contained in this Report on Form 10-K. For example, given the cessation of our operations as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers on January 31, 2020, resulting from the sale of substantially all of our assets to an independent third party, we became engaged in efforts to identify an operating company to acquire or merge with through an equity-based exchange transaction whereby such a transaction would likely result in a change in control. If we are unable to effect a transaction with an operating company, we may be required to cease all operations, including liquidation through bankruptcy proceedings. For all of these reasons, the reader is cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements contained herein, which speak only as of the date hereof. In addition, you should read and carefully consider the Risk Factors discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. We assume no responsibility to update any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise except as required by law.
Overview
On January 31, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we completed the sale of substantially all of our assets (the “Asset Sale”) for a total purchase price of $7,250,000 pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement entered into between us and Mitsubishi Chemical Performance Polymers, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MCPP”). Prior to the Closing Date, we developed and manufactured advanced polymer materials which provided critical characteristics in the design and development of medical devices. Our biomaterials were marketed and sold to medical device manufacturers who used our advanced polymers in devices designed for treating a broad range of anatomical sites and disease states.
As a result of the Asset Sale, we ceased operating as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers. Subsequent to the Closing Date, we became engaged in efforts to identify either an (i) operating company to acquire or merge with through an equity-based exchange transaction or (ii) investor interested in purchasing a majority interest in our common stock, whereby either transaction would likely result in a change in control. On October 12, 2021, we entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) with Reddington Partners LLC, a California limited liability company (“Reddington”) providing for the purchase of a total of 5,114,475 of our common stock, on a post-split basis, or approximately 90% of our total shares of common stock outstanding for total cash consideration of $400,000. Reddington purchased in two tranches on October 12, 2021 and March 15, 2022.
Pursuant to the SPA, the Company effectuated a 1-for 50 reverse stock split on March 11, 2022 (the “Reverse Split”). Accordingly, on a post-split basis, the shares purchased in connection with the First Closing resulted in Reddington owning 422,725 shares of our common stock. As set forth in the SPA, Reddington then purchased from us on March 15, 2022 an additional 4,691,750 shares of our common stock, on a post-split basis (the “Second Closing”). After the issuance thereof Reddington owned 5,114,475 shares of our common stock, or approximately 90% of our total shares of common stock outstanding.
Management is seeking to identify an operating company for the purposes of engaging in a merger or business combination of some kind, or acquire assets or shares of an entity actively engaged in a business that generates sustained revenues. Although we have investigated certain opportunities to determine whether they would have the potential to add value to us for the benefit of our stockholders, we have not yet entered into any binding arrangements.
We do not intend to restrict our consideration to any particular business or industry segment. Because we have limited resources, the scope and number of suitable candidates to merge with is relatively limited. Because we may participate in a business opportunity with a newly formed firm, a firm that is in the development stage, or a firm that is entering a new phase of growth, we may incur further risk due to the inability of the target’s management to have proven its abilities or effectiveness, or the lack of an established market for the target’s products or services, or the inability to reach profitability in the next few years.
Any business combination or transaction will likely result in a significant issuance of shares and substantial dilution to our present stockholders. As it is expected that the closing of such a transaction will result in a change in control, such transaction is expected to be accounted for as a reverse merger, with the operating company being considered the legal acquiree and accounting acquirer, and we would be considered the legal acquirer and the accounting acquiree. As a result, at and subsequent to closing of any such transaction, the financial statements of the operating company would become our financial statements for all periods presented.
Fiscal Year
Our fiscal year ends on March 31. Reference in this annual report on Form 10-K to a fiscal year is reference to the fiscal year ended March 31. For example, references to “fiscal 2022” or our “2022 fiscal year” refer to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 3 to our financial statements. However, certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by our management, and such judgments are reflected in the amounts reported in our financial statements. In applying these policies, our management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observance of market trends, information provided by our strategic partners and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Actual results may differ significantly from the estimates contained in our financial statements. Our critical accounting policies are as follows:
● Stock-Based Compensation. As a result of the Asset Sale, no further stock option grants have been made, however, 9,000 shares of our common stock continue to be available for grant pursuant to the 2017 Non-Qualified Equity Incentive Plan (the “2017 Plan”). Prior to the Closing Date, we made certain assumptions in order to value our stock-based compensation. The valuation of employee stock options is an inherently subjective process, since market values are generally not available for long-term, non-transferable employee stock options. Accordingly, an option pricing model is utilized to derive an estimated fair value. In calculating the estimated fair value of our stock options we use the Black-Scholes pricing model, which requires the consideration of the following six variables for purposes of estimating fair value:
● the stock option exercise price;
● the expected term of the option;
● the grant date price of our common stock, which is issuable upon exercise of the option;
● the expected volatility of our common stock;
● the expected dividends on our common stock (we do not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future); and
● the risk free interest rate for the expected option term.
We are also required to estimate the level of pre-vesting award forfeitures expected to occur and record compensation expense only for those awards that are ultimately expected to vest. This requirement applies to all awards that are not yet vested. Due to the exercise of substantially all of our options, we have estimated a zero forfeiture rate. As of March 31, 2022, there were 9,000 options pursuant to the 2017 Plan available for grant ond no options outstanding pursuant to the 2017 Plan.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2022 vs. March 31, 2021
Operating Expenses
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, our operating expenses were approximately $309,000 as compared with $326,000 for the comparable prior year period, a decrease of approximately $17,000, or 5.2%. Our operating expenses are composed of those costs necessary to operate a public company, which are primarily composed of management consultant fees, accounting fees, professional fees, and regulatory fees. The decrease in these operating costs is primarily a result of decreased accounting and management advisory fees which were reduced in connection with the sale of shares to a private investor.
Other Income
On May 20, 2021, we received a $22,000 cash deposit (the “Deposit”) in connection with a non-binding arrangement entered into with a private company having an interest in a potential business combination with us. On August 12, 2021, we were notified by the private company of their intent to terminate the arrangement. The arrangement provided that the Deposit was refundable, net of all reasonable legal, advisory and regulatory fees incurred by us. Our legal, advisory and regulatory fees exceeded the amount of the Deposit, accordingly, there was no refund due to the private company.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of March 31, 2022, we had cash of approximately $246,000, an increase of approximately $118,000 when compared with a balance of approximately $128,000 as of March 31, 2021.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, we had net cash of approximately $282,000 used in operating activities. Our cash flows used in operating activities is primarily a result of our net loss of approximately $287,000. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we had net cash of approximately $323,000 used in operating activities. Our cash flows used in operating activities was primarily due to our (i) net loss of approximately $326,000 and (ii) payment of a net obligation of customer advances of approximately $69,000. These uses of cash in operating activities were offset by collections of accounts receivable of approximately $63,000.
There was no cash used in or provided by investing activities during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, we had net cash of $400,000 provided by financing activities which was a result of the issuance of an additional 5,114,475 shares of our common stock to a private investor in consideration of $400,000 in cash. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we had net cash of approximately $5,087,000 used in financing activities as a result of the cash distribution of approximately $5,087,000 on April 23, 2020 to our stockholders of record as of April 16, 2020.
On January 31, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we completed the sale of substantially all of our assets (the “Asset Sale”) for a total purchase price of $7,250,000 pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement entered into between us and Mitsubishi Chemical Performance Polymers, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MCPP”). As a result of the Asset Sale, we ceased operating as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers. Subsequent to the Closing Date, we became engaged in efforts to identify either an (i) operating company to acquire or merge with through an equity-based exchange transaction or (ii) investor interested in purchasing a majority interest in our common stock, whereby either transaction would likely result in a change in control. On October 12, 2021, we entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) with Reddington Partners LLC, a California limited liability company (“Reddington”) providing for the purchase of a total of 5,114,475 of our common stock, on a post-split basis, or approximately 90% of our total shares of common stock outstanding for total cash consideration of $400,000. Reddington purchased these shares of our common stock in two tranches on October 12, 2021 and March 15, 2022.
Our financial statements have been presented on the basis that we are a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. During the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, we reported a net loss of approximately $287,000 and $326,000, respectively. Cash flows of approximately $282,000 and $323,000 were used in operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. As a result, we expect our funds will not be sufficient to meet our needs for more than twelve months from the date of issuance of these financial statements. Accordingly, management believes there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Management is seeking to identify an operating company for the purposes of engaging in a merger or business combination of some kind, or acquire assets or shares of an entity actively engaged in a business that generates sustained revenues. Although we have investigated certain opportunities to determine whether they would have the potential to add value to us for the benefit of our stockholders, we have not yet entered into any binding arrangements.
We do not intend to restrict our consideration to any particular business or industry segment. Because we have limited resources, the scope and number of suitable candidates to merge with is relatively limited. Because we may participate in a business opportunity with a newly formed firm, a firm that is in the development stage, or a firm that is entering a new phase of growth, we may incur further risk due to the inability of the target’s management to have proven its abilities or effectiveness, or the lack of an established market for the target’s products or services, or the inability to reach profitability in the next few years.
Any business combination or transaction will likely result in a significant issuance of shares and substantial dilution to our present stockholders. As it is expected that the closing of such a transaction will result in a change in control, such transaction is expected to be accounted for as a reverse merger, with the operating company being considered the legal acquiree and accounting acquirer, and we would be considered the legal acquirer and the accounting acquiree. As a result, at and subsequent to closing of any such transaction, the financial statements of the operating company would become our financial statements for all periods presented.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 31, 2022, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.