ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contain forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed in the Risk Factors contained herein.
Key Terms
In connection with the management of our businesses, we identify, measure and assess a variety of operating metrics. The principal metrics we use in managing our businesses are set forth below:
Operating Metrics
•Lifetime Value ("LTV") - is the weighted average total amount of tuition and fees paid by every new student that enrolls in the Company’s universities, after giving effect to attrition.
•Bookings - defined by multiplying LTV by new student enrollments for each operating unit.
•Average Revenue per Enrollment ("ARPU") - defined by dividing total bookings by total enrollments for each operating unit.
Operating costs and expenses
•Cost of revenue - consists of instructional costs and services and marketing and promotional costs.
◦Instructional costs - consist primarily of costs related to the administration and delivery of the Company's educational programs. This expense category includes compensation costs associated with online faculty, technology license costs and costs associated with other support groups that provide services directly to the students and are included in cost of revenue.
◦Marketing and promotional costs - include costs associated with producing marketing materials and advertising, and outside sales costs. Such costs are generally affected by the cost of advertising media, the efficiency of the Company's marketing and recruiting efforts, and expenditures on advertising initiatives for
new and existing academic programs. We engage non-direct response advertising activities, which are expensed as incurred, or the first time the advertising takes place, depending on the type of advertising activity and are included in cost of revenue.
•General and administrative expense - consists primarily of compensation expense (including stock-based compensation expense) and other employee-related costs for personnel engaged in executive and academic management and operations, finance, legal, tax, information technology and human resources, fees for professional services, financial aid processing costs, non-capitalizable courseware and software costs, corporate taxes and facilities costs.
Non-GAAP financial measures:
•Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ("EBITDA") - is a non-GAAP financial measure. See "Non-GAAP - Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of net loss to EBITDA for the fiscal years 2022 and 2021.
•Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ("Adjusted EBITDA") - is a non-GAAP financial measure. See "Non-GAAP - Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the fiscal years 2022 and 2021.
Company Overview
Aspen Group, Inc. is an education technology holding company. It operates two universities, Aspen University Inc. ("Aspen University" or "AU") and United States University Inc. ("United States University" or "USU").
All references to the “Company”, “AGI”, “Aspen Group”, “we”, “our” and “us” refer to Aspen Group, Inc., unless the context otherwise indicates.
AGI leverages its education technology infrastructure and expertise to allow its two universities, Aspen University and United States University, to deliver on the vision of making college affordable again. Because we believe higher education should be a catalyst to our students’ long-term economic success, we exert financial prudence by offering affordable tuition that is one of the greatest values in higher education. AGI’s primary focus relative to future growth is to target the high growth nursing profession. As of April 30, 2022, 11,522 of 13,334 or 86% of all active students across both universities are degree-seeking nursing students. Of the students seeking nursing degrees, 9,562 are RNs studying to earn an advanced degree, including 6,672 at Aspen University and 2,890 at USU. In contrast, the remaining 1,960 nursing students are enrolled in Aspen University’s BSN Pre-Licensure program in the Phoenix, Austin, Tampa, Nashville and Atlanta metros.
Aspen University has been offering a monthly payment plan that is available to all students across every online degree program offered, since March 2014. The monthly payment plan is designed so that students will make one fixed payment per month, and that monthly payment is applied towards the total cost of attendance (tuition and fees, excluding textbooks). The monthly payment plan offers online undergraduate students the opportunity to pay their tuition and fees at $250/month, online master students $325/month, and online doctoral students $375/month, interest free, thereby giving students a monthly payment option versus taking out a federal financial aid loan.
USU has been offering monthly payment plans since the summer of 2017. Today, USU monthly payment plans are available for the online RN to BSN program ($250/month), online MBA/MAEd/MSN programs ($325/month), online hybrid Bachelor of Arts in Liberal Studies, Teacher Credentialing tracks approved by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing ($350/month), and the online hybrid Master of Science in Nursing-Family Nurse Practitioner (“FNP”) program ($375/month).
Since 1993, Aspen University has been nationally accredited by the DEAC, a national accrediting agency recognized by the DOE and CHEA. On February 25, 2019, the DEAC informed Aspen University that it had renewed its accreditation for five years to January 2024.
Since 2009, USU has been regionally accredited by WSCUC.
Both universities are qualified to participate under the Higher Education Act and the Federal student financial assistance programs (Title IV, HEA programs).
AGI Student Population Overview
AGI's active degree-seeking student body at AU and USU, declined 4% year-over-year to 13,334 from 13,886. AU's total active student body decreased by 8% year-over-year to 10,225 from 11,117. On a year-over-year basis, USU's total active student body grew by 12% to 3,109 from 2,769. The chart below shows five quarters of active student body results.
Students seeking nursing degrees were 11,522, or 86% of total active students at both universities. Of the students seeking nursing degrees, 9,562 are RNs studying to earn an advanced degree, including 6,672 at Aspen University and 2,890 at USU. In contrast, the remaining 1,960 nursing students are enrolled in Aspen University’s BSN Pre-Licensure program in the Phoenix, Austin, Tampa, Nashville and Atlanta metros. The BSN Pre-Licensure program student body decreased from 2,382 to 1,960 year-over-year or 422 students as a result of the enrollment stoppage in the Phoenix metro.
The chart below shows the breakdown by university nursing students versus total students.
AGI New Student Enrollments
New student enrollments at AU decreased year-over-year by 37% and at USU by 11% year-over-year. New student enrollments were primarily impacted by the enrollment stoppage at our Phoenix pre-licensure campuses, and the reduction in marketing spend in Q4 Fiscal 2022 by $1 million over the prior quarter (the spend decrease was directed to AU’s online nursing degrees based on the Aspen 2.0 spend reallocation initiated one year ago).
New student enrollments for the past five quarters are shown below:
Bookings Analysis and ARPU
On a year-over-year basis, Fiscal 2022 Bookings decreased 16%, to $120.6 million from $143.4 million in the prior year. As previously discussed, the proactive Phoenix pre-licensure enrollment reduction, planned post licensure marketing reductions and the recent COVID surge caused Bookings to decrease year-over-year.
On a year-over-year basis, Q4 Fiscal 2022 ARPU decreased 2% from the prior year period due primarily to a decrease in bookings at Aspen University in the Phoenix metro of the pre-licensure program.
_____________________
1 “Bookings” are defined by multiplying Lifetime Value (LTV) by new student enrollments for each operating unit. “Average Revenue Per Enrollment” (ARPU) is defined by dividing total Bookings by total new student enrollments for each operating unit.
During the Fiscal 2022, the Company continued to focus its growth capital almost exclusively on its two licensure degree programs which have higher lifetime values. Set forth below is the description of these two key licensure degree programs.
Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) Pre-Licensure Program
Aspen’s BSN Pre-licensure program provides students with opportunities to become a BSN-educated nurse and learn the essential skills needed to practice as a professional registered nurse (RN). Skills lab, clinical simulation, seminars and community-based clinical experiences anchor the curriculum. Upon completion of their studies, students are eligible to take the National Council Licensure Examination (NCLEX) in the state or territory in which they choose to practice (the NCLEX is the national registered nurse examination used by all states for potential registered nursing licensure). Students provide their state board of nursing applicable forms to the School of Nursing and Health Sciences, which completes them on behalf of the individual student, and take the exam in the state in which they choose to practice. Upon passing the NCLEX, students then work with their state Board of Nursing to finalize their professional licensure.
We designed this program for students who do not currently hold a state registered nurse license and have little to no prior nursing experience. For students with no prior college credits, the total cost of attendance is $52,175 ($41,445 Tuition, $10,730 Fees), not including textbooks.
Phoenix, AZ Locations
Aspen University began offering the BSN Pre-Licensure program in July 2018 at its initial campus in Phoenix, Arizona. As a result of overwhelming demand in the Phoenix metropolitan area, in January 2019 Aspen University began offering both day (July, November, March) and evening/weekend (January, May, September) terms, equaling six term starts per year. In September 2019, Aspen University opened a second campus in the Phoenix metropolitan area in partnership with HonorHealth.
Aspen University voluntarily suspended new student enrollments and the formation of new cohorts immediately (starting with February 2022 cohort) after receiving guidance from the Arizona State Board of Nursing at its January 28, 2022 meeting. It is now in a probationary period under the Consent Agreement with the Arizona State Board of Nursing wherein certain conditions must be met before new cohorts can again begin to be formed, including maintaining a minimum 80% NCLEX first-time pass rate each quarter for four consecutive quarters, as more particularly described in Item 1 - Business on page 1 under “Arizona State Board of Nursing Probation.” We will not form any additional nursing cohorts in the Phoenix metropolitan area without completing the probationary period and receiving prior approval from the Arizona State Board of Nursing. Aspen University is not currently enrolling students in the BSN Pre-licensure program in Arizona.
Our Pre-Licensure locations that opened outside of Arizona were launched with curricular improvements, a NCLEX test prep product and NCLEX coaches in place and these new cohorts have been required to have higher incoming GPA requirements and have been subject to stiffer requirements relative to HESI A2 entrance exam scores, among other requirements outlined in the competitive evaluation process for the core nursing program. As a result, these cohorts are expected to deliver first-time NCLEX pass rates that comply with each state’s requirements. Although three of these locations are in smaller Tier-two metros, each metro is experiencing high population growth rates that are expected to increase the long-term demand for nursing degrees.
Atlanta, GA
On January 20, 2022, the Company announced that Aspen University received the final required state and board of registered nursing regulatory approvals for their new BSN Pre-Licensure location in Atlanta, Georgia. The Atlanta site was occupied by the University of Phoenix, located at 859 Mt. Vernon Highway NE, Suite 100, which is situated just off Interstate 285 in the Sandy Springs suburb in the inner ring of Atlanta. Aspen University began enrolling first-year Pre-Professional Nursing (“PPN”) students in Atlanta in February 2022, and expects to enroll Nursing Core students (Years 2-3) in Fall 2022.
Austin, TX
Aspen University’s BSN Pre-Licensure program in Austin is based in the Frontera Crossing office building located at 101 W. Louis Henna Boulevard in the suburb of Round Rock. The building is situated at the junction of Interstate 35 and State Highway 45, one of the most heavily trafficked freeway exchanges in the metropolitan area with visibility to approximately 143,362 cars per day. Aspen University's initial PPN enrollments began on the September 29, 2020 start date and the first core cohort began in February 2021.
Tampa, FL
Aspen University’s BSN Pre-Licensure program in Tampa is located at 12802 Tampa Oaks Boulevard. The building is visible from the intersection of Interstate 75 and East Fletcher Avenue, near the University of South Florida, providing visibility to approximately 126,500 cars per day. Aspen University's initial PPN enrollments began on the December 8, 2020 start date and the first core cohort began in June 2021.
Nashville, TN
Aspen University’s BSN Pre-licensure program in Nashville is located at 1809 Dabbs Ave. The campus is within easy access of Intersection of Interstate 40 and the 155, near the Sonesta Nashville Airport. On April 27, 2021, Aspen University began to enroll first-year PPN students in Nashville, Tennessee. The first core cohort began in June 2021.
USU Master of Science in Nursing-Family Nurse Practitioner (MSN-FNP)
USU offers a number of nursing degree programs and other degree programs in health sciences, business & technology and education. Its primary enrollment program is its MSN-FNP which is designed for BSN-prepared registered nurses who are seeking a Nurse Practitioner license. The MSN-FNP is an online-hybrid 48-credit degree program with 100% of the curriculum online, including the curricular component to complete 540 clinical and 32 lab hours.
While MSN-FNP lab hours have been done at USU’s San Diego facility through the end of calendar year 2020, the rapid growth of the MSN-FNP program has caused AGI to open two additional immersion locations in 2021. Specifically, the Company built-out additional suites on the ground floors at our main facility in Phoenix (by the airport) and our location in Tampa, FL. Consequently, students now have the option to attend their weekend immersions at three different metro locations: San Diego, Phoenix and Tampa.
Accounts Receivable - Monthly Payment Plan ("MPP")
The Company offers several payment options to its students including a monthly payment plan (MPP), installment plans and financial aid. Our growth in accounts receivable over the last several years has predominantly been a result of students taking advantage of our groundbreaking monthly payment plan which we introduced in 2014 at Aspen University and subsequently in Fiscal Year 2018 at USU. At April 30, 2022, Gross MPP accounts receivable was 83% of total gross accounts receivable. Of the Gross MPP accounts receivable, approximately 50% was generated at each AU and USU.
The Monthly Payment Plan is a private education loan with a 0% fixed rate of interest (0% APR) and no down payment. Each month the student will make one payment of $250, $325, $350 or $375 (depending on the program) until the program is paid for. The attractive aspect of being able to pay for a degree over a fixed period of time has fueled the growth of this plan. The MPP is designed so students can build the cost of their degree into their monthly budget.
Long-Term Accounts Receivable
When a student signs up for the monthly payment plan, there is a contractual amount that the Company can expect to earn over the life of the student’s program. This full contractual amount cannot be recorded as an account receivable upon enrollment. As a student takes a class, revenue is earned over that eight-week class. Some students accelerate their program, taking two classes
every eight-week period, and that increases the student’s accounts receivable balance. If any portion of that balance will be paid in a period greater than 12 months, that portion is reflected as long-term accounts receivable.
As a result of the growing acceptance of our monthly payment plans, our long-term accounts receivable balance has grown from $10,249,833 at April 30, 2021 to $11,406,525 at April 30, 2022. These are MPP students who make monthly payments over 36, 39 and 72 months. Generally, students in the USU MSN-FNP program make payments over the 72 month period, and as a result, a portion of the impact of USU's 72-month payment plan becomes long-term accounts receivable.
Accounts receivable is considered short-term to the extent the remaining payments are 12 months or less. Payments due in greater than 12 months are considered long-term. Here is a graphic of both short-term and long-term receivables, as well as contractual value:
A B C
The portion of remaining payments owed for classes taken under a monthly payment plan due in 12 months or less
The portion of remaining payments owed for classes taken under a monthly payment plan due in greater than 12 months
Expected future classes
to be taken over
balance of program.
Short-Term
Accounts Receivable Long-term
Accounts Receivable Not recorded in
financial statements
The Sum of A, B and C will equal the total cost of the program.
Results of Operations
Set forth below is the discussion of the results of operations of the Company for the three months ended April 30, 2022 (“Q4 Fiscal 2022”) compared to the three months ended April 30, 2021 (“Q4 Fiscal 2021”), and for the year ended April 30, 2022 (“Fiscal 2022”) compared to the year ended April 30, 2021 (“Fiscal 2021”).
Revenue
The following table presents selected consolidated statement of operations as a percentage of revenue (differences due to rounding):
The following table presents our revenue, both per-subsidiary and total:
Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021
AU revenue decreased 4% in Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021 due primarily to the Q4 Fiscal 2022 enrollment stoppage at our Phoenix pre-licensure campuses and the material reduction in marketing spend in the AU Nursing + Other unit based on the Aspen 2.0 business plan instituted in Fiscal 2022. The active student body at AU decreased from 11,117 at April 20,2021 to 10,225 at April 30, 2022.
AU entered into a Consent Agreement related to its BSN pre-licensure program in Arizona, in which the AZ BON revoked its approval of AU’s core component of its pre-licensure program in Arizona but simultaneously imposed a conditional stay on the revocation. In June 2022, the AZ BON granted approval of Aspen University’s request for provisional approval as long as the program is in compliance with the consent agreement through March 31, 2025. However, Aspen University is not currently enrolling students in the BSN Pre-licensure program in Arizona. Approximately 12% of AU’s enrollments are students in its BSN Pre-Licensure nursing programs at two campus locations in Phoenix. The AU Arizona programs accounted for 19.5% of AGI's consolidated revenue in Fiscal Year 2022 and is projected to decline to approximately 10% of our revenue in Fiscal Year
2023. Our revenue is expected to be lower while the probationary period under the Consent Agreement with the Arizona Board of Nursing is ongoing or if the revocation stay is lifted which would result in our inability to continue BSN pre-licensure program operations in Arizona.
USU revenue increased 14% in Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021 due primarily to USU's MSN-FNP program, the USU degree program with the highest concentration of students and the highest LTV. The active student body at USU increased from 2,769 at April 20,2021 to 3,109 at April 30, 2022.
Except for the impact of the enrollment stoppage at our Phoenix pre-licensure campuses, the Company expects the majority of its revenue growth in future periods to be derived from Aspen's BSN Pre-Licensure program and USU's MSN-FNP program as we continue prioritizing our highest LTV degree programs to achieve our long-term growth plans.
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
AU and USU revenue increased 8% and 25% in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021. AU revenue increased year-over-year due primarily to student body increases in the BSN Pre-Licensure program now located in five metros and the AU doctoral online degree program; and the marketing spend reduction in Q4 2022 of $1 million. USU revenue increased due primarily to student body increases described above in the three-month revenue discussion.
Cost of Revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below)
Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021
Instructional Costs and Services
Consolidated instructional costs and services for Q4 Fiscal 2022 increased to $5,203,463 or 27% of revenue from $4,577,075 or 24% of revenue for Q4 Fiscal 2021, an increase of $626,388 or 14%. The increase is due to staffing increases in the growing USU FNP program and hiring of new faculty and operations personnel in the newly opened pre-licensure campuses in Austin, Tampa, Nashville and Atlanta.
AU instructional costs and services were 27% and 24% of AU revenue for Q4 Fiscal 2022 and Q4 Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, instructional costs and services increased due primarily to an increase in faculty compensation costs related to the faculty hiring in the BSN Pre-Licensure campus locations and increases in student technology license costs.
USU instructional costs and services were 27% and 25% of USU revenue for Q4 Fiscal 2022 and Q4 Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, instructional costs and services have increased due to higher USU immersion costs incurred due to the growth in the MSN-FNP program, which resulted in increased immersions at additional locations with associated faculty and supplies costs.
Marketing and Promotional
Consolidated marketing and promotional costs for Q4 Fiscal 2022 were $3,397,630 or 18% of revenue compared to $4,144,404 or 22% of revenue for Q4 Fiscal 2021, a decrease of $746,774 or 18% of revenue. The decrease of marketing as a percentage of revenue is a result of a planned marketing spend decrease in Q4 Fiscal 2022 to ensure sufficient collateral for a surety bond required by the Arizona State Board for Private Postsecondary Education.
AU marketing and promotional costs represented 18% and 21% of AU revenue for Q4 Fiscal 2022 and Q4 Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, marketing and promotional costs decreased due primarily to the planned decrease in marketing spend in Q4 Fiscal 2022.
USU marketing and promotional costs were 11% and 18% of USU revenue for Q4 Fiscal 2022 and Q4 Fiscal 2021, respectively, due to the planned decrease in marketing spend in Q4 Fiscal 2022.
Corporate marketing costs were $358,976 for Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to $310,415 for Q4 Fiscal 2021, an increase of $48,561 or 16%.
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Instructional Costs and Services
Consolidated instructional costs and services for Fiscal 2022 increased to $19,463,085 or 25% of revenue from $15,275,131 or 23% of revenue for Fiscal 2021, an increase of $4,187,954 or 27%. The increases are due primarily to the factors described above in the three-month costs of revenue discussion.
AU instructional costs and services were 25% and 22% of AU revenue for Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, instructional costs and services increased primarily due to the factors described above in the three month discussion.
USU instructional costs and services were 26% and 25% of USU revenue for Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively.
Marketing and Promotional
Consolidated marketing and promotional costs for Fiscal 2022 were $15,796,196 or 21% of revenue compared to $14,178,602 or 21% of revenue for Fiscal 2021, an increase of $1,617,594 or 11%. The increase of marketing costs is a result of a planned advertising spending increase during Fiscal Year 2022, targeted primarily to our highest LTV programs. Specifically, the majority of the advertising spending increase was directed toward the growing USU MSN-FNP program and the four new pre-licensure metro locations in Austin, Tampa, Nashville and Atlanta. Partially off-setting this increase, in Q4 Fiscal 2022, the Company decreased marketing spend to ensure sufficient collateral for a surety bond required by the Arizona State Board for Private Postsecondary Education.
AU marketing and promotional costs represented 20% of AU revenue for both Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, marketing and promotional costs remained flat.
USU marketing and promotional costs were 16% and 18% of USU revenue for Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively.
Corporate marketing and promotional costs were $1,353,657 in Fiscal 2022 compared to $1,068,292 in Fiscal 2021, an increase of $285,365 or 27%.
Costs and Expenses
General and Administrative
Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021
Consolidated general and administrative expense for Q4 Fiscal 2022 was $11,175,725 or 58% of revenue compared to $11,184,681 or 59% of revenue for Q4 Fiscal 2021, a decrease of $8,956 or less than 1%. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expense remained flat due to increased general and administrative spend at AU's BSN Pre-Licensure and USU MSN-FNP programs, which is comprised of additional headcount, and the related increase in compensation and benefits expense, and increased facilities costs, offset by flat general and administrative spend in corporate.
AU general and administrative expense was 36% of AU revenue for both Q4 Fiscal 2022 and Q4 Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expense remained flat.
USU general and administrative costs were 36% and 34% of USU revenue for Q4 Fiscal 2022 and Q4 Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expense increased due primarily to additional headcount, and the related increase in compensation and benefits, and increased facilities costs associated with the growing USU MSN-FNP program.
Corporate general and administrative costs were $4.2 million in Q4 Fiscal 2022 and $4.4 million in Q4 Fiscal 2021, a decrease of $0.2 million, or 5%. The decrease was primarily due to planned Corporate cost control.
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Consolidated general and administrative expense for Fiscal 2022 was $45,535,001 or 59% of revenue compared to $41,908,030 or 62% of revenue for Fiscal 2021, an increase of $3,626,971 or 9%. The increase in general and administrative expense is related to the factors described below.
AU general and administrative expense was 36% and 34% of AU revenue for Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expense increased due primarily to additional headcount, and the related increase in compensation and benefits, and increased facilities costs associated with our new pre-licensure locations.
USU general and administrative expense was 40% of USU revenue for both Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expense remained flat.
Corporate general and administrative expense was $17.2 million and $17.5 million in Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to planned Corporate cost control.
Bad Debt Expense
For both Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021, bad debt expense decreased as a percentage of total revenue. Based on our review of additional student accounts associated with increased revenue and existing accounts receivable and historical write-off trends, the Company evaluated its reserve methodology and adjusted reserves for AU and USU accordingly. At AU and USU, approximately $1.0 million and $0.3 million of student accounts receivable were written off against the accounts receivable allowance during Fiscal 2022.
Depreciation and Amortization
For both Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021, the increase in depreciation is primarily due to investments in new campuses, including capital expenditures of leasehold improvements and computer equipment, and an increase in amortization of internally developed capitalized software placed into service to support the Company's services and the opening of new campuses, partially offset by a decrease related to fully depreciated assets.
Other Expense, net
Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021
Other expense, net in Q4 Fiscal 2022 includes: $210,000 of interest expense related to the $5 million Revolving Credit Facility borrowings on August 31, 2021, interest expense of $108,000 related to the $10 million Convertible Notes issued on March 14, 2022, amortization expense of $17,000 related to the 2% annual commitment fee on the undrawn portion of the $20 million Revolving Credit Facility, and $20,000 of amortization expense in connection with the fair value of the warrants issued to the Leon and Toby Cooperman Family Foundation as an extension fee in connection with the $5 million revolving line of credit.
Other expense, net for Fiscal Q4 2021 primarily includes the 2% quarterly commitment fees on the undrawn $5 million Revolving Credit Facility which matured on November 4, 2021.
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Other expense, net in Fiscal 2022 primarily includes: $498,120 of a litigation settlement amount received on July 21, 2021 offset by the write-off of a related net receivable of $45,329 with the adverse party in this litigation; partially offset by interest expense of approximately $411,000 related to the period of time after August 31, 2021 that the $5 million Revolving Credit Facility was fully drawn, amortization expense of $58,000 related to the 2% annual commitment fee incurred during the period of time prior to August 31, 2021 that the $5 million Revolving Credit Facility was undrawn, interest expense of $108,000 related to the $10 million Convertible Notes issued on March 14, 2022, amortization expense of $17,000 related to the 2% annual commitment fee for the undrawn $20 million Revolving Credit Facility, $69,000 of amortization expense in connection with the fair value of the warrants issued to the Leon and Toby Cooperman Family Foundation as an extension fee in connection with the $5 million revolving line of credit; and a $36,000 loss on disposal of fixed assets.
Other expense, net for Fiscal Year 2021 includes: interest expense of (i) a non-cash charge of $1.4 million of accelerated amortization expense related to the conversion of the $10 million Convertible Notes which occurred on September 14, 2020; (ii) $0.5 million for the $10 million Convertible Notes issued on January 22, 2020 as well as the commitment fee on the $5 million Revolving Credit Facility; (iii) an adjustment of $0.3 million related to the previously reported earned revenue fee calculation deemed immaterial to our Fiscal Year 2019 revenue; (iv) a non-cash modification and accelerated amortization charges of $0.2 million related to the exercise of the 2018 and 2019 Cooperman Warrants on June 5, 2020; partially offset by $0.3 million of other income.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
Income tax expense in Q4 Fiscal 2022 includes a reserve of approximately $40,000 for the estimated Fiscal Year 2022 Canada foreign income tax liability which covers the 2022 tax year for which a permanent establishment is in place in Canada. The Company will file an annual Canadian T2 Corporation Income Tax return to report the ongoing activity of the permanent establishment for 2022.
Income tax expense in Fiscal 2022 includes a reserve of $300,000 for the Canada foreign income tax liability which covers the 2013 through 2021 tax years during which a permanent establishment was in place in Canada. Additionally, the Company recorded a reserve of $100,000 for the estimated Fiscal Year 2022 Canada foreign income tax liability. The Company is prepared to file Canadian T2 Corporation Income Tax Returns and related information returns under the Voluntary Disclosure Program with the Canada Revenue Agency ("CRA") to cover the 2013 through 2021 tax years. The Company will also file an annual Canadian T2 Corporation Income Tax return to report the ongoing activity of the permanent establishment for 2022 and future taxation years.
Non-GAAP - Financial Measures
This discussion and analysis includes both financial measures in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP, as well as non-GAAP financial measures. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position or cash flows that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally included or excluded in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed as supplemental to, and should not be considered as alternatives to net income (loss),
operating income (loss), and cash flow from operating activities, liquidity or any other financial measures. They may not be indicative of the historical operating results of AGI nor are they intended to be predictive of potential future results. Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Our management uses and relies on EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin and Adjusted Gross Profit, which are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that management, analysts and shareholders benefit from referring to the following non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate and assess our core operating results from period-to-period after removing the impact of items that affect comparability. Our management recognizes that the non-GAAP financial measures have inherent limitations because of the excluded items described below.
We have included a reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that providing the non-GAAP financial measures, together with the reconciliation to GAAP, helps investors make comparisons between AGI and other companies. In making any comparisons to other companies, investors need to be aware that companies use different non-GAAP measures to evaluate their financial performance. Investors should pay close attention to the specific definition being used and to the reconciliation between such measure and the corresponding GAAP measure provided by each company under applicable SEC rules.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
AGI defines Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA excluding: (1) bad debt expense; (2) stock-based compensation; and (3) non-recurring charges or gains. The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA and of net loss margin to the Adjusted EBITDA margin:
In Q4 Fiscal 2022, excluding the impact on EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for new campuses, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA would have been greater. Non-recurring charges - Other of $339,025 includes non-recurring professional fees and consulting costs.
In Fiscal 2022, excluding the impact on EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for new campuses, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA would have been positive. Our entire Fiscal Year 2022 annual EBITDA loss is attributable to our investments in growing our pre-licensure business. On a same store sales basis, excluding the four new pre-licensure campuses, our EBITDA would be break-even for Fiscal Year 2022. Fiscal 2022 non-recurring charges - other includes non-recurring income of $345,056, which consists of a $498,120 litigation settlement amount received on July 21, 2021 offset by the write-off of a related net receivable of $45,329 with the party in this litigation, which are included in "other (expense) income, net," offset by non-recurring professional fees and consulting costs.
In Fiscal 2021, stock-based compensation expense included $1.2 million related to the accelerated amortization expense for the price vesting of Executive RSUs in Q2 Fiscal 2021 and non-recurring charges of $375,437 in Q1 Fiscal 2021. EBITDA in Q2 Fiscal 2021 included $1.4 million related to the accelerated amortization expense of the original issue discount for the automatic
conversion of $10 million Convertible Notes on September 14, 2020 (included in "Interest expense, net"). An additional non-recurring item in Q1 Fiscal 2021 of $123,947 (included in "Interest expense, net"), which arose from the acceleration of amortization arising from the exercise of warrants issued to a lender.
Q4 Fiscal 2022 compared to Q4 Fiscal 2021
Adjusted EBITDA margin remained flat year-over-year. Marketing spend in the fourth quarter of 2022 was down sequentially by approximately $1.0 million to ensure adequate available funds to collateralize the surety bond required by the Arizona State Board for Private Postsecondary Education. This was offset by staffing increases in the growing USU MSN-FNP program and hiring of new faculty and operations personnel and new facility costs associated with the newly opened pre-licensure campuses in Austin, Tampa, Nashville and Atlanta. (Atlanta is scheduled to open in Fall 2022).
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Adjusted EBITDA margin decreased to a loss of 1% in Fiscal 2022 from 2% in Fiscal 2021 due primarily to an increase in new faculty and operations personnel and new facility costs associated with the newly opened pre-licensure campuses in Austin, Tampa, Nashville and Atlanta. Additionally, there were higher USU immersion costs incurred due to the growth of the MSN-FNP program, which resulted in increased immersions at additional locations.
Additionally, enrollments and class starts were impacted by 1) the increased workloads nurses have been experiencing, which severely limited their availability to take classes or required them to delay their enrollment in new degree programs, 2) the reprioritization of marketing funds with Aspen 2.0 impacted enrollments in our Aspen Nursing + Other unit and 3) the suspension of enrollments in Phoenix metro BSN Pre-Licensure program related to the Consent Agreement with the Arizona Board of Nursing. The decrease in enrollments and class starts contributed to the decrease in Adjusted EBITDA margin.
Adjusted Gross Profit
GAAP Gross Profit is revenue less cost of revenue less amortization expense. The Company defines Adjusted Gross Profit as GAAP Gross Profit adjusted to exclude amortization expense. The following table presents a reconciliation of GAAP Gross Profit to Adjusted Gross Profit:
GAAP Gross profit and gross margin for the Q4 Fiscal 2022 were $10,298,542 and 53%, respectively, compared to $9,945,090 and 52%, respectively, for Q4 Fiscal 2021. The improvement in gross margin was primarily due to the reduction in marketing spend, partially offset by increased instructional costs. If marketing spend had not been reduced by $1 million sequentially, gross margin would have been 48% and in-line with the Q4 Fiscal 2021.
For Fiscal Year 2022, gross profit increased by 7% to $39,641,027 or 52% gross margin compared to $36,923,910 or 54% gross margin in the prior year. If marketing spend had not been reduced by $1 million in the Q4 Fiscal 2022, gross margin would have been 50%.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
A summary of the Company's cash flows is as follows:
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities for the year ended April 30, 2022 increased from $985,578 in Fiscal Year 2021 to $11,278,225 in Fiscal Year 2022. Approximately $1 million of the cash used in operations in Fiscal Year 2022 is attributed to the Adjusted EBITDA loss, and the remaining use of operating cash is primarily attributed to increased working capital to support growth in our monthly payment plans.
The increase in cash from changes in working capital primarily consists of an increase in accounts receivable and other current assets, partially offset by a decrease in deferred revenue due primarily to timing of billings for class starts. The increase in accounts receivable is primarily attributed to the growth in revenues from increased enrollments and students paying through the monthly payment plan as well as timing of billings for class starts. The increases in other current assets was primarily related to a $548,000 fee for the surety bond required by the Arizona State Board for Private Postsecondary Education in April 2022, which will be amortized over one year, and the anticipated Delaware Franchise tax refund of $147,000 for Fiscal Year 2021.
The decrease in non-cash adjustments primarily consists of lower stock-based compensation expense related to $1.2 million related to the accelerated amortization expense for the price vesting of Executive RSUs in Q2 Fiscal 2021 and non-recurring accelerated stock-based compensation expense of approximately $0.6 million related to the accelerated vesting of RSUs, prior year amortization of debt discounts related to the former $10 million Convertible Notes, which were automatically converted on
September 14, 2020, and lower tenant improvements allowances from the landlords which only includes the Atlanta campus in Fiscal Year 2022.
The Company expects working capital and long-term student accounts receivable to trend higher over time as more students utilize our monthly payment plan. Additionally, there may be working capital volatility from quarter to quarter, regarding the timing of financial aid payments and student course starts that impact deferred revenue and accounts receivable balances. Offsetting the trend toward higher working capital and long-term student accounts receivable will be a trend toward improved adjusted EBITDA as we continue to grow our high LTV programs.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the Fiscal Year 2022 decreased from Fiscal Year 2021 due principally to lower capital expenditures in the current year associated with the opening of pre-licensure locations.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the Fiscal Year ended 2022 increased from the Fiscal Year 2021 due primarily to the proceeds of $5,000,000 from borrowings under the Credit Facility on August 31, 2021, the issuance of $10,000,000 of Convertible Notes on March 14, 2022, and proceeds from stock options exercised of $191,034, partially offset by payments of deferred financing costs of $335,362.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the Fiscal Year ended 2021 was composed of $2,669,247 for the exercise of stock options as well as proceeds from warrants exercised of $1,081,792 received from the cash exercise of warrants associated with the Term Loan and Revolving Credit Facility.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash balances are kept liquid to support our growing infrastructure needs. The majority of our cash is concentrated in large financial institutions.
Financing Arrangements
Convertible Note and Revolving Credit Facility
On March 14, 2022, the Company closed an offering of a $10 million convertible note and a $20 million Revolving Credit Facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). The Company received the proceeds from the $10 million convertible note at the closing. Subsequent to the closing of the $10 million convertible note, $5 million was restricted as collateral for a surety bond, which was required by the Arizona State Board for Private Postsecondary Education. The remaining $5 million is available for general corporate purposes, including funding the Company’s expansion of its BSN Pre-Licensure nursing degree program.
The $20 million revolving credit facility has not been drawn upon and was pledged as additional collateral for the surety bond required by the Arizona State Board for Private Postsecondary Education.
Credit Facility
On August 31, 2021, the Company extended its $5 million Credit Facility by one year to November 4, 2022. The Credit Facility is evidenced by a revolving promissory note. Borrowings under the Credit Facility Agreement bear interest at 12% per annum. In conjunction with the extension of the Credit Facility, the Company drew down $5 million of funds at 12% interest per annum due November 4, 2022. Pursuant to this agreement, on August 31, 2021 the Company issued to the Foundation warrants to purchase 50,000 shares of the Company’s common stock exercisable for five years from the date of issuance at the exercise price of $5.85 per share. Additionally on March 14, 2022, the Company extended the $5 million Credit Facility by one additional year to November 4, 2023, at an increased interest rate of 14% per annum. The Company uses these funds for general business purposes, including the roll out of the new campuses.
At April 30, 2022 and 2021, there were $5 million and no outstanding borrowings, respectively, under the Credit Facility.
Sufficiency of Working Capital
As of July 22, 2022, the Company has $4.2 million of unrestricted cash on hand. In order to meet our short-term working capital requirements and to achieve our operational goals during the next 12 months, we expect to either raise sufficient capital or reduce our expenditures. We expect that with these reductions, we have sufficient cash to meet our working capital for the next 12 months.
Capital and other expenditures
The Company anticipates that it will need to make capital and other expenditures in connection with the development and expansion of its campus operations and the implementation of new online programs.
On July 6, 2022, the Company amended its Certificate of Incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of common stock the Company is authorized to issue from 40,000,000 to 60,000,000 authorized shares. The stockholders of the Company had previously approved the amendment at a special meeting held on July 6, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In response to financial reporting release FR-60, Cautionary Advice Regarding Disclosure About Critical Accounting Policies, from the SEC, we have selected our more subjective accounting estimation processes for purposes of explaining the methodology used in calculating the estimate, in addition to the inherent uncertainties pertaining to the estimate and the possible effects on our financial condition. There were no material changes to our principal accounting estimates during the period covered by this report.
Revenue Recognition and Deferred Revenue
The Company follows ASC 606. ASC 606 is based on the principle that revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. This ASC also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer purchase orders, including significant judgments.
Revenue consists primarily of tuition and course fees derived from courses taught by the Company online and in-person as well as from related educational resources and services that the Company provides to its students. Under ASC 606, tuition and course fee revenue is recognized pro-rata over the applicable period of instruction and are not considered separate performance obligations. Non-tuition related revenue and fees are recognized as services are provided or when the goods are received by the student. Students may receive discounts, scholarships, or refunds, which gives rise to variable consideration. Discounts and scholarships are applied to individual student accounts when such amounts are awarded. Therefore, the tuition is reduced directly by these discounts or scholarships from the amount of the standard tuition rate charged.
The Company's disaggregated revenue disclosures are presented in Note 13. Revenue.
Deferred revenue, a contract liability, represents the amount of tuition, fees, and other student payments received in excess of the portion recognized as revenue and it is included in current liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Other revenue may be recognized as sales occur or services are performed.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts Receivable
All students are required to select both a primary and secondary payment option with respect to amounts due to AGI for tuition, fees and other expenses. The monthly payment plan represents the majority of the payments that are made by AGI's total active students, making it the most common payment type. In instances where a student selects financial aid as the primary payment option, the student often selects personal cash as the secondary option. If a student who has selected financial aid as the student's primary payment option withdraws prior to the end of a course but after the date that AGI’s institutional refund period has expired, the student will have incurred the obligation to pay the full cost of the course. If the withdrawal occurs before the date at which the student has earned 100% of the student's financial aid, AGI may have to return all or a portion of the Title IV funds to the DOE and the student will owe AGI all amounts incurred that are in excess of the amount of financial aid that the student earned, and that AGI is entitled to retain. In this case, AGI must collect the receivable using the student’s second payment option.
For accounts receivable from students and payors other than students, AGI records an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability, failure or refusal of its students or other payors to make required payments, which includes the recovery of financial aid funds advanced to a student for amounts in excess of the student’s cost of tuition and
related fees. AGI estimates the amounts to adjust the allowance based upon the risk presented by the age of the receivables, student status, payment type, program and estimate of new revenue. AGI writes off accounts receivable balances at the time the balances are deemed uncollectible. AGI continues to reflect accounts receivable with an offsetting allowance as long as management believes there is a reasonable possibility of collection.
Goodwill and Intangibles
The Company assesses goodwill on its one reporting unit and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually as of April 30, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit or the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset below its carrying value.
Goodwill currently represents the excess of purchase price over the fair market value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed from the 2017 acquisition of USU. Goodwill has an indefinite life and is not amortized.
In January 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350), to simplify how an entity is required to test goodwill for impairment by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. Step 2 measures a goodwill impairment loss by comparing the implied fair value of a reporting unit’s goodwill with the carrying amount of that goodwill. This guidance is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company early adopted this standard effective April 30, 2018. We have selected an April 30 annual goodwill impairment test date.
When evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill, management first assess a range of qualitative factors, including but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for the Company’s products and services, regulatory and political developments, entity specific factors such as strategy and changes in key personnel, and the overall financial performance for each of the Company’s reporting units. If, after completing this assessment, it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we then proceed to the quantitative impairment testing.
We compare the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill, with its fair value, as determined. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, then the amount of impairment to be recognized is the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value.
When required, we arrive at our estimates of fair value using a discounted cash flow methodology which includes estimates of future cash flows to be generated by a component where the goodwill is recorded, as well as determining a discount rate to measure the present value of those anticipated cash flows. Estimating future cash flows requires significant judgment and includes making assumptions about projected growth rates, industry-specific factors, working capital requirements, weighted average cost of capital, and current and anticipated operating conditions. The use of different assumptions or estimates for future cash flows could produce different results.
Intangible assets represent both indefinite-lived and definite-lived assets. Acquired accreditation and regulatory approvals, and trade name and trademarks are deemed to have indefinite useful lives and accordingly are not amortized but are tested annually for impairment. Student relationships and curriculums are deemed to have definite lives and are amortized accordingly.
Stock-based compensation
Stock-based compensation expense is measured at the grant date fair value of the award and is expensed over the requisite service period, which is included in general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations. For employee stock option based awards, the Company calculates the fair value of the award on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Determining the fair value of stock option based awards at the grant date under this model requires judgment, including estimating volatility, employee stock option exercise behaviors and forfeiture rates. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock option based awards represent the Company's best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. Stock option based awards are expensed as stock-based compensation over the vesting term, which is included in general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations.
For non-employee stock option based awards, the Company follows ASU 2018-7, which substantially aligns share based compensation for employees and non-employees.
Restricted stock units ("RSUs") are awards in the form of shares denominated in the equivalent number of shares of AGI common stock. RSU awards may be subject to service-based vesting, where a specific period of continued employment must
pass before an award vests and/or other vesting restrictions based on the nature and recipient of the award. For RSU awards, the expense is typically measured at the grant date as the fair value of AGI common stock and expensed as stock-based compensation over the vesting term, which is included in general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations.
Related Party Transactions
The Company did not have any related party transactions in fiscal year 2022.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of April 30, 2022.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included herein for discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements
This report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including statements regarding our continuing focus on the nursing profession, our future operations with respect to our Arizona locations, resolution of the Consent Agreement with the Arizona Board of Nursing, future NCLEX and pass rates in Arizona and at our other campus locations, expected growth in demand for nurses and nursing degrees, the expected changes in our expenditures in fiscal year 2023, including the length of our current reduction in marketing expenses, completion of any financing, the anticipated changes in enrollments and bookings, our beliefs with respect to our student acquisition costs and faculty cost model, the future job opportunities for licensed practical nurses and registered nurses, future competitive trends in our industry, including increased competition as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors, our future ability to provide lower costs per enrollment, our estimates concerning LTV and ARPU, our expectations regarding future trends in the six-year MPP accounts receivable and collections, the future impact of our enhanced recovery and collections process, the expected continued revenue growth in the BSN Pre-Licensure and USU businesses and spending focus on our highest LTV degree programs to achieve our long-term growth plans, allowance for doubtful accounts and cash flow from operations, the impact of bookings, future expansion of our operating margins, the expected revenue trends and sources of future revenue growth, our anticipated working capital trends, and our future liquidity. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained in this report, including statements regarding our future financial position, liquidity, business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. The words “believe,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “should,” “plan,” “could,” “target,” “potential,” “is likely,” “will,” “expect” and similar expressions, as they relate to us, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may affect our financial condition, results of operations, business strategy and financial needs.
The results anticipated by any or all of these forward-looking statements might not occur. Important factors, uncertainties and risks that may cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements are discussed in the Risk Factors section of this Report and include, without limitation, our ability to successfully implement the fiscal year 2023 business plan and the accuracy of the assumptions used in estimating the results of such implementation, continued high demand for nurses for our new programs and in general, student attrition, national and local economic factors including the labor market shortages, future NCLEX scores of our students in Arizona and in other locations will not be sufficient to meet regulatory requirements, the failure to obtain approval from the National Council for State Authorization Reciprocity Agreements, competition from nursing schools in local markets, the competitive impact from the trend of major non-profit universities using online education and consolidation among our competitors, the continued effectiveness of our marketing and cost reduction efforts, the effectiveness of our collection efforts and process improvements, our ability to obtain and maintain the necessary regulatory approvals to operate our existing campuses , national and local economic factors including the substantial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the war in Ukraine and inflation and Federal Reserve interest rate increases in response on the economy, unfavorable regulatory changes, and our failure to continue obtaining enrollments at low acquisition costs and keeping teaching and administrative costs down. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as the result of new information, future events or otherwise. For more information regarding some of the ongoing risks and uncertainties of our business, see the Risk Factors and our other filings with the SEC.