ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a specialty pharmaceutical company that sells commercial products to wholesale distributors and specialty pharmacies in the United States. Our primary marketed products include:
INDOCIN® (indomethacin) Suppositories
A suppository form and oral solution of indomethacin used in the hospital as well as in the out-patient setting. Both products are nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), approved for:
• Moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis including acute flares of chronic disease
• Moderate to severe ankylosing spondylitis
INDOCIN® (indomethacin) Oral Suspension
• Moderate to severe osteoarthritis
• Acute painful shoulder (bursitis and/or tendinitis)
• Acute gouty arthritis
CAMBIA® (diclofenac potassium for oral solution)
A prescription NSAID indicated for the acute treatment of migraine attacks with or without aura in adults 18 years of age or older. CAMBIA can help patients with migraine pain, nausea, photophobia (sensitivity to light), and phonophobia (sensitivity to sound). CAMBIA is not a pill, it is a powder, and combining CAMBIA with water activates the medicine in a unique way.
Otrexup® (methotrexate)
injection for subcutaneous use
A once weekly single-dose auto-injector containing a prescription medicine, methotrexate. Methotrexate is used to:
• Treat certain adults with severe, active rheumatoid arthritis, and children with active polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pJIA), after treatment with other medicines including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) have been used and did not work well.
• Control the symptoms of severe, resistant, disabling psoriasis in adults when other types of treatment have been used and did not work well.
SPRIX® (ketorolac tromethamine) Nasal Spray
A prescription NSAID indicated in adult patients for the short term (up to five days) management of moderate to moderately severe pain that requires analgesia at the opioid level. SPRIX is a non-narcotic nasal spray provides patients with moderate to moderately severe short-term pain a form of ketorolac that is absorbed rapidly but does not require an injection administered by a healthcare provider (HCP).
Zipsor® (diclofenac potassium) Liquid filled capsules
A prescription NSAID used for relief of mild-to-moderate pain in adults (18 years of age and older). Zipsor uses proprietary ProSorb® delivery technology to deliver a finely dispersed, rapid and consistently absorbed formulation of diclofenac.
Other commercially available products include OXAYDO® (oxycodone HCI, USP) tablets for oral use only -CII.
On December 15, 2021, we, through a newly-formed subsidiary, Otter Pharmaceuticals, LLC, entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Antares Pharma, Inc. (“Antares”), and concurrently consummated the transaction. Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, we acquired Antares’ rights, title and interest in and to Otrexup, including certain related assets, intellectual property, contracts, and product inventory for (i) $18.0 million in cash payable at
the Closing, (ii) $16.0 million in cash payable on May 31, 2022 and (iii) and $10.0 million in cash payable on December 15, 2022.
On May 18, 2021, we effected a 1-for-4 reverse stock split of its issued and outstanding common stock. The par value of the common stock was not adjusted as a result of the reverse stock split. All common stock share and per-share data included in these financial statements have been retrospectively adjusted to reflect the effect of the reverse stock split for all periods presented
On February 9, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors and accredited investors to sell 5,650,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $2.48 per share on a post stock split basis. The gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $14.0 million. After placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, we received net proceeds of approximately $13.1 million. On February 12, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors and accredited investors to sell 8,750,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $3.92 per share on a post stock split basis. The gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $34.3 million. After placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, we received net proceeds of approximately $32.2 million. We intend to use proceeds from both offerings for general corporate purposes, including general working capital.
In September 2020, we terminated our Second Amended and Restated Nano-Reformulated Compound License Agreement (the “iCeutica License”), with iCeutica Inc. and iCeutica Pty Ltd. (collectively, “iCeutica”). The iCeutica License allowed us to utilize certain technology and intellectual property related to iCeutica’s SOLUMATRIX technology and certain other rights of iCeutica. Effective the termination of the iCeutica License, we ceased manufacturing products using SOLUMATRIX technology and will sell through the remaining inventory.
On May 20, 2020, we completed a Merger (the Zyla Merger) with Zyla Life Sciences (Zyla) pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger (Merger Agreement), dated as of March 16, 2020. Pursuant to the Zyla Merger, we acquired our current commercial products of INDOCIN Products, SPRIX, and OXAYDO, as well as ZORVOLEX®(diclofenac) and VIVLODEX® (meloxicam) (which are collectively known as the SOLUMATRIX® products).
On February 13, 2020, we completed the sale of our remaining rights, title and interest in and to the NUCYNTA® franchise to Collegium Pharmaceutical, Inc. (Collegium) for $375.0 million, less royalties, in cash at closing.
On January 10, 2020, we completed the sale of Gralise® (gabapentin) to Golf Acquiror LLC, an affiliate to Alvogen, Inc. (Alvogen), for cash proceeds of $130.3 million. The total value included $75.0 million in cash at closing, with the remaining balance settled through June 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) regulations for annual reporting. Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant judgements and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
A more detailed discussion of our critical accounting policies may be found in “Note 1. Organization and Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report, and the impact and risks associated with our accounting policies are discussed throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
Product sales revenue is recognized when title has transferred to the customer and the customer has assumed the risks and rewards of ownership, which typically occurs on delivery to the customer. Our performance obligation is to deliver product to the customer, and the performance obligation is completed upon delivery. The transaction price consists of a fixed invoice
price and variable product sales allowances, which include rebates, discounts and returns. Product sales revenues are recorded net of applicable sales tax and reserves for these product sales allowances (gross-to-net sales allowances).
Product sales allowances consist primarily of provisions for product returns, managed care rebates and government rebates (collectively, rebates), wholesaler and pharmacy discounts, prompt pay discounts, patient discount programs, and chargebacks. We consider products sales allowances to be variable consideration and estimate and recognize product sales allowances as a reduction of product sales in the same period the related revenue is recognized. Product sales allowances are based on actual or estimated amounts owed on the related sales. These estimates take into consideration the terms of our agreements with customers, historical product returns, rebates or discounts taken, estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel, the shelf life of the product and specific known market events, such as competitive pricing and new product introductions. We use the most likely method in estimating product sales allowances. If actual future results vary from our estimates, we may need to adjust the estimates, which could have an effect on product sales and earnings in the period of adjustment.
We believe our estimates related to gross-to-net sales adjustments for product return allowances and rebates are judgmental and are subject to change based on our experience and certain quantitative and qualitative factors. We believe that our estimates related to gross-to-net sales adjustments for wholesaler and pharmacy fees and discounts, prompt payment discounts, patient discount programs and chargebacks do not have a high degree of estimation complexity or uncertainty as the related amounts are settled within a relatively short period of time.
Product Return - We allow customers to return product for credit with respect to that product within 6 months before and up to 12 months after the product expiration date. We estimate product returns and associated credit based on historical return trends by product or by return trends of similar products, taking into consideration the shelf life of the product at the time of shipment, shipment and prescription trends, estimated distribution channel inventory levels and consideration of the introduction of competitive products. We do not assume financial responsibility for returns of NUCYNTA previously sold by Janssen Pharma, Lazanda product previously sold by Archimedes Pharma US Inc., or for Otrexup product previously sold by Antares Pharma. Under the Commercialization Agreement with Collegium for NUCYNTA, the divestiture of Lazanda to Slán and the divestiture of Gralise to Alvogen, we are only financially responsible for product returns for products that were sold by us, which are identified by specific lot numbers.
Shelf lives, from the respective manufacture dates, for our products range from 24 months to 48 months. Because of the shelf life of our products and its return policy of issuing credits with respect to product that is returned within six months before and up to 12 months after its product expiration date, there may be a significant period of time between when the product is shipped and when we issue credit on a returned product. Accordingly, we may have to adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on product sales and earnings in the period of adjustments. Product returns charged against gross sales were approximately $15.2 million in 2021.
Managed Care Rebates - We offer discounts under contracts with certain managed care providers. We generally pay managed care rebates one to three months after prescriptions subject to the rebate are filled. Managed care rebates charged against gross sales were approximately $8.9 million in 2021.
Government Rebates - We participate in both Medicaid and Medicare rebate programs. Medicaid provides assistance to certain low income patients based on each individual state’s guidelines regarding eligibility and services. Under the Medicaid rebate programs, we pay a rebate to each participating state, generally two to three months after the quarter in which prescriptions subject to the rebate are filled. We participate in the Medicare Part D Coverage Gap Discount Program under which it provides rebates on prescriptions that fall within the “donut hole” coverage gap. We generally pay Medicare Part D Coverage Gap rebates two to three months after the quarter in which prescriptions subject to the rebate are filled. Government rebates charged against gross sales were approximately $11.4 million in 2021.
Acquisitions
We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting under ASC 805, Business Combinations (ASC 805), which requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at date of acquisition at their respective fair values. The fair value of the consideration paid, including contingent consideration, is assigned to the underlying net assets of the acquired business based on their respective fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Significant judgments are used in determining the estimated fair values assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed and in determining estimates of useful lives of long-lived assets. Fair value determinations and useful life estimates are
based on, among other factors, estimates of expected future net cash flows, estimates of appropriate discount rates used to present value expected future net cash flows, the assessment of each asset’s life cycle, and the impact of competitive trends on each asset’s life cycle and other factors. These judgments can materially impact the estimates used to allocate acquisition date fair values to assets acquired and liabilities assumed and the resulting timing and amounts charged to, or recognized in current and future operating results. For these and other reasons, actual results may vary significantly from estimated results.
If the acquired net assets do not constitute a business under the acquisition method of accounting, the transaction is accounted for as an asset acquisition and no goodwill is recognized. In an asset acquisition, the amount allocated to acquired in-process research and development (IPR&D) with no alternative future use is charged to expense at the acquisition date.
On December 15, 2021, we completed the Otrexup Acquisition, which was accounted under ASC 805. See “Note 2. Acquisitions” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
On May 20, 2020, we completed the Zyla Merger, which was accounted under ASC 805. See “Note 2. Acquisitions” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Contingent Consideration Obligation
Pursuant to the May 2020 Zyla Merger, we assumed a contingent consideration obligation which is measured at fair value. We have an obligations to make contingent consideration payments for future royalties to Iroko based upon annual INDOCIN Product net sales over $20.0 million at a 20% royalty through January 2029.
At each reporting date, we re-measure the contingent consideration obligation to estimated fair value which is recognized in Selling, general and administrative expense in the Company’s Condensed Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income. The fair value of the contingent consideration is determined using an option pricing model under the income approach based on estimated INDOCIN Product revenues through January 2029 and discounted to present value. The fair value measurement is based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus represents a Level 3 measurement as defined in fair value measurement accounting. The significant assumptions used in the calculation of the fair value include projections of future INDOCIN Product revenues including the probability assigned to the achievement of those projections, revenue volatility, discount rate, and credit spread. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized a charge of $3.9 million and $1.5 million, respectively, for the change in fair value of contingent consideration, which was recognized in Selling, general and administrative expense in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income. The significant assumptions used in the calculation of the fair value as of December 31, 2021 included revenue volatility of 35%, discount rate of 7.0%, credit spread of 5.2% and updated projections of future INDOCIN Product revenues.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets, including property and equipment and acquired intangible assets consisting of product rights, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition are less than its carrying amount. The impairment loss is calculated as the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value. Estimating future cash flows and fair value related to an intangible asset involves significant estimates and assumptions. If our assumptions are not correct, there could be an impairment loss or, in the case of a change in the estimated useful life of the asset, a change in amortization expense.
As of December 31, 2021, we determined that there was an indicator of impairment present based on our market capitalization as of December 31, 2021 compared to our carrying value. After grouping the long-lived assets, including purchased developed technology and trademarks, at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities, we estimated the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the use of the long-lived asset group and its eventual disposition. We then compared the estimated undiscounted cash flows to the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group. Based on this test, we determined that the estimated undiscounted cash flows were in excess of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group and, accordingly, the long-lived asset group is fully recoverable.
As of December 31, 2020, we determined there were indicators of impairment present related to the declining revenues due to the adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business as well as unfavorable changes in product payor mix, resulting in our announcement of a restructuring plan. These factors contributed to higher operating losses and cash used by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, our
market capitalization declined from approximately $72.0 million as of September 30, 2020 to $38.0 million as of December 31, 2020. As a result of these recent events, we determined indicators of impairment were present and, accordingly, performed a test for recoverability of long-lived assets to be held and used pursuant to ASC 360, Impairment Testing: Long Lived Assets Classified as Held and Used. After grouping the long-lived assets, including purchased developed technology and trademarks, at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities, we estimated the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the use of the long-lived asset group and its eventual disposition. We then compared the estimated undiscounted cash flows to the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group. Based on this test, we determined that the estimated undiscounted cash flows were in excess of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group and, accordingly, the long-lived asset group is fully recoverable.
Goodwill
Under the purchase method of accounting pursuant to ASC 805, Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is recognized within other long-term assets, and is not amortized but subject to an annual review for impairment. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level at least annually or when a triggering event occurs that could indicate a potential impairment by assessing qualitative factors or performing a quantitative analysis in determining whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of net assets are below their carrying amounts. A reporting unit is the same as, or one level below, an operating segment. Our operations are currently comprised of a single reporting unit.
As of December 31, 2020, we determined, due to declining revenues and a decrease in our market capitalization, that it is more likely than not that the fair value of net assets are below their carrying amounts and, therefore, we performed the required goodwill impairment test under ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. First, we estimated the fair value of the reporting unit to which goodwill is assigned using a combination of the income and market approach. We then compared the carrying amount of the reporting unit, including goodwill, to its fair value. Since the fair value was less than the reporting unit’s carrying amount, we calculated the goodwill impairment as the difference between the reporting unit’s fair value and the carrying amount, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. Accordingly, we recorded an impairment charge of $17.4 million, recognized within total costs and expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income, to impair the carrying amount of goodwill as of December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
We record the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and amounts reported in our accompanying consolidated balance sheets, as well as operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We follow the guidelines set forth in the applicable accounting guidance regarding the recoverability of any tax assets recorded on the consolidated balance sheet and provide any necessary allowances as required. Determining necessary allowances requires us to make assessments about the timing of future events, including the probability of expected future taxable income and available tax planning opportunities. When we determine that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized in the future, the deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance. The valuation allowance is sufficient to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that we determine is more likely than not to be realized.
We are subject to examination of our income tax returns by various tax authorities on a periodic basis. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from such examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We have applied the provisions of the applicable accounting guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, which requires application of a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and de-recognition of uncertain tax positions. If the recognition threshold is met, the applicable accounting guidance permits us to recognize a tax benefit measured at the largest amount of tax benefit that, in our judgment, is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon settlement. It further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in the period of such change.
We recognize tax liabilities in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Tax Provisions and we adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which they are determined. Refer to “Note 20. Income Taxes” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table reflects our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Revenues
The following table reflects total revenues, net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Products acquired in connection with May 20, 2020 Zyla Merger.
Product Sales, net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, product sales primarily consisted of sales from INDOCIN Products, CAMBIA, Zipsor and SPRIX. We began shipping and recognizing product sales for INDOCIN Products and SPRIX upon the Zyla Merger on May 20, 2020.
The increase in INDOCIN net products sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $28.9 million from $31.7 million to $60.6 million as compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to INDOCIN Products sales only beginning upon the Zyla Merger on May 20, 2020 as well the impact of the price increase in the fourth quarter of 2021.
CAMBIA net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $3.4 million from $28.4 million to $25.0 million as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower volume partially offset by favorable payor mix.
Zipsor net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $3.1 million from $13.3 million to $10.2 million as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower volume partially offset by favorable payor mix. Certain parties who have entered into settlement agreements with us will be able to market generic versions of Zipsor starting in 2022.
SPRIX net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $2.4 million from $11.1 million to $8.7 million as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower volume partially offset by the impact of 2020 as product sales only began upon the Zyla Merger on May 20, 2020.
Other products net sales includes product sales for non-promoted products (OXAYDO and SOLUMATRIX) which were acquired from Zyla in May 2020. In September 2020, we terminated our iCeutica License and as a result will no longer manufacture products using SOLUMATRIX technology and will sell through the remaining inventory.
Commercialization Agreement Revenue, net
We ceased recognizing commercialization revenue and related costs for NUCYNTA effective the closing of the transaction to divest our rights, title and interest in and to the NUCYNTA franchise to Collegium on February 13, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized net revenue from the Commercialization Agreement of $11.3 million. This included variable royalty revenue of $13.1 million partially offset by the amortization of the $1.8 million net contract asset in connection with the termination of the Commercialization Agreement.
Royalties & Milestone
In November 2010, we entered into a license agreement with Tribute Pharmaceuticals Canada Ltd. (now known as Miravo Pharmaceuticals) granting them the rights to commercially market CAMBIA in Canada. We receive royalties on net sales as well as certain one-time contingent milestone payments. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $2.5 million and $1.5 million of revenue related to CAMBIA in Canada, respectively.
Other Revenue
Other revenue consists of sales adjustments for previously divested products. Sales adjustments for previously divested products primarily include Gralise, which was divested in January 2020, as well as Nucynta and Lazanda, and were $(1.0) million and $1.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Cost of Sales (excluding amortization of intangible assets)
Cost of sales consists of costs of the active pharmaceutical ingredient, contract manufacturing and packaging costs, royalties payable to third parties, inventory write downs, product quality testing, internal employee costs related to the manufacturing process, distribution costs and shipping costs related to our product sales. Cost of sales excludes the amortization of intangible assets described below under “Amortization of Intangible Assets.” Fair value of inventories acquired through business combination or asset acquisition include an inventory step-up within the value of inventories. The inventory step-up value is amortized, as the related inventory is sold, and included in cost of sales.
Cost of sales decreased $4.0 million from $19.9 million to $15.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to lower cost of sales as a result of the Gralise divestiture in the first quarter of 2020 and lower Zyla Merger related inventory step-up expense in current period, partially offset by higher net product sales.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 cost of sales include $0.6 million amortization of inventory step-up related to Zyla acquired inventories sold. The year ended December 31, 2020 cost of sales included $4.1 million of amortization of inventory step-up related to Zyla acquired inventories sold.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development (R&D) expenses include salaries, clinical trial costs, consultant fees, supplies, manufacturing costs for research and development programs and allocations of corporate costs. It is difficult to predict the scope and magnitude of future research and development expenses for our product candidates in research and development, as it is difficult to determine the nature, timing and extent of clinical trials and studies and the FDA’s requirements for a particular drug. As potential products proceed through the development process, each step is typically more extensive, and therefore more expensive, than the previous step. Therefore, success in development generally results in increasing expenditures until actual product approval.
As a result of the December 2020 restructuring plan, we did not incur any research and development costs in 2021. Research and development expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to the completion of all material research and development activities in 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses primarily consist of personnel, contract personnel, marketing and promotion expenses associated with our commercial products, personnel expenses to support our administrative and operating activities, facility costs, and professional expenses, such as legal fees. In addition, the change in fair value of our contingent consideration liability, which is remeasured quarterly based on the likelihood of the contingent earn-out payments, is recognized within SG&A.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased $47.8 million from $104.3 million to $56.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to lower employee costs in 2021 as a result of prior restructuring plans, one-time transaction costs in 2020 not repeating, receipt of insurance reimbursement in the first quarter of 2021 for previous opioid-related expenses, partially offset by additional expense for loss contingency provision recognized in 2021.
Intangible Assets
The following table reflects amortization of intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Amortization expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $3.3 million from $24.8 million to $28.1 million as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to the timing of Zyla Merger in May 2020 partially offset by the February 2020 divestiture of our rights, title and interest to the NUCYNTA franchise of products to Collegium. As a result, we derecognized the remaining carrying value of the NUCYNTA product rights and ceased recognizing related amortization.
Loss on Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Asset
No impairment loss on goodwill was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an impairment loss of $17.4 million on goodwill to reduce the carrying value to its estimated fair value in accordance with ASC 350.
Restructuring Charges
We continually evaluate our operations to identify opportunities to streamline operations and optimize operating efficiencies in anticipation of changes in the business environment.
On December 15, 2020, we announced the December 2020 Plan which was designed to substantially reduce the Company’s operating footprint through the reduction of its staff at our headquarters office and remote sales force. We substantially completed the workforce reduction in the first quarter of 2021.
In May 2020, we began implementing reorganization plans of our workforce and other restructuring activities to realize the synergies of the Zyla Merger and to re-align resources to strategic areas and drive growth (Zyla Merger Reorganization). We completed the restructuring activities in 2020 and did not incur significant costs related to the Zyla Merger Reorganization in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021 restructuring charges incurred were $1.1 million. The restructuring charges cost and one-time termination costs incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $17.8 million.
Other (Expense) Income
The following table reflects Other (expense) income: for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Other (expense) income: changed by $46.6 million from other income of $36.6 million to other expense of $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to the prior year gain on the sale of Gralise, loss on sale of NUCYNTA, loss on debt extinguishment and change in fair value of Collegium warrants not repeating. Sublease income offset by sublease expense is recorded in Other gain (loss) within the above table.
The following table reflects interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total interest expense decreased $5.7 million as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due the settlement of the remaining principal of our Senior Secured Notes and the repurchase of our 2021 and 2024 Convertible Notes in the third quarter of 2020 partially offset by interest expense associated with 13% Senior Secured Notes assumed from the Zyla Merger in May 2020.
Income Tax Provision
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an income tax expense of approximately $0.7 million, which represents an effective tax rate of (131.6)%. The difference between the income tax expense of $0.7 million and the tax at the statutory rate of 21% is principally due to the recording of a valuation allowance for current year movement in deferred tax assets.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of approximately $17.4 million, which represents an effective tax rate of 38.2%. The difference between the income tax benefit of $17.4 million and the tax at the statutory rate of 21.0% is principally due to the carryback of our 2020 federal net operating loss (“NOL”) to our 2018 and 2019 tax years under the NOL carryback provisions enacted as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act in early 2020 and the current year reversal of valuation allowance related to the utilization of our deferred tax assets (“DTA”) to offset the deferred tax liabilities (“DTL”) of Zyla recorded through acquisition accounting.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Historically and through December 31, 2021, we have financed our operations and business development efforts primarily from product sales, private and public sales of equity securities, including convertible debt securities, the proceeds of secured borrowings, the sale of rights to future royalties and milestones, upfront license, milestone and fees from collaborative and license partners.
On December 17, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement with Roth Capital Partners, LLC (“Roth”) as sales agent to sell shares of our common stock, from time to time, through an “at-the-market offering” program having an aggregate offering price of up to $25.0 million. Roth will be entitled to aggregate compensation equal to 3.0% of the gross sales price of the shares sold through it pursuant to the Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we have not sold any shares under this program.
On February 9, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors and accredited investors to sell 5,650,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $2.48 per share on a post stock split basis. The gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $14.0 million. After placement agent fees, we received net proceeds of approximately $13.1 million. On February 12, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors and accredited investors to sell 8,750,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $3.92 per share on a post stock split basis. The gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $34.3 million. After placement agent fees, we received net proceeds of approximately $32.2 million. We also incurred $0.5 million direct incremental cost to complete both registered direct offerings. We intend to use proceeds from both offerings for general corporate purposes, including general working capital.
We may incur operating losses in future years. We believe that our existing cash will be sufficient to fund our operations and make the required payments under our debt agreements due for the next twelve months from the date of this filing. We base this expectation on our current operating plan, which may change as a result of many factors.
Our cash needs may vary materially from our current expectations because of numerous factors, including:
•acquisitions or licenses of complementary businesses, products, technologies or companies;
•sales of our marketed products;
•expenditures related to our commercialization of our products;
•milestone and royalty revenue we receive under our collaborative development arrangements;
•interest and principal payments on our current and future indebtedness;
•financial terms of definitive license agreements or other commercial agreements we may enter into
•changes in the focus and direction of our business strategy and/or research and development programs;
•potential expenses relating to any litigation matters, including relating to Assertio Therapeutics’ prior opioid product franchise for which we have not accrued any reserves due to an inability to estimate the magnitude and/or probability of such expenses, and former drug Glumetza; and
•effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations.
The inability to raise any additional capital that may be required to fund our future operations, payments due under our debt agreements, or product acquisitions and strategic transactions which we may pursue could have a material adverse effect on our company.
The following table reflects summarized cash flow activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands)::
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $5.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to cash used of $65.6 million in the same period in 2020. The increase in cash provided from operating activities is primarily due to combination of lower net loss after non-cash adjustments and favorable working capital cash flows.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $18.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 which included $18.0 million paid related to the Otrexup acquisition. Cash provided from investing activities was $512.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which included cash received for the sales of NUCYNTA, Gralise and Collegium warrants as well as cash acquired in Zyla Merger.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.0 million, which primarily consisted of proceeds from the registered direct offerings in February 2021 partially offset by payments of our debt as well as our contingent consideration obligation. Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $468.6 million, which was primarily due to the settlement of our Senior Notes and the repurchase of our outstanding 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal material cash requirements consist of obligations related to the deferred cash payments for Otrexup acquisition, debt obligations related to Secured Notes and Royalty Rights, continent consideration obligation, payments for rebates, returns and discounts, third-party consent payments, remaining compensation under our restructuring programs, and non-cancelable leases for our office space. Refer to Note 2, Note 10, Note 19, Note 1, Note 18, Note 11 and Note 12, respectively, to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Additionally, we have non-cancelable contractual obligations for our purchase commitments, see Note 13 to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
RECENTLY ADOPTED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data - Note 1. Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for additional information on recent accounting pronouncements.