ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, which appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to “the Company” “Astra,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Astra Space, Inc. (n/k/a Astra Space Operations, Inc.) prior to the Business Combination, and to Astra Space, Inc. (f/k/a Holicity, Inc.) following the consummation of the Business Combination on June 30, 2021.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Final Prospectus dated August 9, 2020 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) on August 9, 2020.
Overview
Our mission is to launch a new generation of launch services and space services and products to improve life on Earth. These services and products are enabled by new constellations of small satellites in Low Earth Orbit (“LEO”), which have rapidly become smaller, cheaper, and many times more numerous than legacy satellites. Launch vehicles, however, have not evolved in the same way - most rockets remain focused on serving legacy satellites and human spaceflight missions and we aim to provide the world’s first mass-produced orbital launch system. While our primary focus remains the growth and development of our launch services offerings, we continue to develop other product and service offerings to support our overall mission to improve life on Earth from space. For example, on June 2, 2021, we announced the acquisition of Apollo Fusion, Inc. and acquired its ACE propulsion system and, on November 4, 2021, we announced the filing of an application with the Federal Communications Commission for V-band spectrum assets to support a future constellation to further enable communications and connectivity.
Holicity Business Combination and Public Company Costs
We entered into a business combination agreement with Holicity Inc. (“Holicity”) on February 2, 2021. On June 30, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), the previously announced business combination was consummated. Upon the consummation of the business combination, Holicity Merger Sub Inc. (“Merger Sub”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Holicity, merged with and into Astra with Astra surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of Holicity (the “Business Combination”). Astra became a wholly owned subsidiary of Holicity, which renamed to Astra Space, Inc. (“New Astra”), and Astra renamed to Astra Space Operations, Inc. upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Astra was the predecessor and New Astra is the successor SEC registrant, meaning that Astra’s financial statements for previous periods will be presented in New Astra’s future periodic reports filed with the SEC. Holicity was treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes.
The most significant change in the post-combination Company’s reported financial position and results was a net increase in cash of $463.6 million. We paid $25.2 million in transaction costs relating to the Business Combination at the closing. We recorded a liability related to the Public and Private Placement Warrants of $56.8 million in the consolidated balance sheet on Closing Date.
As a consequence of the Business Combination, the Company trades under the ticker symbol “ASTR” on the Nasdaq. We hired additional personnel and implemented procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We also incurred, and will continue to incur, additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Acquisition of Apollo Fusion
On July 1, 2021, the Company completed its acquisition of Apollo Fusion, Inc. (“Apollo”), a designer and builder of thruster propulsion systems for satellite programs. The acquisition-date fair value of the consideration transferred totaled $70.8 million, net of cash acquired. The consideration consisted of approximately 2,558,744 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock worth $33.0 million which value was determined based on the closing market price of the Company's common stock on the acquisition date, $19.9 million in cash and $18.4 million of the fair value of contingent consideration. The contingent consideration arrangement requires the Company to pay up to an additional $75.0 million, provided certain customer revenue-based milestones are achieved prior to December 31, 2023. If earned, the contingent consideration will be payable as follows: up to $15.0 million of cash and $60.0 million of the
Company’s Class A common stock, at a reference price per share equal to the then volume weighted average trading price over a five-day trading period prior to the business day prior to issuance. The contingent consideration is payable on a quarterly basis based on the milestones achieved. We estimated the fair value of the contingent consideration using a Monte Carlo simulation model. This fair value measurement is based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus represents a Level 3 measurement as defined in ASC 820. As of December 31, 2021, the contingent consideration recognized from acquisition of Apollo decreased to $13.7 million as a result of changes in forecasted revenues subject to milestone payments and the passage of time.
An additional $10.0 million of cash ("Cash Earnout") is expected to be paid to employees of Apollo that joined Astra following the acquisition, subject to certain performance-based milestones, as amended. The Cash Earnout is accounted for as compensation expense over the requisite service period in the post-acquisition period as the payment is subject to continued employment with the Company which is payable after the achievement of each performance-based milestone. The Company assessed the probability of success of each performance-based milestone and determined that the Company has achieved certain performance-based milestones and it is probable that certain remaining performance-based milestones will be met. The Company recognized $5.8 million in compensation cost which was included in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $3.9 million was accrued in accrued expenses and other current liabilities as of December 31, 2021.
In addition, on November 22, 2021, the Company's compensation committee awarded 1,047,115 performance stock units ("PSUs") to the employees of Apollo who joined Astra under the Company’s 2021 Omnibus Incentive Plan. The PSUs were negotiated as part of the acquisition of Apollo and are subject to certain performance-based and service-based vesting conditions. If the milestones are achieved, the PSUs would vest over four years with 25% of awards vesting on July 1, 2022 and the remaining 75% vesting quarterly beginning November 15, 2022, over the remaining 12 quarters only for the portion of PSUs that is eligible to become vested which will be determined based upon timely satisfaction of performance conditions. The number of PSUs vested will be determined by multiplying the total number of PSUs granted by the percentage of milestones achieved and by the percentage of PSUs that satisfy the time-based vesting condition on such time-vesting date.
Certain performance conditions under the plan are subjective and the number of PSUs related to these performance conditions do not meet the criteria for the grant date. Accordingly, 523,557 PSUs related to the performance conditions that are not subjective are considered granted as of November 22, 2021. The remaining PSUs issued did not meet the grant date criteria as of December 31, 2021. The Company will re-assess at the end of each reporting period if any further PSUs has met the grant date criteria and account for it in the period in which it meets the grant date criteria.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company assessed the probability of success for the performance conditions that are not subjective and determined that the Company has achieved these performance conditions within the requisite period. Therefore, the Company recognized $0.5 million compensation costs related to PSUs for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Public and Private Warrants Redemption
As part of Holicity’s initial public offering ("IPO") in 2020, Holicity issued 9,999,976 warrants to third party investors, and each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of the Company's Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share (the “Public Warrants”). Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, Holicity completed the private sale of 5,333,333 warrants to Holicity’s sponsor (“Private Placement Warrants”) and each Private Placement Warrant allows the sponsor to purchase one share of the Company's Class A common stock at $11.50 per share.
On November 26, 2021 Company issued a notice of redemption to redeem all of its Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants ("Redeemable Warrants") outstanding as of December 27, 2021. In connection with the redemption, the holders of 9,413,895 Public Warrants and 5,333,333 Private Placement Warrants elected to receive, in lieu of the $0.10 redemption price, an aggregate 3,775,709 shares of Class A common stock at 0.2560374 shares of Class A Common Stock per Redeemable Warrant. A total of 586,075 Public Warrants remained unexercised as of December 27, 2021 and the Company redeemed the Public Warrants for a redemption price of $0.10 per Redeemable Warrant. The Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants were remeasured to fair value as of the exercise or redemption date, resulting in a gain of $25.7 million for year ended December 31, 2021, classified within other income, net in the consolidated statements of operations.
COVID-19 Impact
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. The extent of the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on Astra’s operational and financial performance will depend on various future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and impact on its customers, suppliers, and employees, all of which is uncertain at this time. Astra believes the COVID-19 pandemic may adversely impact future revenue and results of operations, but Astra is unable to predict at this time the size and duration of this adverse impact. Astra has seen some signs of positive effects for its long-term business prospects and partnerships as a result of the pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has created an even greater need for broadband internet access, and businesses are thinking
differently about how their workforce can stay connected. There have also been recent government and commercial announcements about continuous investments in this area and we believe this will continue to support the growth of the small satellite market for the foreseeable future.
For more information on Astra’s operations and risks related to health epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic, please see the section entitled “Risk Factors.”
Key Factors Affecting Our Results and Prospects
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including competition from better known and well-capitalized companies, the risk of actual or perceived safety issues and their consequences for our reputation and the other factors discussed under “Risk Factors.” We believe the factors discussed below are key to our success.
Commencing and Expanding Commercial Launch Operations
We are on track to achieve a monthly launch capability by accelerating production of our launch vehicles by the end of 2022, with a goal of reaching an even more frequent launch capability in the future. When we refer to a “commercial launch,” we mean a launch conducted under an FAA commercial launch license. With binding agreements for launches, our contracted revenue is significant, and we are in active discussions with numerous potential customers, including government agencies and private satellite companies, to add to our contracted revenue.
In December 2020, we successfully launched Rocket 3.2 to an altitude of 380 km, demonstrating orbital launch capability. We improved propellant depletion controls to address the findings from the December 2020 flight. In August 2021, we attempted a flight with launch vehicle LV0006, but the mission was aborted. During liftoff, fuel and liquid oxygen leaked from the propellant supply system attached to the launch vehicle. The leaked propellants mixed and ignited, which disabled one of the five first-stage engines. We analyzed the cause of the anomaly and implemented certain design changes to avoid having this issue in future. On November 20, 2021, we launched launch vehicle LV0007 into orbit at an inclination of 86.0 degrees, an altitude of 500 km and velocity of 7.61 km/s, making Astra one of the fastest privately-funded U.S. company to successfully demonstrated the orbital placement of a test payload. Astra achieved this goal in approximately five years from inception. We commenced paid commercial launch services in 2022 and on February 10, 2022, Astra launched launch vehicle LV0008. After a nominal first stage flight, the payload fairing did not fully deploy prior to the upper stage ignition due to an electrical issue which, together with a software issue, resulted in the upper stage not reaching orbit and the end of the mission. Through our investigation process, we identified and have since corrected the issues that caused the error in the payload fairing’s deployment and addressed the software issue. On March 15, 2022, we conducted an orbital launch for three customers of Spaceflight, Inc. and confirmed our first delivery of customer payloads into Earth orbit. To conduct our launches, we are required to receive commercial space transportation licenses from the FAA. Any delays in commencing our commercial launch operations, including due to delays or cost overruns in obtaining FAA licenses or other regulatory approvals for future versions of our launch vehicles or at future spaceports, could adversely impact our results and growth plans.
Lowering Manufacturing Costs and Increasing Payloads
We aim to be a cost-efficient dedicated orbital launch system provider. We plan to increase the maximum payload capacity of our launch vehicle to meet the customer needs and demands through a process of iterative development and improvement. We have invested approximately $35.9 million in our manufacturing facility through December 31, 2021 and we expect the facility will be at full capacity by the end of 2024. Please see the section entitled "Risk Factors" for factors that could affect our ability to realize benefit from investment in our manufacturing facility. While we believe that our estimate is reliable, the development of our manufacturing facility may take longer than planned, including due to delays in obtaining federal and state regulatory approvals of our final construction plans or any changes that are required to be made to those plans. Any delays in our achieving full manufacturing capacity could adversely impact our results and growth plans.
Expand Our Space Services Offerings
We are in the preliminary stages of developing our space services offering (which we previously referred to as "Satellite Services"), providing modular configurable satellite buses for customers, leveraging both in-house and partner-provided subsystem components and in-house design and integration services, as well as operational support of satellites on orbit, to turn-key provision of entire constellations, offering "concept to constellation" in months instead of years. Specifically, our space services encompass all aspects of hosted satellite and constellation services, including hosting customer payloads onto our satellites, and delivering services, such as communication services. These services are expected to allow customers to focus on developing innovative payloads rather than having to design or develop complete satellite buses or satellites or constellations, which we will provide, along with ancillary services that are likely to include telemetry, tracking and control ("TT&C"), communications, processing, as well as software development and maintenance.
On November 4, 2021, we filed an application with the FCC, under which we requested authority to launch and operate a non-geostationary orbit satellite system using V-band frequencies (the "Constellation") as we work to build out our space services offering to enable communications.
We expect to make significant investments in our space services programs. Although we believe that our financial resources, including the proceeds of the Business Combination and the related private placement, will be sufficient to meet our capital needs for at least 23 months from December 31, 2021, our timeline and budgeted costs for these offerings are subject to substantial uncertainty, including due to compliance requirements of U.S. federal export control laws and applicable foreign and local regulations, the impact of political and economic conditions, and, particularly in the case of our anticipated Spaceport offering, the need to identify opportunities and negotiate long-term agreements with customers for these services, among other factors. Please see the section entitled “Risk Factors”.
Key Components of Results of Operations
We are an early-stage company and our historical results may not be indicative of our future results for reasons that may be difficult to anticipate. Accordingly, the drivers of our future financial results, as well as the components of such results, may not be comparable to our historical or future results of operations.
Revenues
We have not generated any revenue as of December 31, 2021, as we were a developmental stage company until our first paid commercial launch, which occurred in February 2022. Following the commercial launch of our services, we expect to generate a significant portion of our revenues in launch services from delivering payloads into orbit. We also expect to generate revenues by delivering space products and space services to our customers in the future. Over time, we expect space services to grow more quickly and to represent a significant portion of our revenues after 2025.
Expenses
Research and Development Expense
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of internal and external expenses incurred in connection with our research activities and development programs. These expenses include, but are not limited to, development supplies, testing materials, personnel and personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense), depreciation expense, overhead allocation (consisting of various support and facility costs) and consulting fees. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
We allocate research and development costs by function rather than by project, as a significant majority of our historical research and development spending was related to the initial development and testing of our underlying technology, including preparation for multiple test launches.
Our current primary research and development objectives focus on the development and finalization of our offerings. The successful development of these offerings involves many uncertainties, including:
•timing in finalizing launch and space systems design and specifications;
•successful completion of analyses and ground test programs to validate that new or changed designs perform as expected;
•successful completion of flight test programs, including flight safety tests;
•our ability to obtain additional applicable approvals, licenses or certifications from regulatory agencies, if required, and maintaining current approvals, licenses or certifications;
•performance of our manufacturing facilities despite risks that disrupt productions, such as natural disasters and hazardous materials;
•performance of a limited number of suppliers for certain raw materials and components;
•performance of our third-party contractors that support our research and development activities;
•our ability to maintain rights from third parties for intellectual properties critical to research and development activities; and
•our ability to continue funding and maintain our current research and development activities.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables could delay the development of our launch and space systems, which in turn could impact the timing of commercialization of our offerings.
As we are developing and building our launch services, we have expensed all research and development costs associated with developing and building our launch services offering. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in the short-term as we invest in improving and further reducing the costs of our launch system as well as developing and improving our space services offering.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel and personnel-related expenses (including stock-based compensation) for our business development team as well as advertising and marketing expenses. We expect to increase our sales and marketing activities in order to grow our customer base and increase market share. We also expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase over time as we continue to hire additional personnel to scale the business. We began incurring sales and marketing expenses in 2021.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense) for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, corporate development and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees, professional fees paid for accounting, auditing, consulting, tax, and investor relations services, insurance costs, and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses and costs associated with compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and the stock exchange.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
Our income tax provision consists of an estimate for U.S. federal and state income taxes based on enacted rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in the tax law. We maintain a valuation allowance against the full value of our U.S. and state net deferred tax assets because we believe the recoverability of the tax assets is not more likely than not.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net primarily consists of gain on change in fair value of Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants, fair value contingent consideration, mark to market derivate liability related to convertible notes and forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") Note and income from government research and development contracts.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. Preparation of the financial statements requires our management to make a number of judgments, estimates and assumptions relating to the reported amount of expenses, assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We consider an accounting judgment, estimate or assumption to be critical when (1) the estimate or assumption is complex in nature or requires a high degree of judgment and (2) the use of different judgments, estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our critical accounting estimates are described below.
Business Combination
Accounting for business combinations requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, for intangible assets, contractual obligations assumed, pre-acquisition contingencies, and contingent consideration, where applicable. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, they are based, in part, on historical experience and information obtained from management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from product sales, revenue growth rate, technology royalty rate, expected life of the technology acquired, customer retention rate and discount rates. Critical estimates in valuing contingent consideration include, but are not limited to, forecasted revenues from new customers including probabilities of achieving it and discount rates. The discount rates used to discount expected future cash flows to present value are typically derived from a weighted-average cost of capital analysis and adjusted to reflect inherent risks. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect either the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. As of December 31, 2021, we have recorded a contingent consideration liability of $13.7 million based on assumptions and estimates which we believe are reasonable and appropriate. However, any changes in actual revenues as compared to forecasted revenues from new customers could have a significant impact on contingent consideration liability and could result in a maximum payout of up to $75 million.
Valuation of goodwill and long-lived asset
We perform an annual impairment review of our goodwill during the fourth fiscal quarter of each year, and more frequently if we believe indicators of impairment exist. The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill is highly subjective and requires significant judgment. To review for impairment, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether events or circumstances lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Our qualitative assessment of the recoverability of goodwill, whether performed annually or based on specific events or circumstances, considers various macroeconomic, industry-specific and company-specific factors. Those factors include: (i) severe adverse industry or economic trends; (ii) significant company-specific actions; (iii) current, historical or projected deterioration of our financial performance; or (iv) a sustained decrease in our market capitalization below our net book value. After assessing the totality of events and circumstances, if we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, no further assessment is performed. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units is less than its carrying amount, we calculate the fair value of that reporting unit and compare the fair value to the reporting unit’s net book value. If the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its net book value, there is no impairment. Otherwise, we record a goodwill impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value up to the amount of the goodwill. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. As of December 31, 2021, no impairment of goodwill is identified based on our qualitative assessment of the recoverability of goodwill.
We assess the impairment of long-lived assets including indefinite life intangible asset, definite life intangible asset and property, plant and equipment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important which could trigger an impairment review include (i) significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results, (ii) significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business, or (iii) significant negative industry or economic trends. The process of evaluating the potential impairment of long-lived assets under the accounting guidance is also highly subjective and requires significant judgment. In order to estimate the fair value of long-lived assets, we typically make various assumptions about the future prospects of our business and consider market factors to estimate future cash flows to be generated by the business, which requires significant judgment as it is based on assumptions about market demand for our services and products over a number of future years. Based on these assumptions and estimates, we determine whether we need to take an impairment charge to reduce the value of the long-lived asset stated on our consolidated balance sheets to reflect its estimated fair value. Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors including external factors, industry and economic trends, and internal factors, such as changes in our business strategy and our internal forecasts. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made have been reasonable and appropriate, changes in assumptions and estimates could materially impact our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Astra adopted the requirements of the new revenue recognition standard, known as ASC 606, effective January 1, 2020, utilizing the modified retrospective method. Revenue for launch services and space products is recognized at a point in time when the Company has delivered the promised services or products to customers.
At contract inception, an assessment of the goods and services promised in the contracts with customers is expected to be performed and a performance obligation is identified for each distinct promise to transfer to the customer a good or service (or bundle of goods or services). To identify the performance obligations, the Company considers all the goods or services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices.
The transaction price will be defined as the amount of consideration in a contract to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer, which is a fixed price stated in the contract. When a contract involves multiple launches or products, the Company accounts for each launch or product as a separate performance obligation, because the customer can benefit from each launch or product on its own or with other readily available resources and the launch or product is separately identifiable. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on an estimated relative standalone selling price basis. The Company’s process to estimate standalone selling prices involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors such as prices charged for similar goods and services and the Company’s ongoing pricing strategy and policies.
Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition.
Stock-Based Compensation
We use the fair value method of accounting for our stock-based awards granted to employees to measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for the stock-based awards. We recognize compensation expense for time-based restricted stock units (“RSUs”) over the requisite service period based on the fair value of RSUs on the date of grant. The fair value of RSUs is the closing market price of Astra common stock on the date of grant. We recognize compensation expense for time-based stock options and employee stock purchase plan, based on the estimated grant-date fair value determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model
over the requisite service period. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires inputs that are subjective and require significant judgement and is impacted by the following assumptions:
•Expected Term - We use the midpoint between the vesting term and the original contractual term (contractual period to exercise). If the option contains graded vesting, then the vesting term is based on the vesting pattern.
•Expected Volatility - The volatility is based on a benchmark of comparable companies.
•Expected Dividend Yield - The dividend rate used is zero as we have never paid any cash dividends on common stock and do not anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate - The interest rates used are based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent remaining term equal to the expected life of the award.
Certain stock options include service, market and performance conditions ("Performance-based stock options"). The fair value of performance-based stock options is estimated on the date of grant using the Monte Carlo simulation model. Certain RSUs also include service and performance conditions "(Performance-based Units"). The fair value of performance-based units is the closing market price of Astra common stock on the date of grant. Awards that include performance conditions are assessed at the end of each reporting period whether those performance conditions are met or probable of being met and involves significant judgement. For performance-based stock options, stock-based compensation expense associated with each tranche is recognized over the longer of (i) the expected achievement period for the operational milestone for such tranche and (ii) the expected achievement period for the related share price milestone determined on the grant date, beginning at the point in time when the relevant operational milestone is considered probable of being achieved. If such operational milestone becomes probable any time after the grant date, we will recognize a cumulative catch-up expense from the grant date to that point in time. If the related share price milestone is achieved earlier than its expected achievement period and the achievement of the related operational milestone, then the stock-based compensation expense will be recognized over the expected achievement period for the operational milestone, which may accelerate the rate at which such expense is recognized. For performance-based units, stock-based compensation expense associated with each tranche is recognized over the longer of the expected performance achievement period of individual performance milestones and the implicit service period when the achievement of each individual performance milestone becomes probable.
We reverse previously recognized costs for unvested stock-based awards in the period that forfeitures occur.
Income Taxes
We follow the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under ASC 740, Income Taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between consolidated financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
We determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination. If it is not more likely than not that a position will be sustained, no amount of benefit attributable to the position is recognized. The tax benefit to be recognized for any tax position that meets the more likely than not recognition threshold is calculated as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon resolution of the contingency. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which judgment occurs.
Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes as a component of the provision for income taxes. To date, there have been no interest or penalties recorded in relation to unrecognized tax benefits.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
____________
n.m. = not meaningful.
Research and Development
Research and development costs were $80.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $27.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $52.9 million increase mainly reflected a $25.5 million increase in personnel-related costs and recruiting expenses for personnel in research and development departments due to an increase headcount, a $12.9 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, a $6.7 million inventory net realizable value write downs, a $3.0 million increase in technology licensed and software subscription licenses related expenses, a $2.9 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense and a $2.2 million increase in research and development materials expense with the remainder due to changes in other research and development expenses. These increases were to support our product roadmap and launch services.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and Marketing expenses were $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. There were no sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as the Company was primarily focused on research and development activities. The sales and marketing expenses primarily consists of personnel-related costs and consulting charges and increased mainly due to increased headcount.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $74.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $46.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $28.8 million increase was primarily due to a $12.0 million increase in employee costs due to increased headcount, a $6.2 million increase from transaction costs incurred and expensed by the Company in relation to the Business Combination and Apollo Merger, a $5.9 million increase in third-party consulting and recruitment costs due to the increased hiring, a $4.8 million increase in accounting, audit and legal related fees, a $3.7 million increase in insurance related expenses which is partially offset by a decrease in stock based compensation of $5.3 million, with the remainder due to changes in facilities costs, IT equipment fees, and software subscription fees.
Interest (Expense) Income, Net
Interest expense, net was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $4.5 million decrease in interest expense was primarily due to the settlement of convertible notes on January 28, 2021, therefore we incurred $0.5 million and $5.3 million interest expense related to convertible notes for year ended December 31,
2021 and 2020, respectively, offset by an increase of $0.3 million in interest expense related to the Bridge Loan and the SVB loan for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net was $36.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $25.2 million increase in other income was primarily due to a $25.7 million in gain on change in fair value of Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants, a $4.9 million in gain on the forgiveness of PPP Note and a $4.7 million in gain on change in fair value of contingent consideration. This is partially offset by a decrease of $8.2 million in income from a gain on the mark-to-market derivative liability related to convertible notes, a decrease of $1.2 million in income from government’s research and development contracts and $0.8 million due to a nonrecurring payment to one of our investors.
Loss on Extinguishment of Convertible Notes
Loss on extinguishment of convertible notes of $131.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the settlement of convertible notes on January 28, 2021. There was no such loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Convertible Notes Attributable to Related Parties
Loss on extinguishment of convertible notes attributable to related parties of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the settlement of convertible notes attributable to related parties on January 28, 2021. There was no such loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
We recorded an income tax benefit of $0.4 million as the result of the Apollo Merger for the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not incur income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Adjustment to redemption value on Convertible Preferred Stock
Adjustment to redemption value on Convertible Preferred Stock of $1,011.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, was due to the re-measurement of Convertible Preferred Stock to its redemption value due to the likelihood of a redemption event becoming probable. There was no such adjustment for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
The following section discusses our principal liquidity and capital resources as well as our primary liquidity requirements and uses of cash. Our cash and cash equivalents are maintained in highly liquid investments with remaining maturities of 90 days or less at the time of purchase. We believe our cash equivalents are liquid and accessible.
Our primary sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2021 consisted of $325.0 million in cash and cash equivalents (compared to $10.6 million as of December 31, 2020) and cash we expect to generate from operations. In addition, we may also generate cash from debt or equity financing from time to time. We had no debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021 (compared to $71.1 million as of December 31, 2020, of which $59.8 million represented outstanding principal on the Company’s convertible notes). On January 28, 2021, we settled the outstanding convertible notes into convertible preferred shares as part of the Company's Series C financing, from which we also received $30.0 million in cash proceeds. In June 2021, we closed the Business Combination and related private placement, from which we received $463.6 million in net cash proceeds.
We measure liquidity in terms of our ability to fund the cash requirements of our research and development activities and our current business operations, including our capital expenditure needs, contractual obligations and other commitments. Our current liquidity needs relate to research and development activities, mainly in connection with the ongoing development of our technology, lease obligations and capital expenditures, which primarily relate to the development of our manufacturing facility.
We believe our expected future operating cash flows, together with our cash and cash equivalents, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for a period of at least twelve months from the date of this Annual Report. We expect a decrease in capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2022 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2021. For additional information regarding our cash requirements from contractual obligations and lease obligations, see Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies and Note 10 - Leases in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the periods presented below:
Cash Flows used in Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by our cash investments to support the growth of our business in areas such as research and development and general and administrative and working capital. Our operating cash inflows include cash from milestone billing under certain launch services contracts. These cash inflows are offset by our payments to suppliers for production materials and parts used in our manufacturing process as we ramp up our production, payments to our employees and other operating expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $114.4 million. The primary factors affecting the Company’s operating cash flows during the period were net loss of $257.8 million, gain of $25.7 million due to change in fair value of warrant liability, gain of $4.9 million due to forgiveness of PPP Note, gain of $4.7 million due to change in fair value of contingent consideration and deferred income tax benefit of $0.4 million. This offset by non-cash charges including a non-cash loss on extinguishment of convertible notes of $133.8 million, stock-based compensation expense of $39.7 million, inventory net realizable value write downs of $6.7 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $5.3 million, non-cash lease expense of $1.1 million and amortization of convertible note debt discounts of $0.4 million. Changes in operating working capital items is mainly due to increased headcount and ramp-up of our production and primarily reflect the increase in trade accounts receivable of $1.8 million, inventories of $12.9 million, prepaid and other current assets of $11.0 million, other non-current assets of $0.6 million, accounts payable of $1.3 million and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $18.8 million. Changes in operating working capital items was partially offset by a decrease in lease liabilities of $1.2 million and other non-current liabilities of $0.8 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $32.8 million, which was comprised of net loss of $68.3 million and a non-cash gain on mark to market derivatives of $8.1 million, offset by non-cash charges including stock-based compensation expense of $32.2 million, depreciation expense of $3.3 million, and amortization of convertible note debt discounts of $4.5 million. Changes in operating working capital items primarily reflect the increase in inventories of $0.6 million and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $3.7 million. This is partially offset by decrease in prepaid and other current assets of $0.3 million and other non-current assets of $0.3 million.
Cash Flows used in Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $61.1 million, which was comprised mainly of cash paid as purchase price consideration for the acquisition of Apollo Fusion, Inc., net of cash acquired of $19.4 million, acquisition of an indefinite-lived intangible trademark asset of $3.4 million and purchases of property, plant and equipment of $38.3 million mainly related to the construction of our manufacturing facility.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $2.2 million, which was comprised of purchases of property, plant and equipment of $2.2 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities amounted to $489.8 million and consisted primarily of proceeds from the Business Combination and private offering, net of transaction costs, of $463.6 million, issuance of Series C of $30.0 million, borrowings of $10.0 million, issuance of stock under equity plans of $2.0 million and employee stock purchase plan of $0.8 million, offset by repayments on borrowings of $16.4 million and settlement of Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants of $0.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities amounted to $35.1 million and consisted primarily of proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes of $31.0 million, borrowings of $5.4 million and issuance of stock under equity plan of $0.9 million, partially offset by repayments on borrowings of $2.1 million.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We are a party to operating leases primarily for land and buildings (e.g., office buildings, manufacturing and testing facilities and spaceport) and certain equipment (e.g., copiers) under non-cancellable operating leases. The following table summarizes our lease commitments as of December 31, 2021:
On May 25, 2021, the Company entered a contract with a supplier to purchase components. The Company is obligated to purchase $22.5 million of components over 60 months. The Company may terminate the supply agreement by paying 50% of the remaining purchase commitment at any point during the contract term. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company made total purchases of $0.4 million.
Apart from the aforementioned leases and purchase commitments, we do not have any other material contractual obligations, commitments or contingent obligations.
Compliance With Continued Listing Standards of NASDAQ Global Select Market ("Nasdaq")
In conjunction with preparing this annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 (the “Annual Report”), we recently became aware that at the end of 2021 our filer status changed from non-accelerated filer to large accelerated filer. As a result of this change in status, this Annual Report was due to be filed on March 1, 2022 rather than on March 31, 2022. Under the Nasdaq listing standards, we are required to file our reports timely with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This report was filed late.
Our filing status is based on our public float as of June 30, 2021, which was also the effective date of the closing of the Business Combination. At the time of the closing of the Business Combination, our filing status was determined to be a non-accelerated filer, and we incorrectly believed that our status as a non-accelerated filer, based on our public float, did not need to be remeasured until June 30, 2022. We were required to recalculate our public float as of June 30, 2021, and our public float as of that date makes us a large accelerated filer, rather than a non-accelerated filer as we had previously believed.
When we discovered the change in our filing status, we promptly notified Nasdaq.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information about recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted, including the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one yet, of their potential impact on our financial condition and our results of operations.