Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A - Risk Factors, for a discussion of factors that could cause our future financial condition and results of operations to be materially different from those discussed below. Unless otherwise indicated, all references to “dollars” and “$” in this Annual Report are to, and all monetary amounts in this Annual Report are presented in, U.S. dollars.
Overview
We are an innovative satellite designer and manufacturer. We operate from six locations that include our corporate headquarters and 185,000 square foot satellite assembly, integrating and testing facilities in Texas, and engineering and development locations in Maryland, Spain, the United Kingdom, and Israel. Also, our 51% owned and controlled subsidiary, Nano, is headquartered in Lithuania.
We and our global partners are building what we believe is the first space-based cellular broadband network designed to be accessible by standard mobile phones. Our SpaceMobile Service is expected to provide cost-effective, high-speed mobile broadband services with global coverage to all end-users, regardless of where they live or work, without the need to purchase special equipment. We believe the SpaceMobile Service would be the first global direct mobile broadband network using LEO satellites to provide connectivity to any standard, unmodified, off-the-shelf mobile phone or 2G/3G/4G LTE/5G and IoT-enabled device. We intend to partner with MNOs to offer the SpaceMobile Service to the MNOs’ end-user customers. Our vision is that users will not need to subscribe to the SpaceMobile Service directly with us, nor will they need to purchase any new or additional equipment. Instead, users will be able to access the SpaceMobile Service when prompted on their mobile device that they are no longer within range of the land-based facilities of the MNO operator or will be able to purchase a plan directly with their existing mobile provider.
The SpaceMobile Service currently is planned to be provided through a network of 168 high-powered, large phased-array satellites in LEO. The worldwide mobile traffic will be directed by the SpaceMobile constellation to terrestrial gateways via high throughput Q/V-band links and then directed to the in-country MNO’s core cellular network infrastructure, located at our dedicated gateways. Our intent is that users will be able to connect to the SpaceMobile Service as if they were using a local cell tower, with less communication delay effects than existing geostationary satellite communication systems experience.
On April 1, 2019, we launched our first test satellite, BW1, which was used to validate our satellite to cellular architecture and was capable of managing communications delays from LEO orbit and the effects of doppler in a satellite to ground cellular environment using the 4G-LTE protocol. We are currently completing the assembly and testing our BW3 test satellite. The BW3 test satellite has an aperture of 693 square feet and is designed to communicate directly with mobile phones via 3GPP standard frequencies. The BW3 test satellite currently is targeted to launch in the Summer of 2022 on a SpaceX’s Falcon 9 vehicle. Through December 31, 2021 and as of the date hereof, we have incurred approximately $67.6 million and $80.7 million of capitalized costs (including launch cost and non-recurring engineering costs) relating to the BW3 test satellite, respectively. The BW3 test satellite is substantially complete and we do not expect to incur material costs in future periods relating to the BW3 test satellite.
We are also currently developing and designing our constellation of BB satellites. We currently plan to begin launching the first commercial BB satellites in 2023 and expect this to continue through 2025. We currently plan to achieve substantial global mobile coverage after the launch of a total of 110 satellites by the end of 2024 and MIMO capabilities during 2025 after the launch of a total of 168 satellites. Our current plan is subject to numerous uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, including, satisfactory and timely completion of assembly and testing of the satellites, availability of launch windows by the launch providers, proposed orbits and resulting satellite coverage, launch costs, ability to enter into agreements with MNOs, regulatory approvals, and other factors. Accordingly, we may adopt a deployment strategy that may differ materially from our current plan.
We are currently industrializing the assembly, integration, and testing processes for the future production of the BB satellites. We are making the necessary capital investments in the AIT facility in Texas. We are hiring, and expect to continue hiring, assembly, integration, and testing employees necessary for the production of the BB satellites and engineers that will be required to test and integrate the BB satellites. Also, we are continuing to implement and integrate various systems, such as product lifecycle management, manufacturing execution system, enterprise resource planning system, and other systems required to industrialize the manufacturing processes of the BB satellites. We are also actively engaged with the third-party vendors to secure supply of components and materials for production of the BB satellites. Furthermore, we are continuing to expand our R&D efforts for the development of electronics required for BB satellites and cellular and ground infrastructure and gateways.
We are an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies. Please refer to the Item 1A - Risk Factors for a description of such risks.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting impact on all aspects of our business across geographies, including how it has and may continue to impact our workforce, suppliers and vendors. We have implemented business continuity plans designed to address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business, research and development efforts and the value of our equity, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence at this time. To date, the pandemic has not had a material impact to our technology development efforts or results of our operations. However, given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the global responses to curb its spread, we are not able to estimate the future effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Our Future Results of Operations to Our Historical Results of Operations
The consolidated assets, liabilities and results of operations for the fiscal year 2020 and for the period from January 1, 2021 up to April 6, 2021, the date of the Business Combination, are those of our accounting predecessor, AST LLC. After the Business Combination, upon obtaining additional funding of $416.9 million, we significantly expanded research and development initiatives, made significant progress on the BW3 test satellite and design of the BB satellites, increased the headcount of employees and consultants, and expanded our operations, including by purchasing a new 100,000 square foot facility in Texas to supplement our existing manufacturing capacity. All of these factors contributed to a significant increase in related operating and capital expenditures during 2021. Also, in connection with the Business Combination, we issued warrants which are recorded at fair value in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. The change in fair value of warrants was recognized as a gain or loss in the consolidated statement of operations.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
To date, we have not generated any revenues from our SpaceMobile Service. Our 51% owned subsidiary, Nano, generates revenue from the development and manufacture of satellite technology, and ancillary sales and services globally. Nano also sells individual satellite parts, subsystems, and software to be configured to customers’ satellites, and enters into “rideshare” type agreements whereby Nano provides hosted payload services using customers’ payloads integrated with Nano-owned satellite buses for scheduled launches. Accordingly, all revenue recognition presented herein exclusively relates to Nano’s sales of goods and services.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the purchase price of various products used and services performed to execute Nano’s sales contracts. Cost of sales also includes operational costs to fulfil Nano customer orders, including costs for Nano employees and overhead.
Engineering Services
Engineering costs are charged to expense as incurred. Engineering costs consist primarily of the expenses associated with our ongoing engineering efforts related to integration, testing, and development of our satellites, as well as the cost of internal staff (such as engineers and consultants) to support these efforts and general expenses related to engineering centers.
General and Administrative Costs
General and administrative costs include the costs of insurance, cost of non-engineering personnel and personnel related expenses such as recruiting and travel and lodging expenses, software licensing and subscriptions, office and facilities expenses, investor relations, and professional services, including public relations, accounting and legal fees.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development (“R&D”) costs consist principally of non-recurring development activities in which we typically engage third-party vendors. Currently, major R&D activities include engaging with vendors to help design and develop the
electronic componentry, software, and mechanical deployment systems to be used in the BB satellites and in connection with the planned SpaceMobile service.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense includes amounts related to property and equipment as well as definite lived intangible assets. Once the BW3 test satellite is completed and successfully launched, we expect a significant portion of our depreciation expense to relate to the depreciation of this asset, given its assigned useful life is two years.
Gain (Loss) on Remeasurement of Warrant Liabilities
Public and private warrants issued by us are accounted for as liability-classified instruments at their initial fair value on the date of issuance. They are remeasured on each balance sheet date and changes in the estimated fair value are recognized as an unrealized gain or loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Other Income, Net
Other income consists of interest earned on cash and cash equivalents held by us in interest bearing demand deposit accounts, net of any interest expense, as well as miscellaneous non-operating items, including foreign exchange gains or losses.
Income Tax Expense
As a result of the Business Combination, we own an equity interest in AST LLC in what is commonly referred to as an “Up-C” structure. AST LLC is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes. Also, we have a controlling ownership interest in Nano, a Lithuanian subsidiary, that is subject to foreign income taxes and is also treated as a partnership for U.S. federal and state and local taxes. Accordingly, for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes, all income, losses, and other tax attributes pass through to the members’ income tax returns, and no U.S. federal and state and local provision for income taxes has been recorded for these entities in the consolidated financial statements. Certain foreign wholly-owned entities are taxed as corporations in the jurisdictions in which they operate, and accruals for such taxes are included in the consolidated financial statements.
We recorded net deferred tax assets of $72.4 million as of December 31, 2021 primarily related to the difference between the book value and tax basis of our investment in AST LLC, and net operating loss carryforwards. We have assessed the realizability of our deferred tax assets and in that analysis have considered the relevant positive and negative evidence available to determine whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. As a result, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets.
Noncontrolling Interest
Noncontrolling interest primarily represents the equity interest in AST LLC held by the Existing Equityholders other than us. As of December 31, 2021, the Existing Equityholders’ equity ownership percentage in AST LLC was approximately 72%. Also, noncontrolling interest includes the equity interests in our subsidiaries, Nano Lithuania and Nano US, held by equityholders other than us. As of December 31, 2021, the noncontrolling interests in Nano Lithuania and Nano US was approximately 49%. We attribute a portion of net income or loss generated at AST LLC, Nano Lithuania, and Nano US to the noncontrolling interests based on their ownership interests.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth a summary of our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands) and the discussion that follows compares the year ended December 31, 2021, to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues
Total revenues increased by $6.4 million, or 108%, to $12.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $5.2 million was attributable to Nano sales contracts entered into during the year ended December 31, 2021, including contracts with new customers. The remaining $1.2 million increase was attributable to the completion of performance obligations associated with existing Nano customer contracts.
Cost of Sales
Total cost of sales increased by $4.5 million, or 150%, to $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of sales was primarily attributable to increased production and services under new and existing Nano sales contracts during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Engineering Services
Total engineering services increased by $16.5 million, or 126%, to $29.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $14.2 million increase in headcount of engineers and a $1.1 million increase in consultant costs. The costs related to recurrent engineers and consultants are expensed as engineering services. The remaining change relates to a $1.2 million increase in general expenses at engineering centers to support the engineering efforts related to the integration, testing, and development of our satellites. Engineering expenses are expected to continue to increase in the near term as we hire additional engineers and third parties in our development of the SpaceMobile Service.
General and Administrative Costs
Total general and administrative costs increased by $23.3 million, or 189%, to $35.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased professional fees, employee and consultant related expenses, insurance costs, and office related costs. The $7.6 million increase in professional service fees was attributable to the increase in legal, tax, and accounting services provided as we transitioned to a public company. The $5.8 million increase in employee and consultant-related expenses, such as salaries and recruiting fees, was attributable to the increase in headcount as we expanded operations. The $4.1 million increase in insurance costs was attributable to increased insurance needs, including related to D&O insurance, intellectual property insurance and insurance coverage for our expanded facilities. The $4.0 million increase in office-related costs was primarily attributable to increased costs for repairs and maintenance at our existing facility in Texas, headcount-driven increases in office supplies, software costs, and increased rent. The remaining $2.0 million increase in general and administrative costs was attributable to miscellaneous expenses, including licensing costs and travel costs.
Research and Development Costs
Total research and development costs increased by $22.4 million, or 2218%, to $23.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to third-party development efforts relating to the BB satellites to be used in the SpaceMobile constellation, which began to increase substantially during the second quarter of 2021. Prior-year operations primarily related to constructing the BW3 test satellite, and therefore research and development efforts were limited during the year ended December 31, 2020. Research and development costs are expected to continue to increase in future periods until the design and development of the BB satellite constellation is completed.
Depreciation and Amortization
Total depreciation and amortization expense increased by $2.0 million, or 228%, to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the purchase of additional fixed assets and leasehold improvements during the period. Depreciation expense is expected to increase significantly once the BW3 test satellite is completed and successfully launched given its assigned useful life of two years.
Changes in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Total changes in fair value of warrant liabilities was $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to zero in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to the unrealized gain on the change in the fair value of the warrant liabilities of $15.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not have a similar change in the fair value of the warrant liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2020, which only includes the consolidated financial results of AST LLC, as the warrant liabilities were not recorded until the Business Combination in the second quarter of 2021.
Other Income (Expense), net
Total other income (expense), net was $(2.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to near zero in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in other expenses was primarily attributable to a $2.7 million write-off of deposits for launch services with an entity headquartered in Russia, that we do not expect to be able to utilize for satellite launches in the foreseeable future or obtain a refund as a result of recent sanctions imposed by the U.S. government on Russian business entities. This was offset by non-operating income from a third-party contract executed during the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not have similar income and expense during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Noncontrolling Interest
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest was $42.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $0.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in net loss correlates with the increase in net loss generated at AST LLC given the noncontrolling interest represents a portion of such net loss.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We require capital to fund our operating expenses and to make capital expenditures. We expect our capital requirements to increase as our operations expand. As of December 31, 2021, we had $324.5 million of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash on hand. We believe our cash on hand is sufficient to meet our current working capital needs and planned capital expenditure for a period of at least 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The design, manufacture, integration, testing, assembly and launch of satellites and related components and related ground infrastructure is a capital-intensive venture. We currently estimate the capital asset investments required for the manufacture and launch of the first 20 BB satellites to be between approximately $260.0 million and $300.0 million, which is expected to be incurred during 2022 and 2023. Assuming we are able to execute on our current planned timeframe, we estimate the capital asset investments required for the manufacture and launch of the planned constellation, including the 168 satellites we currently anticipate are required to reach substantial global mobile coverage with MIMO capabilities, to be approximately $1.9 billion, expected to be incurred through 2025.
We also have contractual obligations, including non-cancellable operating leases for office space, with terms expiring through February 2028. Rent expense from our operating leases was $1.0 million and $0.3 million for the fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively, included in general and administrative expense on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Future minimum annual rental payments required under these operating lease agreements as of December 31, 2021 is presented within the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements (Note 6), included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Also, as of December 31, 2021, we had contractual commitments with third parties in the aggregate amount of $27.0 million related to R&D programs, capital improvements, and procurement of BB satellite components, whereby we expect to pay approximately $12.9 million during 2022 and $14.1 million during 2023, through cash and cash equivalents on hand. These commitments will continue to increase as we complete the supply chain and electronics development in preparation for the production and launch of the BB satellites.
Our cash used in operating activities, which was $80.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, is expected to increase during 2023 and 2024 until after we begin to generate revenue from the SpaceMobile Service. These increases in cash used in operating activities is expected to result from 1) hiring the required employees to complete the manufacture, assembly, integration and testing of the BB satellites, 2) additional general and administrative costs relating to the operation of a growing public company (legal, tax, and accounting fees, D&O and other insurance, software licenses and subscriptions, etc.) and the related increase in the number of corporate employees, 3) expenses relating to the negotiation and procurement activities relating to the design and procurement required for the BB satellites and efforts related to the required regulatory approvals, and 4) third-party research and development efforts relating to the development and design elements of the BB satellites. We believe we have sufficient capital to fund planned operations and capital investments for at least 12 months from the date hereof. The capital asset investments required to complete the SpaceMobile constellation and related operating costs are preliminary estimates. As we complete the design, development, componentry and progress with procurement, assembly, integration and testing of the BB satellites, our estimates may be subject to change and actual costs may be materially greater than our current estimates. We intend to seek to raise additional capital prior to the commercial launch of the SpaceMobile Service. Also, we will need to raise additional capital to continue to fund our operations and to develop and launch satellites required to provide substantial global mobile coverage of the SpaceMobile Service. We expect to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity, equity related or debt securities, or through obtaining credit from government or financial institutions or commercial partners. This capital will be necessary to fund ongoing operations, continue research, development and design efforts, improve infrastructure, and launch satellites. We cannot be certain that additional funds will be available to us on favorable terms if required, or at all. If we cannot raise additional funds when needed, our financial condition, results of operations, business and prospects will be materially adversely affected.
Long-term debt
In December 2021, concurrent with the purchase of real property and equipment in Midland, Texas, our wholly owned subsidiary, AST & Science Texas, LLC (the "Subsidiary"), entered into a new credit agreement providing for a $5.0 million term loan secured by the property. Borrowings under the term loan bear interest at a fixed rate equal to 4.20% per annum until December 7, 2026, and from December 8, 2026 until December 8, 2028 at a fixed rate per annum equal to 4.20% subject to adjustment if the index rate as defined in the credit agreement is greater than 4.20%. See the notes to the consolidated financial statements (Note 9) contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
In connection with the term loan, we deposited into a reserve account $2.8 million of restricted cash that may be used only for the purposes of funding capital improvements related to the AIT facility located in Midland, Texas. Under any event of default, the lender will have the right to offset against this account any past due payments, indebtedness or charges owed by us.
The credit agreement contains certain customary events of default, and certain covenants that limit our Subsidiary's ability to, among other things, create liens on collateral, consolidate, merge, sell, or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of their assets; and enter into certain transactions with their affiliates. If our Subsidiary fails to perform its obligations under these and other covenants, or should any event of default occur, the term loan may be terminated and any outstanding borrowings, together with unpaid accrued interest, could be declared immediately due and payable, and the lender will be authorized to take possession of the collateral.
Nano Business Credit Agreement
On December 8, 2021, our subsidiary, Nano, entered into an agreement with AB SEB Bank (the "Lender") pursuant to which the Lender agreed to provide up to $0.4 million to fund certain capital expenditures. Nano may use this facility to fund up to 70% of certain capital expenditures on an as-invoiced basis through March 2022, at which time outstanding principal and interest will be due and payable in monthly installments commencing on March 31, 2022 and continuing until December 6, 2025. Borrowings under the agreement bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the EURIBOR plus 3.00%. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance was approximately $49,000, which is classified within Accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See the notes to the consolidated financial statements (Note 9) contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Cash Flows
Historical Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating activities
Cash used in operating activities was $80.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to cash used in operating activities of $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $57.3 million increase in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was attributable to increased operating expenditures related to increased headcount as our operations expanded, increased satellite technology development efforts, and an increase in professional fees related to being a public company.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities was $54.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to cash used in investing activities of $30.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $24.4 million increase in cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was attributable to a $17.5 million increase in cash used for BW3 satellite construction, as well as a $7.0 million increase in cash used for property and equipment purchases including the new Midland facility, satellite antennas, test equipment, and leasehold improvements.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $416.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to cash provided by financing activities of $69.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $347.2 million increase in cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the $416.9 million of net proceeds from the Business Combination in the second quarter of 2021, compared to $72.1 million of net proceeds received from the issuance of AST LLC Series B Preferred Units during 2020.
Impact of inflation
While inflation may impact our capital and operating expenditure, we believe the effects of inflation, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition have not been significant. However, there can be no assurance that our results of operations and financial condition will not be materially impacted by inflation in the future, including by heightened levels of inflation experienced globally as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic and recent geopolitical conflict.
Funding Requirements
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet anticipated cash requirements for at least 12 months from the date hereof. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could expend capital resources sooner than we expect.
Future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•Seeking and obtaining market access approvals;
•Establishing and maintaining supply and manufacturing relationships with third parties that can provide adequate, in both amount and quality, products and services to support our satellite development;
•Addressing any competing technological and market developments;
•Technological or manufacturing difficulties, design issues or other unforeseen matters;
•Negotiation of launch agreements, launch delays or failures or deployment failures or in-orbit satellite failures; and
•Attracting, hiring, and retaining qualified personnel.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenues to support our cost structure, we expect to finance cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, commercial and other similar arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of stockholders will be, or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through commercial agreements, or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies and/or future revenue streams, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. Also, our ability to raise necessary financing could be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on the market conditions. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market other services even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market these services ourselves or potentially discontinue operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). Preparation of the financial statements requires our management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that impact the reported amount of revenue and expenses, assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We consider an accounting judgment, estimate or assumption to be critical when (1) the estimate or assumption is complex in nature or requires a high degree of judgment and (2) the use of different judgments, estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of the Company’s consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. Our critical accounting policies are described below.
BlueWalker3 Capitalization
We account for research and development costs related to the BW3 test satellite in accordance with ASC 730 - Research and Development (“ASC 730”). We have determined there is an alternative future use for BW3 as defined in this guidance. As such, certain costs related to the construction of the BW3 test satellite are capitalized and reported as construction-in-progress (“CIP”) on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We capitalize only those expenditures and ancillary costs that are directly attributable to the construction phase and necessarily incurred to place BW3 into its intended location and use. To date, capitalized expenditures include the costs for satellite parts, paid launch costs, and other non-recurring costs directly associated with BW3 developments. The other non-recurring costs primarily include third-party engineers who are hired solely for the design and assembly of BW3 and are responsible for the value and progression of the project. The costs for internal, recurrent engineers and consultants are expensed as engineering services and not capitalized to the CIP account on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, as these employees are not directly associated with the development of BW3. Costs incurred that are not directly attributable to the construction phase or necessarily incurred to place BW3 into its intended location and use are recognized as an expense as incurred.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480 - Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815 - Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). Our assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, whether they meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period-end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, they are recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, they are recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance and subject to remeasurement each balance sheet date with changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants to be recognized as a non-cash gain or loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
We assess goodwill for impairment at least annually in the fourth quarter, on a reporting unit basis, or more frequently, when events and circumstances occur indicating that the recorded goodwill may be impaired. We first perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill, a Step 0 analysis, to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. The qualitative impairment analysis consists of evaluating macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, relevant entity-specific events, events affecting a specific reporting unit, and sustained decrease in the share price. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value we perform a quantitative impairment test. This test identifies both the existence of and the amount of goodwill impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value an impairment loss is recognized in amount equal to that excess, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. When performing a quantitative impairment test we make various estimates and assumptions in determining the estimated fair value of the reporting unit, including estimated cash flows and a terminal value, discounted at a rate of return that reflects the relative risk of the cash flows, as well as valuation multiples derived from comparable publicly traded companies that are applied to operating performance of the reporting unit. It is possible that changes in circumstances or changes in management’s judgments, assumptions and estimates could result in an impairment charge of a portion or all of its goodwill.
We performed our annual goodwill impairment test using the qualitative approach for the year ended December 31, 2021 and concluded there was no impairment as of that date. Factors that we considered in determining that it was not more likely than not that the carrying value of our reporting unit exceeded its fair value included the results of the quantitative test performed in fiscal year 2020, our forecasts of future operating performance, market conditions, and other factors. No goodwill impairment charges were recognized for goodwill for the fiscal years 2021 or 2020.
We assess the impairment of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important in the determination of an impairment include significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner that we use the acquired asset and significant negative industry or economic trends.