ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Certain statements in this Report represent forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements include but are not limited to statements regarding our strategy, future operations, financial condition, results of operations, projected costs, and plans and objectives of management. Actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements due to, among others, the risks and uncertainties described in this Report and in our other SEC filings.
We have attempted to identify these forward-looking statements with the words “believes,” “estimates,” “plans,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “may,” “will,” “could,” “should” and other similar expressions. Although these forward-looking statements reflect management’s current plans and expectations, which we believe reasonable as of the filing date of this Report, they inherently are subject to certain risks and uncertainties. Additionally, we are under no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K or to conform such statements to actual results.
OVERVIEW
We are a provider of Human Capital Management (“HCM”) solutions, delivered as software-as-a-service. Our product suite manages the entire employment lifecycle, allowing our clients to better serve their employees by providing the tools necessary to field a human resources department without the traditional overhead costs.
We strive to be the most trusted HCM resource to small and medium-sized businesses (“SMBs”), and are focused on less densely populated U.S. metropolitan cities where fewer of our competitors have a presence. We sell our solutions through both direct and partner models. We supplement our direct sales efforts with partner programs that afford us access to opportunities in various geographic and industry niches. Asure has two types of partners: Reseller Partners that white label our products while providing value-added services to their clients (our indirect clients) and Referral Partners that provide us with SMB leads but do not resell our solutions.
As of December 31, 2021, Asure had more than 80,000 clients, split between approximately 15,000 direct and the remaining 65,000 indirect clients who have contracts with Reseller Partners.
Asure has several forms of revenue that result from our business model:
Software-as-a-service revenue is generated when clients utilize our product suite for their recurring human resource needs-primarily payroll, tax, and garnishment withdrawals and subsequent disbursements. This also contains revenue generated from quarterly and annual reporting requirements to local, state and federal regulatory agencies. Examples include Form W-2 and reporting mandated by the Affordable Care Act (the “ACA”).
Hardware-as-a-service revenue is generated when clients choose not to purchase our hardware, but rather rent the devices. This hardware includes a variety of clocks used to track time and attendance. Hardware revenue is generated when our clients buy our devices outright.
Maintenance and support revenue is generated from servicing our hardware on our clients’ behalf and providing training on how to operate both our hardware and software products.
Professional services revenue is generated from our clients’ needs that would normally be fulfilled by an internal human resources department. This service is delivered in several different packages, from a base level providing the library and documentation necessary to keep a business running, to having Asure carry out the entire human resource needs of our clients. The frequency varies by client-whose needs may be ongoing or merely require a standalone project be completed.
Interest from client funds is generated when we gain possession of funds intended to be disbursed based on the clients’ needs. We invest the monies in short and long-term securities that may be held to maturity before disbursement.
2021 Highlights
•Consolidated revenue of $76,064 for 2021, representing a 16% increase over revenue in 2020
•Paycheck Protection Program loan and accrued interest forgiveness of $8,654
•Employee Retention Tax Credit of $10,533 included in other income
•Departure from our credit revolver with Wells Fargo and signing of a $50,000 credit facility with Structural Capital Investments
•Acquisition of two payroll businesses, partially funded by our new credit facility
•Integration with Employee Navigator, allowing employee data to be kept in sync with our payroll system even if the employee elects to choose a different insurance carrier on the platform
•Helped small business clients file for in excess of $200,000 in ERTC credits
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic. In response, federal, state and local governments imposed various restrictions on social and commercial activity to promote social distancing in an effort to slow the spread of the disease. Across many industries, temporary and permanent business closures as well as business occupancy limitations have resulted in layoffs and employee furloughs since late March 2020. Because we charge our clients on a per-employee basis for certain services we provide, decreased headcount at our clients at of the onset of the pandemic negatively impacted our recurring revenue during 2020. At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, a limited number of new clients temporarily delayed service implementation. As the COVID-19 pandemic and variants continue to create uncertainty and the potential for ongoing business disruptions, we may experience similar client-driven delays in service implementation in the future.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our sales force traveled frequently to sell our solution. The current remote work environment presents a unique opportunity for our sales force-each sales employee is able to meet virtually with a greater number of client prospects in a given day than they would if conducting in-person meetings. Although we have not experienced such challenges to date, if clients and client prospects are not as willing or available to engage by video conference and teleconference, the shift from in-person to virtual sales meetings could negatively affect our sales efforts, impede client acquisition and lengthen our sales cycles, which would negatively impact our business and results of operations and could impact our financial condition in the future.
In 2021, we continued to invest in sales and marketing and in research and development to drive future growth and expand our market share. Lower employment levels among our clients and the other pandemic-related factors described above continued to have a negative impact on our recurring revenues, although at lesser levels than in 2020. Accordingly, we experienced an improvement in net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect net income to be negatively affected by the impact of the pandemic on our recurring revenue and our deliberate, increased level of investment in sales and marketing and research and development to drive the growth of our business.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) passed by Congress in 2020 (and subsequent amendments) tackled the economic plight caused by the pandemic, and placed Asure in a unique position to help clients navigate the bureaucratic framework to apply for Employee Retention Tax Credits (“ERTC”). We updated our product suite in light of this recent legislation to guide our clients to file for in excess of $200,000 ERTC credits.
OPERATING SEGMENT
We operate as one operating segment. Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise for which the chief operating decision maker, who in our case is the Chief Executive Officer, in deciding how to allocate resources and assess performance, evaluates separate financial information regularly. During 2021, and over the last six years, we have completed a number of acquisitions. These acquisitions have allowed us to expand our offerings, presence and reach in various market segments of the human capital management market. Our business operates in one operating segment because our chief operating decision maker evaluates our financial information and resources and assesses the performance of these resources on a consolidated basis. Because we operate as one operating segment, all required financial segment information can be found in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (in thousands)
The following table sets forth, for the fiscal periods indicated, the percentage of total revenues represented by certain items in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss):
Revenue
Revenues are comprised of recurring revenues, professional services, hardware, and other revenues. We expect our revenues to increase as we introduce new applications, expand our client base and renew and expand relationships with existing clients. As a percentage of total revenues, we expect our mix of recurring revenues, and professional services, hardware and other revenues to remain relatively constant. While revenue mix varies by product, recurring revenue represented over 93% of total revenue in the year ended 2021, compared to 96% in 2020.
Our revenue was derived from the following sources (in thousands):
Recurring Revenues
Recurring revenues include fees for our payroll, payroll tax, time and labor management, and other Asure solutions as well as fees charged for form filings and delivery of client payroll checks and reports. These revenues are derived from fixed amounts charged per billing period and sometimes an additional fee per employee or transaction processed. We do not require clients to enter into long-term contractual commitments for our services. Our billing period varies by client based on when each client pays its employees, which may be weekly, bi-weekly, semi-monthly or monthly. We also generate recurring revenue from our Reseller Partners that license our solutions. Because recurring revenues are based, in part, on fees for use of our applications and the delivery of checks and reports that are levied on a per-employee basis, our recurring revenues increase as our clients hire more employees. Recurring revenues are recognized in the period services are rendered.
Recurring revenues include revenues relating to the annual processing of payroll forms, such as Form W-2 and Form 1099, and revenues from processing unscheduled payroll runs (such as bonuses) for our clients. Because payroll forms are typically processed in the first quarter of the year and many of our clients are subject to form filing requirements mandated by the ACA, first quarter revenues and margins are generally higher than in subsequent quarters. We anticipate our revenues will continue to exhibit this seasonal pattern related to ACA form filings for so long as the ACA (or replacement legislation) includes employer reporting requirements. In addition, we often experience increased revenues during the fourth quarter due to unscheduled payroll runs for our clients that occur before the end of the year. Therefore, we expect the seasonality of our revenue cycle to decrease to the extent clients utilize more of our non-payroll applications.
This revenue line also includes interest earned on funds held for clients. We collect funds from clients in advance of either the applicable due date for payroll tax submissions or the applicable disbursement date for employee payment services. These collections from clients are typically disbursed from one to 30 days after receipt, with some funds being held for up to 120 days. We typically invest funds held for clients in money market funds, demand deposit accounts, commercial paper, fixed income securities and certificates of deposit until they are paid to the applicable tax or regulatory agencies or to client employees. The amount of interest we earn from the investment of client funds is also impacted by changes in interest rates.
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $76,064, an increase of $10,557, or 16%, from $65,507 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Recurring revenue increased due to organic growth within our client base as client employee counts rebounded following the 2020 impact of COVID-19, due to the impact of acquisitions and higher interest revenue.
Professional Services, Hardware and Other Revenues
Professional Services, Hardware and Other Revenues represents implementation fees, one-time consulting projects, on-premise maintenance, and hardware devices to enhance our software products.
Professional services, hardware and other revenue increased $2,794, or 127%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the similar period in 2020, due to the implementation of our ERTC service in 2021.
Although our total customer base is widely spread across industries, our sales are concentrated in SMBs. We continue to target SMBs across industries as prospective customers. Geographically, we sell our products primarily in the United States.
In addition to continuing to develop our workforce solutions and release of new software updates and enhancements, we continue to actively explore other opportunities to acquire additional products or technologies to complement our current software and services.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Consolidated gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $46,564, an increase of $8,471, or 22%, from $38,093 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross margin as a percentage of revenue was 61% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 58% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our increase in gross margin is primarily attributable to the increase in revenue and more efficient operations.
Our cost of sales relates primarily to direct product costs, compensation for operations and related consulting expenses, hardware expenses, facilities and related expenses and the amortization of our purchased software development costs. We include intangible amortization related to developed and acquired technology within cost of sales.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of salaries and related expenses for sales and marketing staff, including stock-based expenses, commissions, as well as marketing programs, which include events, corporate communications and product marketing activities.
Selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $15,448, an increase of $1,899, or 14%, from $13,549 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased personnel costs offset by lower discretionary marketing spending as we focus on hiring direct sales personnel. Selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased to 20% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 21% for the same period in 2020.
We continue to expand and increase selling costs as we focus on hiring direct sales personnel, expanding recognition of our brand, and lead generation.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries and related expenses, including stock-based expenses for finance and accounting, legal, internal audit, human resources and management information systems personnel, legal costs, professional fees, and other corporate expenses such as transaction costs for acquisitions.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $27,570, an increase of $3,644, or 15%, from $23,926 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to increased personnel, contracting and placement costs. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased to 36% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 37% for the same period in 2020.
We continue to drive efficiencies within our payroll operations by continually reevaluating our vendor relationships.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses, including stock-based expenses for employees supporting our R&D activities.
R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $5,410, a decrease of $549, or 9%, from $5,959 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in R&D expense is primarily attributable to an increase in investment costs offset by an increase in capitalization costs. R&D expenses as a percentage of revenues decreased to 7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 9% for the same period in 2020.
We will continue to enhance our products and technologies through expansion of our technological resources by increasing headcount and development partnerships, as well as through organic improvements and acquired intellectual property. We will continue to expand the breadth of integration between our solutions, allowing direct clients and resellers the ability to easily add and implement components across our entire solution set. We believe that our expanded investment in product, engineering, SaaS hosting, mobile and hardware technologies lays the groundwork for broader market opportunities and represents a key aspect of our competitive differentiation. Native mobile applications, common user interface, expanded web service integration and other technologies are all part of our initiatives.
Our development efforts for future releases and enhancements are driven by feedback received from our existing and potential customers and by gauging market trends. We believe we have the appropriate development team to design and enhance our solution suite and integrated platform. We have also made significant investments outside of core R&D into compliance and certifications, including SOC I Type 2 and SOC II Type 2 certifications, BIPA, CCPA, and other initiatives.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization expense in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $10,948, an increase of $1,401, or 15%, from $9,547 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Amortization expense as a percentage of revenue was 14% and 15% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest Expense and Other, Net
Interest expense and other, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was an expense of $2,038 compared to an expense of $1,224 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense and other, net relative to the prior year is attributable to new borrowings under our credit facility with Structural Capital Investments III LP, which were used to fund the acquisitions of two of our payroll resellers in the third quarter of 2021. Interest expense and other, net as a percentage of revenue was an expense of 3% and 2% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is composed primarily of interest expense on notes payable.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8,312, compared with $138 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gain in 2021 is primarily related to the forgiveness of an unsecured Paycheck Protection Program loan from Pinnacle Bank under the CARES Act. The amount forgiven was $8,654 and is discussed in Note 6 - Notes Payable.
Employee Retention Tax Credit
An Employee Retention Tax Credit (“ERTC”) of $10,533 was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021. There was no comparable item in the year ended December 31, 2020. The ERTC is a refundable tax credit against certain employment taxes provided under the CARES Act. We qualified for the ERTC in 2021 and recorded an aggregate benefit of $10,533 in the third quarter of 2021, which is discussed in Note 10 - Employee Retention Tax Credit.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded an income tax expense attributable to continuing operations of $802 and $337, respectively, an increase of $465 or 138%.
Income (Loss) From Operations
We generated income from operations of $3,193, or $0.17 per share, during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a loss from operations of $16,311, or $1.03 per share, during the years ended December 31, 2020. Income and loss from operations as a percentage of total revenues was 4% and 25% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (in thousands)
(1)This balance excludes cash equivalents in funds held for clients
Working Capital. We had working capital of $17,006 at December 31, 2021, an increase of $8,798 from working capital of $8,208 at December 31, 2020. Working capital as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 includes $3,750 and $4,416 of short-term deferred revenue, respectively. Deferred revenue is an obligation to perform future services. We expect that deferred revenue will convert to future revenue as we perform our services, but this does not represent future payments. Deferred revenue can vary based on seasonality, expiration of initial multi-year contracts and deals that are billed after implementation rather than in advance of service delivery.
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities of $1,378 for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by non-cash adjustments to our net income of approximately $12,975, primarily due to depreciation and amortization, and net income of $3,193. This was offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which resulted in a use of $14,790 in cash. Net cash provided by operating activities of $2,235 for the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by non-cash adjustments to our net loss of approximately $20,414, primarily due to depreciation and amortization, offset by our net loss of $16,311. For the year ended December 31, 2020, changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in a use of $1,868 in cash.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities of $36,970 for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to our third quarter acquisitions totaling $25,526. Net cash used in investing activities of $19,407 for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to the purchase and sale of available-for-sale securities.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities was $90,650 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily consisted of a net decrease in client fund obligations of $103,434 and payments of notes payable of $14,657. These amounts were offset by proceeds from our notes payable of $29,425. Net cash provided by financing activities was $208,097 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of a net increase in client fund obligations of $190,328.
Sources of Liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s principal sources of liquidity consisted of approximately $13,427 of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, cash generated from operations of our business over the next twelve months, and $20,000 available for borrowing under our $50,000 credit facility with Structural Capital Investments III, LP, which is discussed in Note 5 - Notes Payable, to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We cannot assure that we can grow our cash balances or limit our cash consumption and thus maintain sufficient cash balances for our planned operations or future acquisitions. Future business demands may lead to cash utilization at levels greater than recently experienced. We may need to raise additional capital in the future in order to grow our existing software operations and to seem additional strategic acquisitions in the near future. However, we cannot assure that we will be able to raise additional capital on acceptable terms, or at all.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We have prepared our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and included the accounts of our wholly owned subsidiaries. We have eliminated all significant intercompany transactions and balances in the consolidation. Preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of the assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates are subjective in nature and involve judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at fiscal year-end and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the fiscal year. The more significant estimates made by management include the valuation allowance for our gross deferred tax asset, the determination of the fair value of our long-lived assets and the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed during acquisitions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that management believes are reasonable under the given circumstances. These estimates could be materially different under different conditions and assumptions. Additionally, the actual amounts could differ from the estimates made. Management periodically evaluates estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements for continued reasonableness. We prospectively apply appropriate adjustments, if any, to our estimates based upon our periodic evaluation.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue consists of software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) offerings and time-based software subscription license agreements that also, typically include hardware, maintenance/support, and professional services elements. We recognize revenue on an output basis when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We determine standalone selling prices based on the amount that we believe the market is willing to pay determined through historical analysis of sales data as well as through use of the residual approach when we can estimate the standalone selling price for one or more, but not all, of the promised goods or services.
Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), and ASU 2015-14, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Deferral of Effective Date, which deferred the effective date of ASU 2014-09 by one year. ASU 2014-09 (“Topic 606”) “Revenue from Contracts with Customers) supersedes the revenue recognition requirements in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 605, Revenue Recognition, and is based on the principle that revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. It also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue, cash flows arising from customer contracts, including significant judgments and changes in judgments, and assets recognized from costs incurred to obtain or fulfill a contract. The adoption of ASU 2014-09, using the modified retrospective approach, had no significant impact on our results of operations, cash flows, or financial position. The initial application was applied to all contracts at the date of initial application. We recognized the cumulative effect of initially applying the new revenue standard as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings.
We recorded a $1,500 cumulative effect adjustment to opening retained earnings as of January 1, 2018 related to an increase in deferred commissions. There was no impact to revenue as a result of applying Topic 606.
The primary impact of adopting Topic 606 is to sales commissions related to onboarding new clients that were previously expensed. Under the new standard, these costs are now capitalized as deferred commissions and amortized over the estimated customer life of five to ten years.
The terms of our contracts with customers range from month to month for some Asure HCM direct clients to longer terms ranging from one to three years, some of which are renewable for successive terms. A SaaS/software subscription arrangement may also include hardware, setup and implementation services. Revenue allocated to the SaaS/software subscription performance obligations are recognized on an output basis ratably as the service is provided over the non-cancellable term of the SaaS/subscription service and are reported as Recurring revenue on the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). Revenue allocated to other performance obligations included in the arrangement is recognized as outlined in the paragraphs below.
Hardware devices sold to customers are sold as either a standard product sell arrangement where title to the hardware passes to the customer or under a hardware-as-a-service (“HaaS”) arrangement where the title to the hardware remains with Asure. Revenue allocated to hardware sold as a standard product are recognized on an output basis when title passes to the customer, typically the date we ship the hardware. Revenue allocated to hardware under a HaaS arrangement are recognized on an output basis, recorded ratably as the service is provided over the non-cancellable term of the HaaS arrangement, typically one year. Revenue recognized from hardware devices sold to customers via either of the two above types of arrangements are reported as Hardware revenue on the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Our professional services offerings typically include data migration, set up, training, and implementation services. Set up and implementation services typically occur at the start of the software arrangement while certain other professional services, depending on the nature of the services and customer requirements, may occur several months later. We can reasonably estimate professional services performed for a fixed fee and we recognize allocated revenue on an output basis on a proportional performance basis as the service is provided. We recognize allocated revenue on an output basis for professional services engagements billed on a time and materials basis as the service is provided. We recognize allocated revenue on an output basis on all other professional services engagements upon the earlier of the completion of the service’s deliverable or the expiration of the customer’s right to receive the service. Revenue recognized from professional services offerings are reported as Professional service revenue on the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
We recognize allocated revenue for maintenance and support on an output basis ratably over the non-cancellable term of the support agreement. Initial maintenance and support terms are typically one to three years and are renewable on an annual basis. Revenue recognized from maintenance and support are reported as Maintenance and support revenue on the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
We do not recognize revenue for agreements with rights of return, refundable fees, cancellation rights or substantive acceptance clauses until these return, refund or cancellation rights have expired or acceptance has occurred. Our arrangements with Reseller Partners do not allow for any rights of return.
Our payment terms vary by the type of customer and the customer’s payment history and the products or services offered. The term between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant and as such our contracts do not include a significant financing component. The transaction prices of our contracts do not include consideration amounts that are variable and do not include noncash consideration.
Deferred revenue includes amounts invoiced to customers in excess of revenue we recognize, and is comprised of deferred SaaS/software, HaaS, Maintenance and support, and Professional services revenue. We recognize deferred revenue when we complete the service and over the terms of the arrangements, primarily ranging from one to three years.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
We record the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition, with any excess purchase price recorded as goodwill. Valuation of intangible assets and in-process research and development entails significant estimates and assumptions including, but not limited to, estimating future cash flows from product sales, developing appropriate discount rates, estimating probability rates for the continuation of customer relationships and renewal of customer contracts. U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) require that we not amortize intangible assets other than goodwill with an indefinite life until we determine their life as finite. We must amortize all other intangible assets over their useful lives. We currently amortize our acquired intangible assets with definite lives over periods ranging from one to nine years. We have assessed the fair value of our customer relationship intangible assets as of December 31, 2021, we do not believe these to be impaired, as the carrying value of the customer relationship intangible assets are recoverable through the associated project cash flows.
Impairment of Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with FASB ASC 350, we review and evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that we may not recover their net book value. When such factors and circumstances exist, including those noted above, we compare the assets’ carrying amounts against the estimated undiscounted cash flows we expect to generate with those assets over their estimated useful lives. If the carrying amounts are greater than the undiscounted cash flows, we estimate the fair values of those assets by discounting the projected cash flows. We record any excess of the carrying amounts over the fair values as impairments in that fiscal period. In 2019, we accelerated the amortization after a reassessment of the useful lives of certain trade names in relation to our rebranding efforts. There has been no other impairment of intangible assets and long-lived assets for the periods presented.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired in a business combination. We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth fiscal quarter of each year, and between annual tests if indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair-value-based approach. There was no impairment of goodwill in either 2021 or 2020. In 2019, we recognized an impairment loss on goodwill. See Note 5 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding goodwill.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method under ASC 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events included in the financial statements. Under the liability method, we determine deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which we expect the differences to reverse. We reduce deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that we will not realize some component or all of the deferred tax assets.
See Note 2 - Significant Account Policies in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about Recent Accounting Pronouncements.