ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our “Risk Factors” and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. See cautionary note regarding “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report.
Overview
Asensus Surgical is a medical device company that is digitizing the interface between the surgeon and the patient to pioneer a new era of Performance-Guided Surgery™ by unlocking clinical intelligence to enable consistently superior outcomes and a new standard of surgery. This builds upon the foundation of Digital Laparoscopy with the Senhance® Surgical System powered by the Intelligent Surgical Unit™, or ISU, to increase surgeon control and reduce surgical variability. With the addition of machine vision, augmented intelligence, and deep learning capabilities throughout the surgical experience, we intend to holistically address the current clinical, cognitive and economic shortcomings that drive surgical outcomes and value-based healthcare. The Company is focused on the market development for and commercialization of the Senhance Surgical System, which digitizes laparoscopic minimally invasive surgery, or MIS. The Senhance System is the first and only digital, multi-port laparoscopic platform designed to maintain laparoscopic MIS standards while providing digital benefits such as haptic feedback, robotic precision, comfortable ergonomics, advanced instrumentation including 3mm microlaparoscopic instruments, 5mm articulating instruments, eye-sensing camera control and fully-reusable standard instruments to help maintain per-procedure costs similar to traditional laparoscopy.
The Senhance System is available for sale in Europe, the United States, Japan, Taiwan, Russia and select other countries.
•
The Senhance System has a CE Mark in Europe for adult and pediatric laparoscopic abdominal and pelvic surgery, as well as limited thoracic surgeries excluding cardiac and vascular surgery.
•
In the United States, the Company has received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for use of the Senhance System in general laparoscopic surgical procedures and laparoscopic gynecologic surgery in a total of 31 indicated procedures, including benign and oncologic procedures, laparoscopic inguinal, hiatal and paraesophageal hernia, sleeve gastrectomy and laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgery.
•
In Japan, the Company has received regulatory approval and reimbursement for 98 laparoscopic procedures.
•
The Senhance System received its registration certificate by the Russian medical device regulatory agency, Roszdravnadzor, in December 2020, allowing for its sale and utilization throughout the Russian Federation.
We also enter into lease arrangements with certain qualified customers. For some lease arrangements, the customers are provided with the right to purchase the leased Senhance System during or at the end of the lease term ("Lease Buyout"). In the first quarter of 2021, we completed one Lease Buyout of a Senhance System.
On February 23, 2021, we changed our name from TransEnterix, Inc. to Asensus Surgical, Inc. as part of our strategy to utilize the Senhance System and ISU capabilities, along with our other augmented intelligence related offerings and instrumentation to unlock clinical intelligence to enable consistently superior outcomes and a new standard of surgery we are calling Performance-Guided Surgery. We believe our product offerings, and our digitization of the interface between the surgeon and the patient allows us to assist the surgeon in all aspects of laparoscopic surgery including:
●
Pre-operative - in what we call “intelligent preparation,” our machine learning models will take data from all the procedures done utilizing our current Senhance System with the ISU, such as tracking surgical motion and team interaction, to create a large and constantly improving database of surgeries and their outcomes to enable surgeons to best inform their approach and surgical setup.
●
Intra-operative - we believe the Senhance System provides perceptive real-time guidance for intra-operative tasks, allowing any surgeon performing a procedure with the Senhance System to perform multiple tasks and benefit from the collective knowledge and rules-based performance of thousands of other successful Senhance-based procedures. Not only will this provide the surgeon with a pathway to better outcomes, but we also believe it will ultimately help reduce the cognitive load of the surgeons.
●
Post-operative - by tapping into the vast amount of data captured during procedures, surgeons and operating room staff will be able to get actionable assessments of their performance giving them the information needed to improve performance over time. We intend to establish a new standard of analytics to improve not only the skills of all surgeons but move towards best-practice-sharing that bridges the global surgeon community.
We received FDA clearance in January 2020 for our Intelligent Surgical Unit, or ISU. We believe it is the only FDA cleared device for machine vision technology in abdominal robotic surgery. On September 23, 2020, we announced the first surgical procedures successfully completed using the ISU. In January 2021, we received CE Mark for the ISU.
In February 2020, we received CE Mark for the Senhance System and related instruments for pediatric use indications in CE Mark territories.
In 2020, we obtained regulatory clearance for the Senhance ultrasonic system in both Taiwan and Japan. We also received clearance for the ISU in both the U.S. and Japan. Finally, in the EU, we expanded our claims for the Senhance System to include pediatric patients, allowing accessibility to more surgeons and patients, as well as expanding our potential market to include pediatric hospitals in Europe. We anticipate the robotic precision provided by the Senhance System, coupled with the already available 3mm instruments will prove to be an effective tool in surgery with smaller patients.
On July 28, 2021, the Company announced that it received FDA clearance for 5mm diameter articulating instruments, offering better access to difficult-to-reach areas of the anatomy by providing two additional degrees of freedom. These instruments have previously received CE Mark for use in the EU.
The Company believes that future outcomes of minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery will be enhanced through its combination of more advanced tools and robotic functionality, which are designed to: (i) empower surgeons with improved precision, dexterity and visualization; (ii) improve patient satisfaction and enable a desirable post-operative recovery; and (iii) provide a cost-effective robotic system, compared to existing alternatives today, for a wide range of clinical indications.
From our inception, we devoted a substantial percentage of our resources to research and development and start-up activities, consisting primarily of product design and development, clinical studies, manufacturing, recruiting qualified personnel and raising capital. We expect to continue to invest in research and development and market development as we implement our strategy.
Since inception, we have been unprofitable. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $785.4 million.
We operate in one business segment.
Financing Transactions
During late 2020 and 2021, the Company engaged in a number of equity financing transactions to fund its operations and extend its cash reach to provide capital to progress its strategy. These financings included:
●
October 2020 At-the-Market Offering. On October 9, 2020, the Company filed a prospectus supplement relating to an at-the-market offering with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or Cantor, pursuant to which the Company could sell from time to time, at its option, up to an aggregate of $40.0 million of shares of the Company’s common stock through Cantor as sales agent, pursuant to the 2019 Sales Agreement, referred to as the “2020 ATM Offering”. The Company terminated this agreement in January 2021.
●
January 2021 Public Offering. On January 29, 2021, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of 26,545,832 shares of its common stock, including the underwriter’s full exercise of an over-allotment option on February 1, 2021, at the public offering price of $3.00 per share, generating net proceeds of approximately $73.4 million.
●
January 2021 Registered Direct Purchase Agreement. On January 12, 2021, the Company sold in a registered direct offering 25,000,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price per share of $1.25 for aggregate gross proceeds of $31.25 million, and net proceeds of $28.6 million.
●
2021 At-the-Market Offering. On May 19, 2021, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement with Cantor, Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated and Oppenheimer & Co. Inc., as our sales agents, relating to an at-the-market offering of up to an aggregate of $100,000,000 of shares of our common stock, referred to as the “2021 ATM Offering”.
Sales during the year ended December 31, 2021, under the 2020 and 2021 ATM Offerings are as follows (in thousands except for share and per share amounts):
●
2021 Exercise of Warrants. During 2021, certain holders of our Series B, C and D warrants to purchase shares of our common stock exercised such warrants for aggregate proceeds to the Company of $30.6 million.
Paycheck Protection Program
During 2020, the Company received an unsecured non-recourse loan of $2.8 million under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act). The Company accounted for the PPP promissory note as debt within notes payable on the consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2020, $1.6 million of the promissory note was classified as long-term and $1.2 million was classified as current. On June 10, 2021, the Company received notification from the Small Business Administration that the principal amount of $2.8 million and related interest had been forgiven. Gain on extinguishment of debt of $2.8 million was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021 on the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
In 2021, our revenue consisted of the sale of two Senhance Systems, one Lease Buyout, ongoing Senhance System leasing payments, sales of instruments and accessories, and services for Senhance Systems sold or placed in Europe, Asia and the U.S. In 2020, our revenue consisted of Senhance System leasing payments, and sales of instruments, accessories, and services for Senhance Systems sold in Europe, Asia and the U.S. in prior periods.
Product, instrument, and accessory revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $6.7 million compared to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $5.1 million increase was derived primarily from the sale of two Senhance Systems and a Lease Buyout in 2021, versus 2020 revenue driven by system leasing arrangements, as well as instruments and accessories sales. Services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to $1.5 million from $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the timing of the service contracts and number of Senhance Systems under service contracts.
We expect to experience variability in the number and trend, and average selling price or leasing price of our products given the early stage of commercialization of our products.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of costs related to contract manufacturing, materials, and manufacturing overhead incurred internally to produce the products. Depreciation expense related to leased systems is included in the cost of revenue. Shipping and handling costs incurred by the Company are included in the cost of revenue. We expense all inventory obsolescence provisions as cost of revenue. The manufacturing overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, material procurement, inventory control, facilities, equipment depreciation and operations supervision and management. We expect overhead costs as a percentage of revenues to decline as our production volume increases. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars to the extent our revenues grow and as we continue to invest in our operational infrastructure to support anticipated growth.
Product cost for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $8.0 million as compared to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This $5.7 million increase over the prior year period was primarily the result of increased materials cost of $6.2 million, which is driven by increased system placements in the current year. The change also includes a decrease in the inventory reserve of $0.5 million. The decrease in the inventory reserve was driven by the sale of previously reserved inventory. Also contributing to the increase were increased facility costs of $0.1 million and increased freight costs of $0.1 million offset by decreased personnel costs of $0.6 million and decreased supplies cost of $0.1 million.
Service cost for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $3.1 million as compared to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This $0.2 million increase over the prior year period was primarily related to $0.3 million in increased supplies and $0.1 million in increased consulting costs offset by $0.1 million in reduced personnel costs, and $0.1 million in reduced facilities costs. Cost of revenue exceeds revenue primarily due to part replacements under maintenance plans, which are expensed when incurred, along with salaries for the field service teams.
Research and Development
Research and development, or R&D, expenses primarily consist of engineering, product development and regulatory expenses incurred in the design, development, testing and enhancement of our products and legal services associated with our efforts to obtain and maintain broad protection for the intellectual property related to our products. In future periods, we expect R&D expenses to increase moderately as we continue to invest in additional regulatory approvals as well as new products, instruments, and accessories to be offered with the Senhance System. R&D expenses are expensed as incurred.
R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 16% to $19.3 million as compared to $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $2.7 million increase primarily relates to increased personnel costs of $2.0 million, increased supplies costs of $0.3 million, increased consulting costs of $0.3 million and increased facility costs of $0.1 million.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses include costs for sales and marketing personnel, travel, demonstration product, market development, physician training, tradeshows, marketing clinical studies and consulting expenses. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase moderately as we refocus our resources and efforts on market development activities.
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 2% to $13.4 million compared to $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $0.3 million increase was primarily related to increased consulting costs of $0.2 million, increased software costs of $0.2 million, increased travel costs of $0.1 million, increased supplies expense of $0.1 million, and increased other costs of $0.2 million offset by decreased depreciation expense of $0.4 million and decreased personnel costs of $0.1 million.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs related to the executive, finance and human resource functions, as well as professional service fees, legal fees, accounting fees, insurance costs, and general corporate expenses. We expect general and administrative costs to remain flat in future periods.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 37% to $19.3 million compared to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $5.2 million increase was primarily due to increased personnel costs of $4.0 million, which is primarily driven by an increase in employee headcount and a $1.6 million increase in stock compensation expense. The change is also driven by increased shareholder meeting costs of $0.6 million, increased supplies expense of $0.2 million, increased product costs of $0.1 million, increased depreciation expense of $0.1 million, and increased other costs of $0.3 million, offset by decreased facilities costs of $0.1 million.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $11.3 million compared to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $0.5 million increase was primarily the result of a higher Euro to Dollar exchange rate.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The change in fair value of contingent consideration in connection with the Senhance Acquisition described in the Product Overview section above was a $1.6 million decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an increase of $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $4.5 million decrease was primarily due to changes in the Company's forecast of future product revenue.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily related to the $2.8 million gain on extinguishment of debt from the PPP loan forgiveness and $1.3 million refund for the Employee Retention Tax Credit (ERTC), offset by a $2.0 million increase in the fair value of warrant liabilities recorded during the year.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Income tax expense of $0.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of current income taxes related to profitable foreign jurisdictions in Japan, Israel, and the Netherlands.
Income tax benefit of $1.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted primarily of taxes related to the amortization of purchase accounting intangibles in connection with the Italian taxing jurisdiction for Asensus Surgical Italia as a result of the Senhance Acquisition.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
In 2020, our revenue consisted of Senhance System leasing payments, and sales of instruments, accessories, and services for Senhance Systems sold in Europe, Asia and the U.S. in prior periods. In 2019, our revenue consisted of product and service revenue primarily resulting from the sale of a total of four Senhance Systems in Europe (one) and Asia (three), and related instruments, accessories and services for current and prior year system sales. The Company also recognized $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to a 2017 system sale for which revenue was deferred until the first clinical use of the system, which occurred in the second quarter of 2019.
Product, instrument, and accessory revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $1.6 million compared to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $5.5 million decrease was due to the 2020 revenue being derived primarily from system leasing arrangements, versus 2019 revenue driven by the sale of four Senhance Systems, as well as instruments and accessories. Services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $1.6 million from $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the increase in the number of Senhance Systems under service contracts.
We expect to experience variability in the number and trend, and average selling price or leasing price of our products given the early stage of commercialization of our products.
Cost of Revenue
Product cost for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $2.3 million as compared to $16.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This $14.1 million decrease over the prior year period was primarily the result of decreased materials cost of $11.6 million, which is driven by fewer system placements compared to the prior period. This change includes an inventory write-down in the amount of $7.4 million under our restructuring plan during the year ended December 31, 2019. Also contributing to the decrease were lower personnel costs totaling $1.6 million, decreased facility costs totaling $0.3 million, decreased freight costs of $0.2 million, decreased travel costs of $0.2 million, and decreased supplies cost of $0.2 million.
Service cost for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $2.9 million as compared to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This $1.4 million decrease over the prior year period was primarily related to $1 million in reduced supplies costs, $0.3 million in reduced travel expenses for field service engineers driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, and $0.1 million in reduced other costs. Cost of revenue exceeds revenue primarily due to part replacements under maintenance plans, which are expensed when incurred, along with salaries for the field service teams.
Research and Development
R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 26% to $16.6 million as compared to $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $5.9 million decrease primarily relates to decreased personnel costs of $3.7 million driven by a reduced headcount under our restructuring plan, decreased technology fees of $0.6 million, decreased supplies costs of $0.6 million, decreased travel costs of $0.5 million, decreased consulting costs of $0.4 million, decreased facility costs of $0.1 million, and decreased other costs of $0.2 million offset by $0.2 million in increased testing and validation costs. R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 also include an impairment of IPR&D in the amount of $7.9 million that is presented separately in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 53% to $13.1 million compared to $28.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $14.9 million decrease was primarily related to decreased personnel related costs of $7.6 million, decreased travel of $3.7 million, decreased consulting costs of $2.1 million, decreased supplies expense of $0.9 million, decreased facilities costs of $0.3 million, decreased depreciation expense of $0.2 million, and decreased other costs of $0.1 million. These decreases were primarily the result of the restructuring plan implemented in the fourth quarter of 2019 together with reductions in travel and cancellation of tradeshows beginning in the first quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs related to the executive, finance and human resource functions, as well as professional service fees, legal fees, accounting fees, insurance costs, and general corporate expenses.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 25% to $14.1 million compared to $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $4.7 million decrease was primarily due to decreased personnel costs of $2.3 million, decreased bad debt expense of $1.6 million, decreased consulting and outside services costs of $0.3 million, decreased supplies expense of $0.2 million, decreased travel costs of $0.2 million, and decreased other costs of $0.5 million offset by increased facilities costs of $0.4 million. In 2019, the Company recorded the bad debt charge due to uncertainty regarding collectability on a 2018 system sale in North Africa.
Restructuring
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we announced the implementation of a restructuring plan to reduce operating expenses as we continue the global market development of the Senhance platform. Under the restructuring plan, we reduced headcount primarily in the sales and marketing functions and determined that the carrying value of our inventory exceeded the net realizable value due to a decrease in expected sales. The restructuring charges amounted to $8.8 million, of which $7.4 million was an inventory write down and was included in cost of product revenue and $1.4 million related to employee severance costs and was included as restructuring and other charges in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, during the fourth quarter of 2019. Payments under the restructuring plan concluded in 2020.
During March 2020, we continued our restructuring with additional headcount reductions which resulted in $0.9 million related to severance costs which were paid in 2020.
Gain from Sale of AutoLap Assets, Net
The net gain from the sale of AutoLap assets was $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The gain represented the difference between the purchase price of $17 million and a $1 million liability incurred as a result of entering into the sale.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $10.8 million compared to $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $0.5 million increase was primarily the result of a higher Euro to Dollar exchange rate.
Impairment of Goodwill and IPR&D Assets
The Company historically tested goodwill for impairment annually as of year-end, however, due to market conditions as well as reduced forecasts, we tested our goodwill and IPR&D carrying values as of September 30, 2019.
Pursuant to ASU 2017-04, a company must record a goodwill impairment charge if a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value. The Company generally determines the fair value of its reporting unit using two valuation methods: the “Income Approach - Discounted Cash Flow Analysis” method, and the “Market Approach - Guideline Public Company Method.”
Under the “Income Approach - Discounted Cash Flow Analysis” method, the key assumptions consider projected sales, cost of sales, and operating expenses. These assumptions were determined by management utilizing the Company's internal operating plan, growth rates for revenues and operating expenses, and margin assumptions. An additional key assumption under this approach is the discount rate, which is determined by looking at current risk-free rates of capital, current market interest rates, and the evaluation of risk premium relevant to the business segment. If our assumptions relative to growth rates were to change or were incorrect, our fair value calculation may change.
Under the “Market Approach - Guideline Public Company Method,” the Company identified several publicly traded companies, which it believed had sufficiently relevant similarities. Similar to the income approach discussed above, sales, cost of sales, operating expenses, and their respective growth rates are key assumptions utilized. The market prices of the Company’s common stock and other guideline companies are additional key assumptions. If these market prices increase, the estimated market value would increase. If the market prices decrease, the estimated market value would decrease.
The results of these two methods were weighted based upon management’s evaluation of the relevance of the two approaches. In the 2019 evaluation, management determined that the income and market value approach should be weighted 50%-50%. In addition, management considered the decline in both our stock price and market capitalization after the September 30, 2019 measurement date as relevant factors in the analysis.
As of September 30, 2019, the Company determined that the goodwill associated with the business was impaired, and recorded impairment charges of $79.0 million. The impairment charge resulted from decreased sales and estimated cash flows and a significant decline in the Company's stock price. The Company does not have any goodwill on its consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Company also recognized a $7.9 million impairment charge to its IPR&D as it concluded that under the market value approach, the fair value of the IPR&D was lower than the carrying value during the year ended December 31, 2019. No such impairment was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The change in fair value of contingent consideration in connection with the Senhance Acquisition was a $2.9 million increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a decrease of $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $12.5 million increase was primarily due to changes in the Company's fair value measurement of a discounted cash flow model using significant unobservable inputs including the probability of achieving the potential milestone, future Euro-to-USD exchange rates, revenue volatility, and an estimated discount rate associated with the risks of the expected cash flows attributable to the milestone.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to a $0.3 million increase in the fair value of warrant liabilities recorded for the year. Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to $3.6 million in interest expense related to notes payable obligations outstanding during the year, a $2.2 million decrease in the change in the fair value of warrant liabilities recorded for the year, and a $1.0 million loss on extinguishment of debt.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit consists primarily of taxes related to the amortization of purchase accounting intangibles in connection with the Italian taxing jurisdiction for Asensus Surgical Italia as a result of the Senhance Acquisition. We recognized $1.5 million and $3.1 million of income tax benefit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's consolidated financial statements are prepared using U.S. GAAP applicable to a going concern, which contemplate the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has not established sufficient sales revenues to cover its operating costs and may require additional capital to proceed with its operating plan. The Company had an accumulated deficit of $785.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and working capital of $103.4 million as of December 31, 2021.
The Company has raised additional capital through equity offerings, including raising net proceeds of $73.4 million in the January 2021 public offering, $28.6 million in the January 2021 registered direct offering, $57.2 million in the 2019, 2020, and 2021 ATM Offerings, $13.5 million in the March 2020 public offering, an additional $13.6 million in net proceeds in the July 2020 public offering (see Note 17 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report), aggregate proceeds to the Company of $33.7 million for exercises of Series B, C and D warrants in 2020 and 2021, and $2.8 million related to a non-recourse loan under the PPP provisions of the CARES Act that was forgiven as of December 31, 2021. Management's plan to obtain additional resources for the Company may include additional sales of equity, traditional financing, such as loans, entry into a strategic collaboration, entry into an out-licensing arrangement or provision of additional distribution rights in some or all of our markets. However, management cannot provide any assurance that the Company will be successful in accomplishing any or all of its plans. The Company believes the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively impact its operations and ability to implement its market development efforts, which will have a negative effect on its financial condition.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash, cash equivalents, short-term and long-term investments, excluding restricted cash, of $135.8 million. While the Company believes that its existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and long-term investments as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to sustain operations for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements, the Company believes it will need to obtain additional financing in the future to proceed with its business plan. Management's plan to obtain additional resources for the Company may include additional sales of equity under the 2021 ATM Offering or otherwise, traditional financing, such as loans, entry into a strategic collaboration, entry into an out-licensing arrangement or provision of additional distribution rights in some or all of our markets. However, management cannot provide any assurance that the Company will be successful in accomplishing any or all of its plans or be able to secure additional funding when needed on terms acceptable to the Company, or at all. For a discussion of our recent equity financings, see “Financing Transactions” above in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis and Results of Operations.
Trends and Uncertainties
Our industry is highly competitive, subject to change and significantly affected by new product introductions and other activities by competitors. Many of these competitors have significantly greater financial and human resources than we do, have established reputations with our target customers, and more established worldwide distribution channels. There were new entrants in the market for robotic surgery in 2021, and some forward steps by existing competitors, such as the CE Mark attained by Medtronic for its Hugo robot. Several competitors have launched devices that enable reduced incision or single incision laparoscopic surgery with or without robotic assistance. We believe that our focus on the laparoscopic market and our Performance-Guided Surgery initiative will help us to remain competitive in this growing field.
Our strategy is to pioneer a new era of Performance-Guided Surgery by unlocking the clinical intelligence to enable consistently superior outcomes and a new standard of surgery. We are currently focused on increasing utilization of the existing Senhance Systems by increasing the number of procedures conducted using the Senhance System quarter over quarter. We are also focused on increasing the number of placements of the Senhance System, not necessarily though sales, but through leasing arrangements. Our efforts to communicate and implement this strategy with hospitals, surgery centers and surgeons may take longer than we anticipate, may not be as successful as we contemplate and may not result in a near-term meaningful increase in our business or financial condition.
We will need additional new products and product enhancements to deliver the opportunities of Performance-Guided Surgery. Such new products and product enhancements are subject to regulatory clearances or approvals, and our ability to provide training and implement the use of such new products.
The global spread of COVID-19 and the various attempts to contain it continue to create significant volatility, uncertainty, and economic disruption. Elective surgeries have also been curtailed a number of times during variant surges in 2021 in various parts of the globe. Although such elective surgeries have recommenced in large part, the limits on elective procedures significantly impacted our ability to place our Senhance Systems, provide training, and increase the use of the Senhance Systems in place. It is uncertain whether elective surgeries will continue to be negatively impacted or halted again in the future by a resurgence of COVID-19 cases in any of the jurisdictions we operate in.
Changes in economic conditions and supply chain constraints and steps taken by governments and central banks, particularly in response to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as other stimulus and spending programs, could lead to higher inflation than previously experienced or expected, increased labor shortages, our ability to hire and retain personnel, which could, in turn, lead to an increase in costs. An inflationary environment could have a negative impact on our expenses, increase our labor costs and reduce our available cash flow.
Consolidated Cash Flow Data
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities of $40.7 million consisted of a net loss of $62.5 million and cash provided by working capital of $0.4 million, offset by non-cash items of $21.4 million. The non-cash items primarily consisted of $11.3 million of net amortization of intangible assets, $9.4 million of stock-based compensation expense, $2.9 million of depreciation, $2.8 million gain on extinguishment of debt, $2.0 million change in fair value of warrant liabilities, $1.6 million change in fair value of contingent consideration, $0.5 million change in inventory reserves, $0.4 million of accretion of discounts and amortization of premiums on investments, net, $0.2 million deferred tax expense and $0.1 million bad debt expense. The decrease in cash from changes in working capital included a $4.5 million increase in operating lease liabilities, a $4.3 million increase in operating lease right-of-use assets, a $0.6 million increase in inventories net of transfers to property and equipment, a $1.6 million increase in accounts payable, a $1.3 million increase in tax credit receivable, a $0.9 million increase in other current and long-term assets, a $0.5 million decrease in accrued expenses, a $0.2 million decrease in accounts receivable, a $0.2 million decrease in deferred revenue, and a $0.1 million decrease in prepaid expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities of $46.7 million consisted of a net loss of $59.3 million and cash used for working capital of $7.7 million, offset by non-cash items of $20.3 million. The non-cash items primarily consisted of $10.8 million of net amortization of intangible assets, $7.9 million of stock-based compensation expense, $3.0 million change in inventory reserves, $2.9 million change in fair value of contingent consideration, $2.9 million of depreciation, $1.5 million deferred tax benefit, and $0.3 million change in fair value of warrant liabilities. The decrease in cash from changes in working capital included $4.2 million increase in inventories, $2.2 million decrease in accrued expenses, $1.8 million decrease in accounts payable, $1.2 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, $1.1 million decrease in operating lease right-of-use assets, $0.8 million decrease in prepaid expenses, $0.4 million increase in accounts receivable, $0.4 million decrease in other current and long term assets, $0.1 million decrease in other long term liabilities, and $0.1 million decrease in deferred revenue.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities of $73.5 million consisted of a net loss of $154.2 million and cash used for working capital of $12.8 million, offset by non-cash items of $93.5 million. The non-cash items primarily consisted of $86.9 million in goodwill and IPR&D impairment, $11.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, $10.3 million of net amortization of intangible assets, $1.5 million amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs, $0.3 million net amortization of discounts and premiums on investments, $2.2 million of depreciation, $1.6 million of bad debt expense, $1.0 million loss on debt extinguishment, $8.9 million related to the write-down of inventory, and $0.8 million in interest expense on deferred consideration related to the MST Acquisition, offset by $16.0 million gain from sale of AutoLap assets, $9.6 million change in fair value of contingent consideration, $3.2 million deferred tax benefit, and $2.2 million change in fair value of warrant liabilities. The decrease in cash from changes in working capital included $16.4 million increase in inventories, $6.1 million decrease in accounts receivable, $5.4 million other current and long-term assets, $2.5 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, $2.5 million decrease in prepaid expenses, $2.4 million other long-term liabilities, $2.3 million decrease in operating lease right-of-use assets, $1.0 million decrease in deferred revenue, $0.7 million decrease in accounts payable. The decrease in cash from changes in working capital was primarily driven by an increase in manufacturing activities combined with decreased Senhance System sales for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $119.7 million. This amount primarily consists of $122.3 million in purchases of available-for-sale investments, $1.4 million in purchases of property and equipment, offset by $4.0 million proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale securities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was not significant.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities was $67.6 million. This amount primarily consists of $65.0 million proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale investments and $16.0 million in proceeds related to the sale of the AutoLap assets, offset by $12.9 million purchase of available-for-sale investments and $0.4 million purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $161.7 million. The net change primarily related to $131.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of shares of our common stock in equity financings, net of issuance costs, $30.9 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants, partially offset by $1.1 million in taxes paid related to the net share settlement of vesting of restricted stock units.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $53.4 million. The net change primarily related to $13.5 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, and warrants under the March 2020 Public Offering, $33.8 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, $3.3 million from the exercise of warrants, and $2.8 million from the receipt of funding under a Promissory Note under the PPP provisions of the CARES Act.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $5.6 million. This amount was primarily related to $31.4 million payment of notes payable and $0.5 million related to the taxes withheld on restricted stock unit, or RSU, awards, offset by $25.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock and warrants and $0.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We intend to spend substantial amounts on research and development activities, including product development, regulatory and compliance, clinical studies in support of our future product offerings, commercial activities and the enhancement and protection of our intellectual property. We cannot assure you that additional financing will not be required in the future to support our operations. We intend to use financing opportunities strategically to continue to strengthen our financial position.
Cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries totaled $4.8 million at December 31, 2021, including restricted cash. We do not intend or currently foresee a need to repatriate cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries. If these funds are needed in the United States, we believe that the potential U.S. tax impact to repatriate these funds would be immaterial.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations set forth above under the headings “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing in