ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors including, but not limited to, those described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please refer to page 5 for further information regarding forward-looking statements and “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for a description of our risk factors.
Overview
We are a leading, global manufacturer of capital equipment, including thermal processing and wafer polishing and related consumables used in fabricating semiconductor devices, such as silicon carbide ("SiC") and silicon power devices, analog and discrete devices, electronic assemblies, and light-emitting diodes ("LEDs"). We sell these products to semiconductor device and module manufacturers worldwide, particularly in Asia, North America and Europe.
We operate in two reportable segments, based primarily on the industries they serve: (i) Semiconductor and (ii) Material and Substrate. In our Semiconductor segment, we supply thermal processing equipment, including solder reflow ovens, horizontal diffusion furnaces, and custom high-temp belt furnaces for use by semiconductor, electronics and electro/mechanical assembly manufacturers. Our semiconductor customers are primarily manufacturers of integrated circuits and optoelectronic sensors and discrete ("O-S-D") components used in analog, power and radio frequency ("RF"). In our Material and Substrate segment, we produce substrate consumables, chemicals and machinery for lapping (fine abrading) and polishing of materials, such as silicon wafers for semiconductor products, sapphire wafers for LED applications, and compound substrates, like silicon carbide wafers, for power device applications.
The semiconductor industry is cyclical, but not seasonal, and historically has experienced fluctuations. Our revenue is impacted by these broad industry trends.
Strategy
We continue to focus on our plans to profitably grow our business and have developed a strategic growth plan and a capital allocation plan that we believe will support our growth objectives. Our Power Semiconductor strategic growth plan leverages our experience, products and capabilities in pursuit of growth, profitability and sustainability. Our core focus areas are:
•Emerging opportunities in the SiC industry - We believe we are well-positioned to take part in this significant growth area, specifically as it relates to silicon carbide wafer capacity expansion. We are working closely with our customers to understand their SiC growth plans, needs and opportunities. We are investing in our capacity, next generation product development, and in our people. During 2021, we completed the acquisition of Intersurface Dynamics, which added numerous coolants and chemical products to our existing consumable and machine product lines. We believe these investments will help fuel our growth in the emerging growth SiC industry.
•300mm Horizontal Diffusion Furnace - We have a highly successful and proven 300mm horizontal diffusion furnace solution used for power semiconductor device manufacturing applications. We have a strong foundation with the leading 300mm power chip manufacturer, and, in the last three years, we have received 23 orders from top-tier customers. We believe we have a strong opportunity to continue expanding our customer base and grow revenue with our 300mm solution.
•As the largest revenue contributor to our organization, we expect our subsidiary, BTU, will continue to track semiconductor industry growth cycles for our advanced semi-packaging and SMT products, in addition to specialized custom belt furnaces used in automotive and other specialized industrial applications. We believe that our investments in product innovation will provide BTU with opportunities
to grow further, especially in high growth applications of consumer and industrial electronics, IoT, electric vehicles and 5G communications.
We anticipate future investments will be required to meet the expected demand from our growing served markets to achieve our revenue growth targets, including investments in research and development as well as capital expenditures, which also includes further investments in capacity expansion, talent, and management information systems. In June 2022, we completed the sale of the real property where our manufacturing facility in Massachusetts is located. In connection with this sale, we entered into a two-year leaseback of the facility. This sale-leaseback transaction resulted in a net cash inflow of approximately $14.9 million, after repayment of the existing mortgage and settlement of related sale expenses. During the two-year leaseback period, we will conduct a search for a new manufacturing facility more in line with the needs of our Semiconductor product lines. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we completed the move of our Shanghai facility to a new location. This new location increases our capacity and allows us to streamline our manufacturing processes, thus reducing our lead times. In addition, we are evaluating our management information systems and needs in order to allow for greater efficiencies and to ensure our infrastructure can support our future growth plans. As a capital equipment manufacturer, we will continue to invest in our business to drive future growth.
In addition to investments in our organic growth, another key aspect of our capital allocation policy is our plan to grow through acquisitions. We have the expertise and track record to identify complimentary and synergistic acquisition targets in the Semiconductor and SiC growth environments and to execute transactions and integrations to provide for value creating, profitable growth in both the short-term and long-term. On March 3, 2021, we acquired Intersurface Dynamics, a Connecticut-based manufacturer of substrate process chemicals used in various manufacturing processes, including semiconductors, silicon and compound semiconductor wafers, and optics. As of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we do not have an agreement to acquire any acquisition target.
Cybersecurity Incident
On April 12, 2021, we detected a data incident in which attackers acquired data and disabled some of the technology systems used by one of our subsidiaries. Upon learning of the incident, we immediately engaged external counsel and retained a team of third-party forensic, incident response, and security professionals to investigate and determine the full scope of this incident. We also notified law enforcement officials and confirmed that the incident is covered by our insurance. We have completed the investigation of the data incident with assistance from our outside professionals, and indications were that the unauthorized third-party gained access to certain personal information relating to employees and their beneficiaries for some of our operations. There was no indication of any misuse of this information.
Despite this disruption, production continued in our facilities. Our previously disabled subsidiary network is now back up and running securely. Working alongside our security professionals, we were able to bring our subsidiary’s systems online with enhanced security controls. We have deployed an advanced next generation anti-virus and endpoint detection and response tool, as well as Managed Detection & Response services. We remain committed to protecting the security of the personal information entrusted to us and providing high-quality products and service to our customers.
We recorded approximately $1.1 million of expense in 2021 related to this incident, which is included in selling, general and administrative expenses. The expense is primarily related to third-party service providers, including security professionals as well as legal and response teams. We may make additional investments in the future to further strengthen our cybersecurity. We filed an insurance claim during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 related to the incident. During the second quarter of 2022, we signed a final settlement agreement with our insurer resulting in total reimbursement of approximately $0.6 million, which included $0.4 million received during the quarter ended December 31, 2021 and $0.2 million received during the quarter ended March 31, 2022. No portion of the reimbursement remains outstanding as of September 30, 2022.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and the outbreak became increasingly widespread, including in all of the markets in which we operate. We continue to monitor
the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business. We are a company operating in a critical infrastructure industry, as defined by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Consistent with federal guidelines and with foreign government, state and local orders to date, we have continued to operate across our footprint throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the onset of COVID-19 and its negative effects on our business, most prominently reflected in our second, third and fourth quarter fiscal 2020 results, global economic conditions improved during fiscal 2021, resulting in increased demand for our products and services, which led to our earnings for fiscal 2021 substantially exceeding our fiscal 2020 results. There remain many unknowns and we continue to monitor the expected trends and related demand for our products and services and have and will continue to adjust our operations accordingly. Please see additional information in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
On March 28, 2022, the Chinese government issued a mandatory shutdown in Shanghai, the location of one of our manufacturing facilities. The factory was allowed to partially reopen in May 2022 and fully reopened on June 1, 2022. After the reopening on June 1, 2022, the factory was able to operate near full capacity for the entire month of June. We were able to make up the shipments missed in the fourth quarter and are now operating at normal capacity levels. Given the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, there can be no assurance that our Shanghai facility will be allowed to remain open on a consistent basis.
Segment Reporting Changes
Upon the acquisition of Intersurface Dynamics in the second quarter of 2021, we evaluated our organizational structure and concluded that we have two reportable segments following the acquisition. Our Material and Substrate segment includes our former SiC/LED segment in addition to Intersurface Dynamics beginning at the date of acquisition.
Industry Fluctuations
Our quarterly and annual operating results have been and will continue to be impacted by the timing of large system orders. Further, the semiconductor equipment industry is highly cyclical, and the conditions of this industry remain volatile. Therefore, our order flow fluctuates quarter to quarter. For additional information regarding the risks related to our business and industry, please refer to "Item 1A. Risk Factors" within this Form 10-K.
Fiscal Year
Our fiscal year is from October 1 to September 30. Unless otherwise stated, references to the years 2022, 2021 and 2020 relate to the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain financial data as a percentage of net revenue for the periods indicated:
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Net Revenue
Net revenue consists of revenue recognized upon shipment or delivery of equipment. Spare parts sales are recognized upon shipment and service revenue is recognized upon completion of the service activity, which is generally ratable over the term of the service contract. Since the majority of our revenue is generated from large system sales, revenue, gross profit and operating income can be significantly impacted by the timing of system shipments. See “Critical Accounting Policies - Revenue Recognition” included in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Our net revenue by reportable segment for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 were as follows, dollars in thousands:
Net revenue for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 were $106.3 million and $85.2 million, respectively, an increase of $21.1 million or 25%. Revenue from the Semiconductor segment increased $15.9 million, or 22%, over the prior year period. Our Semiconductor results for 2022 reflect the closure of our Shanghai manufacturing facility, which partially reopened in mid-May and fully reopened on June 1, 2022. The Shanghai facility was able to return to normal capacity during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, however, the order trends in the overall market have slowed since the April 2022 shutdown. Revenue from our Material and Substrate segment increased $5.2 million, or 40%, due to increased shipments of consumables resulting from capacity expansion and production increases by our customers.
Orders and Backlog
New orders booked in the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 were as follows, dollars in thousands:
Our backlog as of September 30, 2022 and 2021 was as follows, dollars in thousands:
At the end of 2022, three customers individually accounted for 21%, 17% and 14% of our total backlog. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of our backlog as of September 30, 2022. The orders included in our backlog are generally credit approved customer purchase orders believed to be firm and are generally expected to ship within the next twelve months. Because our orders are typically subject to cancellation or delay by the customer, our backlog at any particular point in time is not necessarily representative of actual sales for succeeding periods, nor is backlog any assurance that we will realize profit from completing these orders.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is the difference between net revenue and cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold consists of purchased material, labor and overhead to manufacture equipment and spare parts and the cost of service and support to customers for installation, warranty and paid service calls. Gross margin is gross profit as a percent of net revenue. Our gross profit and gross margin by reportable segment for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 were as follows, dollars in thousands:
Gross profit for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 was $39.5 million and $34.5 million, respectively, representing an increase of $5.0 million, or 14%. Gross margin for 2022 and 2021 was 37% and 41%, respectively. Gross margin for the Semiconductor segment decreased to 35% in 2022, compared to 42% in 2021, due primarily to the above-mentioned closure of our Shanghai manufacturing facility. This closure resulted in decreased utilization during the closure period as we continued to pay our employees while ceasing production entirely for the first eight weeks of the third quarter of fiscal 2022. Additionally, Semiconductor material costs increased approximately 39% over the 2021 period due to product mix changes and rising prices. We continue to take steps to manage our inventory price risk, including purchasing long lead-time items in advance and onboarding additional source suppliers. In the Material and Substrate segment, gross margin increased to 47% in 2022, compared to 32% in 2021 due primarily to improved capacity utilization resulting from higher consumable sales and the usage of previously reserved inventory slightly offset by increased material costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) consists of the cost of employees, consultants and contractors, facility costs, sales commissions, shipping costs, promotional marketing expenses, legal and accounting expenses and bad debt expense.
Total SG&A expenses for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 were $28.3 million and $24.7 million, respectively, representing an increase of $3.6 million or 14.4%. This increase was primarily due to increases of $2.1 million in employee-related expenses and $1.6 million in freight expenses, driven by higher revenues and increased shipping rates. SG&A expense includes $0.5 million and $0.4 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense for 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Gain on Sale of Fixed Assets
Gain on sale of fixed assets consists primarily of the gain on the sale of BTU's building in Massachusetts. The sale price was $20.6 million, of which $0.7 million was deducted at closing for commission and other closing expenses. In connection with the sale, BTU recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of $12.5 million.
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (“RD&E”) expenses consist of the cost of employees, consultants and contractors who design, engineer and develop new products and processes as well as materials and supplies used in producing prototypes. RD&E expenses may vary from period to period depending on the engineering projects in process. Expenses related to engineers working on strategic projects or sustaining engineering projects are recorded in RD&E. However, from time to time we add functionality to our products or develop new products during engineering and manufacturing to fulfill specifications in a customer’s order, in which case the cost of development, along with other costs of the order, are charged to cost of goods sold. Occasionally, we receive reimbursements through governmental research and development grants which are netted against these expenses when certain conditions have been met.
RD&E expenses, net of grants earned, for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 were $6.4 million and $6.0 million, respectively, an increase of $0.4 million. This increase is due to the timing of purchases related to specific strategic-development projects at our Semiconductor segment. We expect most of these strategic projects to be completed throughout fiscal 2023, resulting in new or updated product offerings in fiscal 2023 and 2024. Grants earned are immaterial in all periods presented.
Restructuring Charges
We recorded restructuring charges of $0.1 million in 2021. These one-time charges relate to staff reductions in our Semiconductor and Material and Substrate operations.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 7.5% and 56.1% in 2022 and 2021, respectively. The effective tax rate is the ratio of total income tax expense to pre-tax income. The effective tax rates for 2022 and 2021 were lower and higher than the U.S. statutory rate, respectively. The 2022 effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate due to a substantial portion of the earnings in the US resulting from the gain on the sale of our Massachusetts property for which no tax expense was recognized due to the utilization of net operating losses and foreign tax credits, which are fully valued. The 2021 effective tax rate was higher than the statutory rate due primarily to higher taxes on income in foreign jurisdictions, state income taxes and domestic losses for which no tax benefit was recorded.
In 2022 and 2021, we recorded income tax expense of $1.4 million and $1.9 million, respectively. The income tax provisions are based upon estimates of annual income, annual permanent differences, statutory tax rates and credits in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgments and estimates are required in the determination of the consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. U.S. GAAP requires that a valuation allowance be established when it is “more likely than not” that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. A review of all available positive and negative evidence needs to be considered, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies and results of recent operations. According to those principles, it is difficult to conclude that a valuation allowance is not needed when the negative evidence includes cumulative losses in recent years. Based on the consideration of all available evidence, we have concluded that we will maintain a full valuation allowance for all U.S. net deferred tax assets and a portion of foreign deferred tax assets. We will continue to monitor our cumulative income and loss positions in the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions to determine whether valuation allowances on deferred tax assets are appropriate. We expect to pay minimal U.S federal cash taxes for the foreseeable future as a result of our U.S. net operating losses that are carried forward.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. ASC 740 states that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, on the basis of the technical merits. We currently have $1.0 million of unrecognized tax benefits recorded within our financial statements. We record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available.
Our future effective income tax rate depends on various factors, such as the amount of income (loss) in each tax jurisdiction, tax regulations governing each region, non-deductible expenses incurred as a percent of pre-tax income and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies.
Selected Quarterly Data (Unaudited)
The following table sets forth selected unaudited consolidated quarterly financial information for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, in thousands, except percentages and per share amounts:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
We maintain a strong focus on liquidity and define our liquidity risk tolerance based on sources and uses to maintain a sufficient liquidity position to meet our obligations through our industry cycles, under both normal and stressed
conditions. We manage our liquidity to provide access to sufficient funding to meet our business needs and financial obligations throughout business cycles. We operate in the semiconductor capital equipment industry, which is cyclical, and we must ensure we have sufficient liquidity during the down cycles and varying macroeconomic conditions. Our liquidity plans are established within the context of our financial and strategic planning processes and consider the liquidity necessary to fund our operating commitments, which include purchase obligations for inventory and equipment, payroll and general expenses. We also take into consideration our capital allocation and growth objectives, including investing in research and development and capital expenditures (including capacity assessments and IT systems).
The success of our growth strategy is dependent upon the availability of additional capital resources on terms satisfactory to management. Our sources of capital in the past have included the sale of equity securities, which includes common stock sold in private transactions and public offerings, and cash generated from operations. There can be no assurance that we can raise such additional capital resources when needed or on satisfactory terms. We believe that our principal sources of liquidity discussed above are sufficient to support operations for at least the next twelve months.
Capital Allocation
Our capital allocation strategy focuses on building shareholder value. We do this by first investing in ourselves and growing our capabilities. We then look to supplement and strengthen our capabilities through acquisitions and strategic investments. And finally, we provide the return realized by the investments to our stockholders. These three priorities are detailed as follows:
•Invest in R&D and capital expenditures to strengthen our competitive position. Historically, our R&D efforts have focused on upgrades to existing product platforms as well as new product designs. Capital expenditures consist primarily of capacity expansion as well as investments in IT systems.
•Invest in strategic acquisitions that will complement our strong platform of product offerings. In evaluating these opportunities, our objectives include enhancing our earnings and cash flows, adding complementary product offerings, expanding our geographic footprint, improving our production efficiency and expanding our customer base. As a result, we continue to manage our balance sheet to maintain adequate liquidity so that we may react quickly as opportunities arise.
•Once the above priorities have been met, we evaluate the return of capital to shareholders, as we have done in the past. We have never paid dividends on our common stock, and we do not expect to pay dividends on common stock in the foreseeable future. However, our Board has authorized annual stock repurchase plans since 2018.
Cash and Cash Flow
The following table sets forth for the periods presented certain consolidated cash flow information, in thousands:
*	Includes Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash that are included in Held-For-Sale Assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for periods prior to January 22, 2020.
As of September 30, 2022 and 2021, cash and cash equivalents were $46.9 million and $32.8 million, respectively. We had no restricted cash at September 30, 2022 and 2021. Our working capital was $80.3 million as of September 30, 2022 and $65.8 million as of September 30, 2021. Our ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 4.5:1 as of September 30, 2022, and 5.4:1 as of September 30, 2021.
During periods of weakening demand, we typically generate cash from operating activities. Conversely, we are more likely to use operating cash flows for working capital requirements during periods of higher growth. The $14.0 million increase in consolidated cash during 2022 was primarily due to increases in cash from the sale of our Massachusetts property as well as customer deposits received in 2022 for upcoming shipments in 2023, partially offset by cash used to repay long-term debt and cash used to repurchase stock. We maintain cash accounts denominated in currencies other than our reporting currency, which expose us to foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $5.2 million in 2022 compared to cash used in operating activities of $6.0 million in 2021 and cash used in operating activities of $1.7 million in 2020. During 2022, we received several large customer deposits, primarily related to orders of our horizontal diffusion and high temp furnaces, which are expected to ship over the next four quarters. During 2021, we increased our inventory balances in preparation for shipments scheduled for the first half of fiscal 2022. Additionally, our accounts receivable increased during this period as most of our shipments occurred late in the fourth quarter and our customers generally have payment terms of 60-90 days. During 2020, we increased our inventory balances to mitigate risks in our supply chain resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as in preparation for a large shipment that occurred in the first quarter of fiscal 2021.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities was $18.8 million in 2022, primarily consisting of $19.9 million in proceeds from the sale of our real property in Massachusetts. Cash used in investing activities was $8.1 million in 2021, primarily consisting of $5.1 million net cash paid for the acquisition of Intersurface Dynamics and capital expenditures primarily related to the relocation of our Shanghai manufacturing facility. Cash used in investing activities was $12.6 million in 2020, primarily related to the divestiture of our solar businesses and capital expenditures for our new Material and Substrate building in Pennsylvania. Investing activities in 2022, 2021 and 2020 included capital expenditures of $1.1 million, $3.0 million and $2.7 million, respectively. We expect capital expenditures to increase in 2023 as we make targeted investments in our production capacity and IT systems.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In 2022, cash used in financing activities was $8.3 million, comprised of $4.1 million of cash used for the repurchase of common stock and payments on long-term debt of $4.9 million, partially offset by $0.7 million of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options. Payments in long-term debt include the full repayment of the $4.5 million mortgage balance on the real property in Massachusetts. In 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $1.2 million, consisting of approximately $1.5 million of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by payments on long-term debt of $0.4 million. In 2020, cash used in financing activities was $1.5 million, consisting of $0.9 million of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options, which was fully offset by $2.0 million used for stock repurchases and payments on long-term debt of $0.4 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of September 30, 2022, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
We had the following contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of September 30, 2022, in thousands:
Acquisitions
Our business strategy includes the possible acquisition of or investments in other businesses to expand or complement our operations. The magnitude, timing and nature of any future acquisitions or investments will depend on a number of factors, including the availability of suitable candidates, the negotiation of acceptable terms, our financial capabilities and general economic and business conditions. Financing for future transactions would result in the utilization of cash, incurrence of additional debt, issuance of stock or some combination of the foregoing.
Critical Accounting Policies
See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” for a discussion of our consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period.
On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, income taxes, inventory valuation, and goodwill. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, expectations regarding the future and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these estimates and judgments form the basis for making conclusions about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
A critical accounting policy is one that is both important to the presentation of our financial position and results of operations, and requires management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These uncertainties are discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We believe the following critical accounting policies encompass the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a product or service to the customer. The transaction price of a contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation based upon the relative standalone selling price for each performance obligation and is recognized as revenue upon satisfaction of the performance obligation, either at a point in time or over time.
Equipment and related product revenues (e.g., furnace systems, system add-ons, machinery, consumables and spare parts) are recognized at a point in time, when they are shipped or delivered, depending on contractual terms.
Revenue is recorded net of customer discounts or rebates, if any. Assurance-type warranties are not considered a performance obligation.
Occasionally, our customers earn a commission on the purchase and/or resale of our products. These payments to customers are recorded as a reduction of revenue and are less than 5% of our total revenues in all periods presented.
In substantially all of our sales transactions, we incur incremental costs to obtain contracts with customers, in the form of sales commissions. We maintain a commission program which rewards our sales representatives for system sales and our employees for system sales and other individual goals. We have elected a practical expedient to allow for the recognition of commission expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset that the entity otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. Based on the nature of our contracts with customers, we expense all commissions as incurred based upon the expectation that the amortization period would be one year or less.
Income Taxes. We file consolidated federal income tax returns in the United States for all subsidiaries except those in China and the UK, where separate returns are filed. The calculation of tax liabilities for all jurisdictions involves significant judgment in identifying uncertain tax positions, estimating the amount of deferred tax assets that will be realized in the future and the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with our expectations could have a material impact on our operations and financial condition.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets in the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies and results of recent operations. It is difficult to conclude that a valuation allowance is not needed when the negative evidence includes cumulative losses in recent years. If we were to determine that it is more likely than not that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if we later determine that it is more likely than not that all or part of the net deferred tax assets would be realized, a tax benefit would be realized when all or part of the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. As of September 30, 2022, we have significant U.S. deferred tax assets that have a full valuation allowance and foreign deferred tax assets that have a partial valuation allowance. Any changes to the judgments related to our valuation allowance could have a material impact on our results of operations.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. ASC 740 states that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, on the basis of the technical merits. We currently have $1.0 million of unrecognized tax benefits recorded within our financial statements. We record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available.
Inventory Valuation. We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventory cost includes the purchase price of parts or finished goods and freight and/or other overhead costs incurred to receive the inventory into our manufacturing facilities. We regularly review inventory quantities and record a write-down to net realizable value for excess and obsolete inventory. The write-down is primarily based on historical inventory usage adjusted for expected changes in product demand and production requirements. Our industry is characterized by customers in highly-cyclical industries, rapid technological changes, frequent new product developments and rapid product obsolescence. Changes in demand for our products could result in further write-downs.
Goodwill. We perform an annual impairment test as of September 30, or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist, to determine whether the fair value of a reporting unit in which goodwill resides is less than its carrying value. We perform the first step of the goodwill impairment test, which compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not considered impaired and we are not required to perform additional analysis. If
the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, we would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value (although the loss would not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit).
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Our goodwill impairment test uses a weighting of the income approach and the market approach to estimate a reporting unit’s fair value. The income approach is based on a discounted future cash flow analysis that uses certain assumptions including: projections of revenues and expenses and related cash flows based on assumed long-term growth rates and demand trends; expected future investments and working capital requirements to sustain and grow the business; and estimated discount rates based on the reporting unit’s weighted average cost of capital as derived by the Capital Asset Pricing Model and other methods, which includes observable market inputs and other data from identified comparable companies. The same estimates are also used internally for our capital budgeting process, and for long-term and short-term business planning and forecasting. We test the reasonableness of the inputs and outcomes of our discounted cash flow analysis against available comparable market data.
The market approach is based on the application of appropriate market-derived multiples selected from (i) comparable publicly-traded companies and/or (ii) the implied transaction multiples derived from identified merger and acquisition activity in the market. Multiples are then selected based on a comparison of the reviewed data to that of the reporting unit and applied to relevant historical and forecasted financial parameters such as levels of revenues, EBITDA, EBIT or other metrics.
If actual results differ significantly from our projections, we may be required to record a material impairment charge.
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements, see “Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” within "Note 1. Summary of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies” in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”