Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on September 8, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one
or more businesses or entities (a “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from September 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $1,962,680, which consisted of interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $21,899 and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $3,057,450, offset by general and administrative expenses of $1,116,669.
For the period from September 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,248,847, which consisted of general and administrative expenses of $36,378, transaction costs allocable to warrant liabilities of $15,378 and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,199,000, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,909.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 17, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 11,500,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which included the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 1,500,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $115,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 5,450,000 private warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per private warrant generating gross proceeds of $5,450,000.
Following the IPO, the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option and sale of the private warrants, a total of $116,150,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $2,712,986 in transaction costs, including $2,300,000 of cash underwriting fees, and $412,986 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $618,033. Net income of $1,962,680 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities of $21,899 and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $3,057,450. Changes in operating assets and liabilities generated $498,636 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from September 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $354,949. Net loss of $1,248,847 was affected by formation costs paid by Sponsor in exchange for issuance of Founder Shares of $5,000, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,199,000, transaction costs associated with the IPO of $15,378, and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,909. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $323,571 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $116,173,808 (including approximately $23,808 of interest income) consisting of U.S. treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $635,169. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or
similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private warrants.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through June 17, 2022, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
We issued an aggregate of 5,450,000 private warrants in connection with our IPO and private placement, which are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrants as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statements of operations. The fair value of the private placement warrants has been estimated using a Binomial Lattice Model at each measurement date.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until June 17, 2022 to consummate the proposed Business Combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate the proposed Business Combination by this time. Additionally, the Company may not have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company through one year from the issuance of these financial statements. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after June 17, 2022. The Company intends to complete the proposed Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to consummate any business combination by June 17, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as
variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor and our Chief Executive Officer approximately $7,000 per month for office space and advisory services relating to our search for, and consummation of, an initial Business Combination. We also pay Alberto Pontonio, one of our directors, a fee of approximately $3,000 per month for certain general and administrative services, including office space, utilities and secretarial support, as we may require from time to time.
The underwriters are entitled to a fee under our business combination marketing agreement of $0.20 per Unit, or $2,300,000 in the aggregate. The fee under our business combination marketing agreement will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
The Company has engaged EarlyBirdCapital, the underwriter in the IPO, as an advisor in connection with its Business Combination to assist in holding meetings with the Company shareholders to discuss a potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce the Company to potential investors that are interested in purchasing its securities in connection with its initial Business Combination, assist in obtaining shareholder approval for the Business Combination and assist with press releases and public filings in connection with a Business Combination. The Company will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of its initial business combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO (exclusive of any applicable finder’s fees which might become payable).
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary Shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Ordinary Shares (including Ordinary Shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Ordinary Shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Ordinary Shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the private warrants issued in connection with our IPO in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the private warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the private warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of the private warrants was estimated using a Binomial Lattice Model.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per Ordinary Share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable Ordinary Shares is excluded from income (loss) per Ordinary Share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, "Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity" ("ASU 2020-06"), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.