Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on January 11, 2021 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our share capital, debt or a combination of cash, share capital and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of a Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues through December 31, 2021. All activity for the period from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering as described below and, subsequent to the closing of the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,598,299, which consists of operating costs of $945,070, transaction costs allocated to the Warrants of $208,936 and an increase in the fair value of warrant liability of $452,317, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $8,024.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 8, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 15,525,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $155,250,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 6,105,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement transaction to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $6,105,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $155,250,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $8,983,426 in costs related to the Initial Public Offering, consisting of $3,105,000 of underwriting fees, $5,433,750 of deferred underwriting fees and $444,676 of other offering costs.
For the period from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,428,037. Net loss of $1,598,299 was affected by formation costs paid by the Sponsor in exchange for issuance of the Founder Shares of $5,000, an increase in the fair value of warrant liability of $452,317, transaction costs allocated to the Warrants of $208,936 and interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $8,024. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $487,967 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $155,258,024 (including $8,024 of interest income) consisting of money market funds, which are invested primarily in U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to
complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,147,287 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s executive officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such Working Capital Loans. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such Working Capital Loans but no proceeds from the Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrant.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of the Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a sum of $10,000 per month for office space and secretarial and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on March 3, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $5,433,750 in the aggregate. The deferred underwriting fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the condensed financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the critical accounting policies set forth below.
Warrant Liability
We account for the Warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the Warrants’ specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in the FASB ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity,” and ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging.” The assessment considers whether the Warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC Topic 480, whether Warrants meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC Topic 480 and whether the Warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC Topic 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to the Class A Ordinary Shares, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment,
which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the Warrants and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the Warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified Warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the Warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified Warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the Warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants was determined using the closing price of the Public Warrants, and the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation approach.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Ordinary Shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A Ordinary Shares (including Class A Ordinary Shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A Ordinary Shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Class A Ordinary Shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our condensed balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
The Company has two classes of ordinary shares, which are referred to as Class A Ordinary Shares and Class B Ordinary Shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of ordinary shares. Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period. The calculation of diluted loss per share does not consider the effect of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, because the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)” and “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity,” which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective as of January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our condensed financial statements.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.