ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and accompanying notes included herein. This discussion contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K other than statements of historical fact, including statements regarding our future operating results or financial position, our business strategy and plans, and our objectives for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, economic and competitive conditions, regulatory changes and other uncertainties, as well as those factors included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, all of which are difficult to predict. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
For purposes of this section, “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Company” and “Atlas” refers to Atlas Technical Consultants, Inc. (formerly named Boxwood Merger Corp.) and its subsidiaries. The Atlas Business Combination (as defined below) was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization where the Company was the legal acquirer but treated as the accounting acquiree. All references to operations prior to the Atlas Business Combination reflect the results of Atlas Intermediate Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Atlas Intermediate”) and its subsidiaries. Since Atlas Intermediate was determined to be the accounting acquirer, the information included below will include the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries through the Atlas Business Combination and will include the Company, including Atlas Intermediate, for transactions occurring after the Atlas Business Combination.
OVERVIEW
Atlas Technical Consultants, Inc. (the “Company”, “We”, or “Atlas” and formerly named Boxwood Merger Corp. (“Boxwood”)) was a blank check company, incorporated in Delaware on June 28, 2017. The Company was formed for the purpose of acquiring, through a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization, recapitalization, or other similar business transaction, one or more operating businesses or assets.
On February 14, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), the Company consummated its acquisition of Atlas Intermediate pursuant to the Unit Purchase Agreement, dated as of August 12, 2019, as amended on January 22, 2020 (the “Purchase Agreement”), by and among the Company, Atlas TC Holdings LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and a Delaware limited liability company (“Holdings”), Atlas TC Buyer LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Holdings and a Delaware limited liability company, Atlas Intermediate and Atlas Technical Consultants Holdings LP, a Delaware limited partnership (the “Seller”). The acquisition of Atlas Intermediate pursuant to the Purchase Agreement together with the other transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement is referred to herein as the “Atlas Business Combination.”
Following the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, we are organized in an “Up-C” structure in which the business of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries is held by Holdings and continues to operate through the subsidiaries of Atlas Intermediate, and in which our only direct assets consist of common units of Holdings (the “Holdings Units”). We are the sole manager of Holdings in accordance with the terms of the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Holdings entered into in connection with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination.
Headquartered in Austin, Texas, we are a leading provider of professional testing, inspection, engineering, environmental, program management and consulting services, offering solutions to public and private sector clients in the transportation, commercial, water, government, education, industrial, healthcare and power markets. With approximately 145 offices located throughout the United States, we provide a broad range of mission-critical technical services, helping our clients test, inspect, certify, plan, design and manage a wide variety of projects across diverse end markets. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we:
● performed approximately 40,500 projects, with average revenue per project of less than $10,000 or less; and
● delivered approximately 90% of our projects under “time & materials” and “cost-plus” contracts.
We act as a trusted advisor to our clients, helping our clients design, engineer, inspect, manage and maintain civil and commercial infrastructure, servicing the existing structures as well as helping to build new structures. However, we do not perform any construction, and do not take any direct construction risk.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we:
● performed approximately 40,500 projects, with average revenue per project of less than $10,000 or less; and
● delivered approximately 90% of our projects under “time & materials” and “cost-plus” contracts.
We have long-term relationships with a diverse set of clients, providing a base of repeating clients, projects and revenues. Approximately 90% of our revenues are derived from projects that have used our services at least twice in the past three years and more than 95% of our revenues are generated from client relationships longer than 10 years, with greater than 25% of revenues generated from relationships longer than 30 years. Examples of such long-term customers include the Texas and Georgia Departments of Transportation, U.S. Postal Service, Gwinnett County Georgia, New York City Housing Authority, Stanford University, Port of Oakland, United Rentals, Inc., Speedway, Walmart, Inc., and Apple Inc.
Our broad base of customers spans a diverse set of end markets including the transportation, commercial, water, government, education, industrial, healthcare and power sectors. Our customers include government agencies, quasi-public entities, schools, hospitals, utilities and airports, as well as private sector clients across many industries.
Our services require a high degree of technical expertise, as our clients rely on us to provide testing, inspection and quality assurance services to ensure that structures are designed, engineered, built and maintained in accordance with building codes, regulations and the highest safety standards. As such, our services are delivered by a highly-skilled, technical employee base that includes scientists, engineers, inspectors and other field experts. As of December 31, 2021, our technical staff represented approximately 80% of our approximately 3,450 employees. Our services are typically provided under contracts, some of which are long-term with long lead times between when contracts are signed and when our services are performed. As such, we have a significant amount of contracted backlog, providing for a high degree of visibility with respect to revenues expected to be generated from such backlog. As of December 31, 2021, our contracted backlog was estimated to be approximately $808 million. See “-Backlog” below for additional information relating to our backlog.
COVID-19 Pandemic
See Note 14 “COVID - 19 Pandemic” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the recent accounting pronouncements.
HOW WE EVALUATE OUR OPERATIONS
We use a variety of financial and other information in monitoring the financial condition and operating performance of our business. Some of this information is financial information that is prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), while other information may be financial in nature and may not be prepared in accordance with GAAP. Historical information is periodically compared to budgets, as well as against industry-wide information. We use this information for planning and monitoring our business, as well as in determining management and employee compensation.
We evaluate our overall business performance based primarily on a combination of four financial metrics: revenue, backlog, adjusted EBITDA and liquidity measures. These are key measures used by our management team and Board to understand and evaluate our operational performance, to establish budgets and to develop short and long-term operational goals.
Revenue
Revenues for services are derived from billings under contracts (which are typically of short duration) that provide for specific time, material and equipment charges, or lump sum payments and are reported net of any taxes collected from customers. We recognize revenue as it is earned at estimated collectible amounts.
Revenue is recognized as services are performed and amounts are earned in accordance with the terms of a contract. We generally contract for services to customers based on either hourly rates or a fixed fee. In such contracts, our efforts, measured by time incurred, typically are provided in less than a year and represent the contractual milestones or output measure, which is the contractual earnings pattern. For contracts with fixed fees, we recognize revenues as amounts become billable in accordance with contract terms, provided the billable amounts are consistent with the services delivered and are earned. Expenses associated with performance of work may be reimbursed with a markup depending on contractual terms. Revenues include the markup, if any, earned on reimbursable expenses. Reimbursements include billings for travel and other out-of-pocket expenses and third-party costs, such as equipment rentals, materials, subcontractor costs and outside laboratories, which is included in cost of revenues in the accompanying combined statement of income.
Backlog
Effective for the quarter ended April 2, 2021, we define backlog to include the total estimated future revenue streams associated with fully executed contracts as well as an estimate of highly probable revenues from recurring, task order-based contracts. As we integrate our acquisitions, we have standardized the backlog definition. Previously we defined backlog as fully awarded and contract work or revenue we expect to realize for work completed. Had we not refined our definition of backlog, our backlog as of April 2, 2021 would have been $640 million versus the $689 million we reported as of that date.
We use backlog to evaluate Company revenue growth as it typically follows growth in backlog. As backlog is not a defined accounting term, our computation of backlog may not be comparable with that of our peers.
Adjusted EBITDA
We view adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, as an important indicator of performance. We define adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization and adjustments for certain one- time or non-recurring items adjustments. For more information on adjusted EBITDA, as well as a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, please see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
COMPONENTS AND FACTORS AFFECTING OUR OPERATING RESULTS
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily by providing infrastructure-based testing, inspection, certification, engineering, and compliance services to a wide range of public- and private-sector clients. Our revenue consists of both services provided by our employees and pass-through fees from subcontractors and other direct costs.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue reflects the cost of personnel and specifically identifiable costs associated with revenue.
Operating Expense
Operating expense includes corporate expenses, including personnel, occupancy, and administrative expenses, including depreciation and amortization.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of contractual interest expense on outstanding debt obligations including amortization of deferred financing costs and other related financing expenses.
Income Tax Expense
Following the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, we are organized in an “Up-C” structure in which the business of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries is held by Holdings and will continue to operate through the subsidiaries of Atlas Intermediate, and in which our only direct assets consist of common units of Holdings. We are the sole manager of Holdings in accordance with the terms of the Holdings LLC Agreement entered into in connection with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination.
Previously, Atlas Intermediate was treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes with all income tax liabilities and/or benefits of the Company being passed through to the partners and members. As such, no recognition of federal or state income taxes have been provided for in the accompanying consolidated financial statements with the exception of income taxes relating to the C-Corp subsidiaries directly owned by Atlas Intermediate and the State of Texas Margin tax.
Subsequent to the Atlas Business Combination, income taxes relating to the C-Corps owned directly by Atlas Intermediate, the State of Texas Margin tax and the State of Washington Business and Occupation tax are considered within the provision of non-controlling interest as it is generated through the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries.
Net Income (loss)
Net income from continuing operations reflects our operating income after taking into account costs and expenses for a given period, while excluding any gain or loss from discontinued operations.
Provision for Non-controlling Interest
Our ownership and voting structure are comprised of holders of our Class A common stock that participate 100% in the results of Atlas Technical Consultants, Inc. and 91.0% in Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries and holders of our Class B common stock that participate in the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries until their Class B common stock is converted to Class A common stock. The holders of our Class B common stock participate in 9.0% of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries. In connection with the Atlas Business Combination, it was determined that the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries would be fully consolidated within the results of the Company.
Due to the participation of the holders of our Class B common stock in the results of Atlas Intermediate and subsidiaries, a non-controlling interest was deemed to exist. Consolidated net income includes earnings attributable to both the shareholders and the non-controlling interests.
The provision for non-controlling interest relates to pre-tax income subsequent to the Atlas Business Combination and includes a pro-rata share of taxes as federal and state income taxes relating to the C-Corps directly owned by Atlas Intermediate, the State of Texas Margin tax, and the State of Washington Business and Occupation tax as it is generated through the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries.
Upon the close of the Atlas Business Combination, the holders of our Class B common stock participated in 80.6% of the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries. This percentage has declined since the Atlas Business Combination due to the exchange of Atlas Intermediate units, together with Class B common shares, for Class A common shares as contractual lock-ups have expired and the exchange of our public and private placement warrants for Class A common shares during November and December 2020 because of our tender offer and warrant exchange.
Redeemable Preferred Stock Dividends
On February 14, 2020, in connection with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, Holdings and GSO COF III AIV-2 LP (“GSO AIV-2”) entered into a subscription agreement (the “Subscription Agreement”) pursuant to which GSO AIV-2 purchased 145,000 units of a new class of Series A Senior Preferred Units of Holdings (the “Preferred Units”) at a price per Preferred Unit of $978.21, for an aggregate cash purchase price of $141,840,450, which represented a 2.179% original issue discount on the Preferred Units (such purchase, the “GSO Placement”).
The GSO Placement was made pursuant to the exemption from registration contained in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and/or Regulation D promulgated thereunder.
On February 25, 2021, the Company, in its capacity as the managing member of Holdings, entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Holdings LLC Agreement to allow Holdings, at the direction of the Board, to redeem all the Preferred Units at any time using the proceeds from the refinancing of the Atlas Credit Agreement and entry into the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements.
On February 25, 2021, following the execution of Amendment No. 1 to the Holdings LLC Agreement, Holdings elected to redeem all the 145,000 Preferred Units then outstanding and held by GSO AIV-2 for $1,084.96 per Preferred Unit for a total redemption price of $157.4 million which included dividends accrued for as of December 31, 2020 (the “Redemption”). Following the Redemption, (i) the Preferred Units are no longer deemed outstanding, (ii) all dividends on the Preferred Units ceased to accrue, and (iii) all rights of the holders thereof as holders of Preferred Units ceased and terminated, except for the right to receive payment under the Redemption.
Net Income (loss) Attributable to Class A Common Stock (Previously Members)
Net income (loss) attribution to holders of our Class A common stock represents our results after the provision for non-controlling interest, the effect of all taxes under the Up-C structure for the period subsequent to the Atlas Business Combination, and dividends due on redeemable preferred stock.
Net income (loss) for the historical results of Atlas Intermediate prior to the Atlas Business Combination is also reported within this line item.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview of Financial Results
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we continued to integrate our businesses into the Atlas name and execute on our growth strategy by targeting accretive and deleveraging acquisitions that complement our existing platform and strengthen our position in select areas of the country. We closed both the acquisitions of Atlantic Engineering Laboratories of NY, Inc. (“AEL”) and O’Neill Service Group (“O’Neill”) in the second quarter. These firms will strengthen our position in the Northeast and Pacific Northwest, respectively.
Our focus on providing environmental and other professional services without undertaking direct construction risk or having the carbon footprint of a manufacturing entity provides a growing platform for us to assist our clients in addressing their ongoing Environmental, Social and Governance (“ESG”) objectives and maintaining compliance with local laws and regulations. Examples of projects awarded to us during the year end December 31, 2021 included an $11 million contract with the US Bureau of Reclamation and a $4 million contract with the City of Augusta, Georgia, a trend along with our infrastructure work that we expect to continue through 2021 and beyond.
In addition to record liquidity of $50.7 million at December 31, 2021, we had strong operating income this year in comparison to an operating loss for the prior year as we benefited from the acquisitions we made during the latter part of 2020 and early 2021. We also saw a tempered rebound to pre-COVID levels in our legacy operations. Last year’s operating loss was strongly impacted by the costs incurred with the Atlas Business Combination and the reduction to our revenues resulting from COVID-19.
However, we incurred higher interest expense charges in 2021 associated with the debt refinancing in February 2021. This year’s interest expense included a $15.2 million write-off of deferred financing costs. The debt refinancing simplified our capital structure and lowered our overall cost of capital. In the prior year, we had lower interest charges but incurred redeemable preferred stock dividends which were excluded from net income calculations.
We have experienced an increase in our cost of revenues expressed as a percentage of revenues due to changes in our project mix and increased labor availability and wage pressures affecting our industry as well as the greater U.S. labor sector. We are actively managing and updating our rates with our customers to mitigate this in future periods as well as assessing our existing workforce and its flexibility to mitigate the impact of future variants to the COVID-19 virus.
Backlog has grown to $808 million with key wins this year including:
● $44 million contract for program and construction management services on a significant project that will promote rail accessibility between Manhattan and surrounding areas;
● $24 million contract with Georgia Department of Transportation to provide statewide subsurface utility engineering services;
● $18 million contract for construction inspection services with the US Federal Highway Administration;
● $15 million with TxDOT for design quality assurance on the Interstate 35 (“I-35”) Northeast expansion project;
● $18 million for quality assurance and verification services with the California Department of Transportation (“Caltrans”); and
● $8 million contract with the Texas Department of Transportation (“TxDOT”) for construction engineering and inspection services for the Odessa, Texas district.
These wins are indicative of the breadth of service offerings and the integration of our legacy companies with our acquisitions into a nationwide platform. For instance, the I-35 project will support a highly valued relationship with TxDOT by many of our legacy operating companies.
Our stock was added as a member to the Russell 3000® Index which we believe reflects on the progress we have made in creating shareholder value by delivering on significant milestones, including organic growth, accretive acquisitions, and optimization of our capital structure.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table represents our selected results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands, except per share data).
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to 2020:
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $70.6 million, or 15%, to $538.8 million as compared to $468.2 million for the corresponding prior year period. The acquisitions of AltaVista, WesTest, AEL and O’Neill contributed $57.7 million to the Company’s revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The remainder is due to our legacy business which has seen a measured rebound to pre-COVID-19 performance levels and experienced increased revenues on a significant, materials handling project in the Pacific Northwest for a longtime client. This was offset by the revenue declines in our Texas operations as two significant projects active in the year ended December 31, 2020 were placed on indefinite hold or temporarily scaled back by their respective owners in 2021 and not replaced by comparably sized projects.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $38.3 million, or 16%, to $284.0 million, as compared to $245.7 million for the corresponding prior year period. The increase in cost of revenues was due to the increase in revenues.
Cost of revenue, as a percentage of revenue, were relatively consistent at 52.7% and 52.5% for the years ended December 31, 2021and 2020, respectively. The 0.2% increase when comparing the reporting periods was primarily due to a change in project mix when comparing the two years.
Operating Expense
Operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $2.4 million, or 1%, to $227.2 million as compared to $224.8 million for the corresponding prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expense, as a percentage of revenue, decreased to 42.2% from 48.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We would have expected a larger change in operating expense when comparing the two periods as the year ended December 31, 2020 included significant costs associated with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination. The Company expensed $7.5 million of acquisition related costs and $12.0 million of costs incurred with change of control provisions contained within employment agreements and our former Management Incentive Plan during the year ended December 31,2020. Costs associated with the Atlas Business Combination represented 4.2% of our revenues in the prior year.
We did not see a full $19.5 million reduction in operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 as this period included $17.1 million of additional costs relating to the timing of the Alta Vista, WesTest, AEL and O’Neill acquisitions as well as a non-cash charge of $5.9 million relating to the change in the fair market value of contingent consideration associated with acquisitions.
The Company has also sought to reduce its reliance on external services firms that assisted us as we undertook the responsibilities of a newly public company and with financing and capital structure decisions in the prior year. During the current year, we have reduced those external costs but have incurred higher labor related costs, both in cash and non-cash form in an effort to retain and attract talent within our leadership team throughout the Company to fulfill those roles internally.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $30.1 million, or 122%, to $54.8 million, as compared to $24.7 million for the corresponding prior year period. The primary reason for the increase was due to the write-off of deferred loan acquisition costs previously paid in 2020 in connection with the Atlas Business Combination in the amount of $15.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 in comparison to a $1.7 million write-off during the year ended December 31, 2020. These write-offs were a result of the repayment of the underlying credit agreements during their respective periods.
Interest expense also increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to higher interest rates and borrowing levels in part relating to the redemption of the Preferred Units. As the Preferred Units were redeemed, we will no longer record dividends for the remainder of the year but will experience an increase in interest expense with the balance of the new term loan increased with the new credit facilities entered into in February 2021.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.5 million, compared to income tax expense of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $1.8 million increase in income tax expense was primarily due to the impacts of the AltaVista acquisition and the rebound from COVID-19 on our operations that are organized as C-Corps based in Northern California during the year ended December 31, 2021 in comparison to 2020.
Provision for Non-controlling Interest
The provision for non-controlling interest for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $3.4 million or 20% to $13.2 million from $16.6 million for the corresponding period. The provision for non-controlling interest is due to the reverse recapitalization created by the Atlas Business Combination whereby the initial holders of our Class B common stock only share in the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries based upon their ownership percentage in relation to total common stockholders. This treatment is effective from the Atlas Business Combination until the exchange of Class B common stock to Class A common stock. Shares of Class B common stock issued subsequent to the Atlas Business Combination are not included in the Company’s calculation of the non-controlling interest provision.
The decrease in the provision for non-controlling interest has been affected by the decision of our holders of Class B common stock to convert their shares to Class A common stock as their contractual lockups, as determined within the Atlas Business Combination, have expired and the timing of conversion is left to their discretion. This is evidenced by the fact that we had 18.3 million Class B common shares convert to Class A common stock during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Although the holders of Class B common stock participated at a higher rate during the period that spanned from the close of the Atlas Business Combination through December 31, 2020 than the year ended December 31, 2021 at 80.6% versus 22.7%, respectively, the decrease to the provision when comparing reporting periods was not commensurate with the participation rate decline. This was due to the fact that the prior year period excluded the costs incurred with the Atlas Business Combination as those costs pre-dated the new ownership structure. If those $19.5 million of costs incurred were included in the provision, the provision would have been $15.3 million greater last year than calculated and more consistent with the reduction in Class B common stock shareholder participation.
We expect the provision to continuously decline as the holders of Class B common stock only hold 9.0% of the Company as of December 31, 2021.
Redeemable Preferred Stock Dividends
Redeemable preferred stock dividends for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $10.3 million, or 64%, to $5.9 million from $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the prior year, we held the Preferred Units for ten and one-half months versus approximately two months in the current year as they were repaid on February 25, 2021. We would expect a more significant decline due to timing, but we had to accrete the remaining discount at redemption and that was approximately $3.1 million of the dividends recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021. As noted above, this cost was replaced by higher interest expense this period in comparison to the prior period.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted EBITDA
We view adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, as an important indicator of performance. We define adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest expense, provision for income taxes, depreciation, and amortization, further adjusted to reflect non-cash equity compensation as well as certain one-time or non-recurring items.
We believe adjusted EBITDA is a useful performance measure because it allows for an effective evaluation of our operating performance when compared to our peers, without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. We exclude the items listed above from net income in arriving at adjusted EBITDA because these amounts are either non-recurring or can vary substantially within the industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures and the method by which the assets were acquired. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income determined in accordance with GAAP. Certain items excluded from adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are reflected in adjusted EBITDA. Our presentation of adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indication that results will be unaffected by the items excluded from adjusted EBITDA. Our computations of adjusted EBITDA may not be identical to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table presents reconciliations of adjusted EBITDA to net income, our most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
(1) Includes the EBITDA of LONG (which we acquired in February 2020) for the period January 1, 2020 through the date of the acquisition.
(2) Includes costs associated with lease accruals related to moving to a hybrid workforce, employee separation charges, professional service-related fees such as legal, accounting, tax, valuation and other consulting as well as change in control payments relating to the Atlas Business Combination and other M&A activity. Additionally, it includes costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and other non-recurring expenses..
(3) Includes the amortization of the unvested portion of our 2017 and 2019 Management Incentive Plan grants that vested immediately upon the change in control provisions contained within the agreements, the amortization of unvested restricted share units, performance share units and stock options granted in 2020 and 2021 to key management personnel and our compensation to our Board of Directors.
(4) Includes $15.2 million and $1.7 million of write-offs relating to deferred financing fees for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are our cash and cash equivalents balances, cash flow from operations, borrowings under the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements (as defined below), and access to financial markets. Our principal uses of cash are operating expenses, working capital requirements, capital expenditures, repayment of debt and acquisition expenditures. We believe our sources of liquidity, including cash flow from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents and borrowing capacity under the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements will be sufficient to meet projected cash requirements for at least the next twelve months.
We continue to assess our business operations and the impact that COVID-19 may have on our financial results and liquidity. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic and related project delays, during fiscal year 2020 we experienced a reduction in revenues and our cash flows in comparison to the previous comparable period. We will continue to monitor our capital requirements to ensure our needs are in line with available capital resources and we will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, we had total liquidity of $50.7 million compared to liquidity of $39.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Other than the impact on cash flows from operations relating to the increase in interest expense, we have not experienced other liquidity decreases.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows for the periods indicated.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020
Cash and Cash Equivalents.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $10.7 million and $14.1 million of cash and cash equivalents, respectively.
Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities is primarily generated from operating income from our professional and technical testing, inspection, engineering, environmental, program management and consulting services.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $29.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $13.6 was primarily due to our stronger operating income this year in comparison to the prior year.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was ($36.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to ($23.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $12.9 million increase in cash used was related to our acquisitions of AEL and O’Neill in the year ended December 31, 2021 when the prior year period only included the acquisitions of LONG, Alta Vista and WesTest. Please refer to Note 4 “Business Acquisitions” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the terms and relative size of each acquisition.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.0 million provided by during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $2.1 million increase to net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the $35.0 million received from our term loan that was utilized for the acquisitions of AEL and O’Neill, netted by the ($30.0) million we paid towards our revolving letter of credit. We also paid ($1.2) million in redeemable preferred stock dividends and ($1.7) million relating to contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2021. In comparison, we paid ($6.6) million for redeemable preferred stock dividends in the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company raised additional money during 2020 through the Atlas Credit Agreement, described herein, and the issuance of redeemable preferred stock which was used to pay a distribution to the former owners of Atlas Intermediate, acquire LONG and pay off the Atlas Credit Facility.
Working Capital
Working capital, or current assets less current liabilities, decreased by $11.5 million, or 12%, to $81.3 million at December 31, 2021 from $92.8 million at December 31, 2020. This decrease was due primarily to increases in accounts payable of $14.1 million and other current liabilities of $14.5 million as of December 31, 2021 versus 2020 offset by a reduction in our short-term borrowings in the amount of ($10.0) million at December 31, 2021 versus 2020.
Our increase in accounts payable were a result of our efforts to pay off our revolving letter or credit which is recorded as a non-current liability and appropriately excluded from working capital.
Our increase in other current liabilities was primarily due to fair market value adjustments we made to contingent consideration liabilities that are due companies we acquired in 2020 and 2021. Overall, the current portion of that liability increased $19.8 million when comparing December 31, 2021 to 2020. A portion of that increase is due to timing of payments relating to first and second earnout periods of the Alta Vista and WesTest acquisitions and second earnout period of the LONG acquisition. The remainder is due to the acquisitions of AEL and O’Neill.
The reduction in short-term borrowings were due to the amounts considered due within one year from our balance sheet date and were calculated in accordance with the applicable credit agreements in place at the time of our balance sheet preparation.
Debt Arrangements
In March 2019, subsequent to the merger with ATC Group Partners (“ATC”), we repaid all outstanding balances on the combined entity’s loan agreements in full and terminated our prior loan agreements. These loan agreements were replaced with a term loan of $145.0 million and a revolving credit facility of $50.0 million, of which $31.8 million was funded at closing (the “Atlas Credit Facility”). Proceeds of the Atlas Credit Facility were used to repay existing debt of $123.9 million and fund a shareholder distribution of $52.8 million made in April 2019.
The Atlas Credit Facility was secured by assets of Atlas Intermediate. The Atlas Credit Facility required quarterly principal payments of $2.719 million through March 31, 2023, and then $3.625 million until the final maturity in March 2024, and bore interest at an annual rate of LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 275 to 425 basis points determined by the Company’s Consolidated Leverage Ratio, as defined in the Atlas Credit Facility. For the interest payment made in the quarter ended December 31, 2019, the applicable margin was 375 basis points, and the total interest rate was 5.500%.
The Atlas Credit Facility was scheduled to mature in March 2024. However, in connection with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, the Atlas Credit Facility was repaid, and we entered into a new credit arrangement (the “Atlas Credit Agreement”) with Macquarie Capital Funding LLC (the “Lender” or “Lead Arranger”). The Atlas Credit Agreement provided for a term loan (the “Term Loan”) in the amount of $281.0 million and revolving letter of credit (the “Revolver”) in the amount of $40.0 million, of which $24.0 million was drawn upon through December 31, 2020. The term loan proceeds were used to repay the existing Atlas Credit Facility in the amount of $171.0 million and partially fund the Atlas Business Combination and the acquisition of LONG.
Under the terms of the Atlas Credit Agreement, the Term Loan and Revolver were set to expire on February 14, 2027 and February 14, 2025, respectively. However, the Atlas Credit Agreement was repaid on February 25, 2021 in connection with the entry into the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements described below. Interest was payable monthly or at the end of the applicable interest period in arrears on any outstanding borrowings. The interest rates under the Atlas Credit Agreement equaled either (i) Adjusted LIBOR (as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement), plus 4.75%, or (ii) an Alternate Base Rate (as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement), plus 3.75%.
The Atlas Credit Agreement was guaranteed by Holdings and secured by (i) a first priority pledge of the equity interests of subsidiaries of Holdings and Atlas Intermediate and (ii) a first priority lien on substantially all other assets of Holdings, Atlas Intermediate and all their direct and indirect subsidiaries.
On March 31, 2020, the terms of the Atlas Credit Agreement were modified to reduce the maturity of the Term Loan by one year to February 14, 2026 from February 14, 2027. The interest rate for the Term Loan was increased to (i) Adjusted LIBOR Rate as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement, plus 6.25%, or (ii) an Alternate Base Rate as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement, plus 5.25%. The interest rate for the Revolver was increased to (i) Adjusted LIBOR Rate as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement, plus 5.0%, or (ii) an Alternate Base Rate as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement, plus 4.0%. The modification also increased the rate of amortization applicable to the Term Loan to 5.0% per annum (commencing on June 30, 2020).
The modifications to the Atlas Credit Agreement resulted from the exercise of the market-flex rights by the Lead Arranger in connection with the syndication process, which, in addition, required the payment of an upfront fee in an amount equal to 2% of the currently outstanding Term Loans, which was subsequently paid in April 2020. The market-flex rights were included in the Atlas Credit Agreement and were exercised by the Lead Arranger upon completion of the time period allowed to complete a syndication process.
On February 25, 2021, Atlas Intermediate, as the borrower, entered into two new credit facilities consisting of (i) a $432.0 million senior secured term loan at closing and, subject to the satisfaction of certain terms and conditions, a committed delayed draw term loan facility to be used for future acquisitions, within 18 month of February 25, 2021 and subject to certain conditions, in an aggregate principal amount of up to $75.0 million, of which $35 million has been used and $40 million remains available as of December 31, 2021, and an uncommitted incremental term loan facility that may be incurred after closing (the “2021 Term Loan”) pursuant to a Credit Agreement dated February 25, 2021, by and among Holdings, Atlas Intermediate, Wilmington Trust, National Association, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and certain lenders thereto, including certain Blackstone entities, which may include, Blackstone Alternative Credit Advisors LP, and its managed funds and accounts, and its affiliates, Blackstone Holdings Finance Co. L.L.C. and its affiliates, and/or certain other of their respective funds, accounts, clients managed, advised or sub-advised, or any of their respective affiliates (the “2021 Term Loan Agreement”) and (ii) a $40.0 million senior secured revolver which aggregate principal amount may be increased, subject to the satisfaction of certain terms and conditions, including obtaining commitments therefor, by up to $20.0 million (the “2021 Revolver”) pursuant to the Credit Agreement dated February 25, 2021, by and among Holdings, Intermediate, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, swingline lender, issuing bank, lender, sole bookrunner and sole lead arranger (the “2021 ABL Revolver Agreement,” and together with the 2021 Term Loan Agreement, collectively the “Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements”).
The initial 2021 Term Loan will mature on February 25, 2028 and the 2021 Revolver will mature on February 25, 2026.
Interest on any outstanding borrowings is payable monthly under the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement, quarterly under the 2021 Term Loan Agreement or, in each case, at the end of the applicable interest period in arrears. The cash interest rates under the 2021 Term Loan Agreement will be equal to either (i) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (as defined in the 2021 Term Loan Agreement), plus 5.50%, or (ii) an Alternate Base Rate (as defined in the 2021 Term Loan Agreement), plus 4.50%. In addition, the term loan requires an additional 2.0% interest that can be made at the option of the Company in cash or payment-in-kind (PIK). The interest rates under the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement will be equal to either (i) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (as defined in the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement), plus 2.50%, or (ii) the ABR (as defined in the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement), plus 1.50%.
The Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements are guaranteed by Holdings and secured by (i) In the case of the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement, a first priority security interest in the current assets, including accounts receivable, of Holdings, Intermediate and its subsidiaries and (ii) in the case of the 2021 Term Loan Agreement, a pledge of the equity interests of the subsidiaries of Holdings and Intermediate, and subject to the first lien security interest on current assets under the 2021 Revolver, a first priority lien on substantially all other assets of Holdings, Intermediate and all of their direct and indirect subsidiaries.
The 2021 Term Loan Agreement contains a financial covenant which requires Holdings, Atlas Intermediate and all of their direct and indirect subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to maintain a Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in each of the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements) tested on a quarterly basis that does not exceed (i) 8.25 to 1.00 with respect to the fiscal quarters ending on April 2, 2021 and July 2, 2021, (ii) 8.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending October 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021, (iii) 7.50 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending April 1, 2022 and July 1, 2022, (iv) 7.25 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2022 and December 30, 2022, (v) 7.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2023, (vi) 6.75 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending September 29, 2023 and December 29, 2023, and (vii) 6.50 to 1.00 for March 29, 2024 and each fiscal quarter ending thereafter.
The 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement contains a “springing” financial covenant which requires Holdings, Intermediate and all their direct and indirect subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to maintain a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement) of no less than 1.10 to 1.00 when the outstanding principal amount of loans under the 2021 Revolver exceeds $0 or the aggregate exposure for letters of credit under the 2021 Revolver exceeds $5 million.
The Company has been in compliance with the terms of the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreement and Atlas Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our debt balances are summarized as follows:
The following table presents, in millions, scheduled maturities of the Company’s debt as of December 31, 2021:
Our average effective interest rate on our total debt, exclusive of amortization of deferred debt issuance costs, during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 8.2% and 7.0%, respectively.
Interest expense, inclusive of amortization of deferred debt issuance costs, in the consolidated statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $54.8 million and $24.7 million, respectively. If the amortization of deferred debt issuance costs were excluded, interest expense would be $39.6 million and $23.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other Commitments and Contingencies
In connection with our acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020, we may be required to pay earnout bonuses upon the achievement of certain performance targets. This amount may be paid in installments over the first, second and third anniversaries of the acquisition. We have currently accrued $19.8 million and $11.6 million as the fair value of that liability within other current and other long-term liabilities, respectively, within our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2021, which is temporary and subject to finalization.
As part of our self-insurance policies, we are required to furnish standby letters of credit to our reinsurers. We had $3.7 million of standby letters of credit in effect as of December 31, 2021.
The Company enters into operating leases relating to office space and equipment leases in the ordinary course of business. Remaining amounts due, in millions, as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
During 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with its fleet management company pursuant to which it would receive rebates of $1.3 million to be repaid over three years at an interest rate of 2.85% per annum. The rebates were secured by title to selected vehicles within the Company’s owned fleet of vehicles in Georgia and California.
During the fourth quarter of the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company entered into a similar agreement with its fleet management company in which it would receive $1.6 million secured by vehicles owned by O’Neill. Financial terms for the O’Neill transaction were similar to agreement entered into during 2020.
Remaining payments are as follows:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Revenue Recognition
Our accounting policies establish principles for recognizing revenue upon the transfer of control of promised goods or services to customers. We generally recognize revenues over time as performance obligations are satisfied. In the course of providing these services, we may subcontract for services and incur other direct costs on behalf of our clients. These costs are passed through to clients, and in accordance with accounting rules, are included in our revenue and cost of revenue. Please refer to Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.