Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition for fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. Forward-looking statements are statements not based on historical information and which relate to future operations, strategies, financial results, or other developments. Forward-looking statements are based upon estimates, forecasts, and assumptions that are inherently subject to significant business, economic, and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control and many of which, with respect to future business decisions, are subject to change. These uncertainties and contingencies can affect actual results and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the “Risk Factors,” “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and “Business” sections in this Annual Report. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
On January 5, 2022, we announced the approval of a reverse stock split of our common stock and a reduction in the number of authorized, each within a specified range, with a final decision to be made by our board of directors. On January 6, 2022, we were advised by the Nevada Secretary of State that it had accepted the Company’s filing of a Certificate of Amendment to the Articles of Incorporation, with a filing and effective date of January 6, 2022 (the “Certificate of Change”). The Certificate of Change (i) reduced the number of authorized shares of common stock to one hundred twenty-five million (125,000,000); and, (ii) effected a reverse stock split (the “Reverse Stock Split”) of its issued common stock in a ratio of 1-for-8. The preferred stock of the Company was not changed. Trading of our common stock began on a split-adjusted basis on March 8, 2022. All common stock and per share data have been retroactively adjusted for the impact of the split.
Overview
CARES Act
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020. There are several different provisions with the CARES Act that impact income taxes for corporations. While we continue to evaluate the tax implications, we believe these provisions will not have a material impact to the financial statements.
Additionally, the Company has applied for, and has received, funds under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”) after the period covered in these financial statements in the amount of $339,000. The Company has had this liability forgiven as part of the program.
The Company also received a $150,000 loan (the “EID Loan”) from the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) under the SBA’s Economic Injury Disaster Loan program. The Company received the loan proceeds on or around May 27, 2020. The EID Loan has a thirty year term and bears interest at a rate of 3.75% per annum. Monthly principal and interest payments are deferred for twelve months after the date of disbursement. The EID Loan may be prepaid at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties, and is otherwise repaid at the rate of $731 per month. The proceeds from the EID Loan must be used for working capital. The Loan Authorization and Agreement and the Note executed by the Company in connection with the EID Loan contains events of default and other provisions customary for a loan of this type.
The Company received a second EID loan from the SBA under the SBA’s Economic Injury Disaster Loan program in the amount of $350,000 on or around June 27, 2021 (the “Second EID Loan”). The Second EID Loan has a thirty year term and bears interest at a rate of 3.75% per annum. Monthly principal and interest payments are deferred for twelve months after the date of disbursement. The Second EID Loan may be prepaid at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties, and is otherwise repaid at the rate of $731 per month. The proceeds from the Second EID Loan must be used for working capital. The Loan Authorization and Agreement and the Note executed by the Company in connection with the Second EID Loan contains events of default and other provisions customary for a loan of this type.
Outlook
Our continued objective is to further integrate our growing suite of proven industry leading data security and privacy offerings and deliver the combined offering to our growing stable of enterprise and medium-sized clients directly and via our partner channel. Data privacy concerns continue to grow lockstep with security breaches and ongoing expansion of data storage, consumption and spread of telework, telehealth and remote learning requirements.
We have utilized, and expect to continue to utilize, acquisitions to contribute to our long-term growth objectives. During fiscal 2020 we hope to continue to acquire complimentary business assets and client bases. Some of the key element to our growth strategy include, without limitation:
● Improve and extend our technological capabilities, domestically and internationally.
● Further integrate our product offerings to provide an unmatched data privacy platform.
● Focus on underserved markets, such as sports teams (at all levels) and medium-sized businesses.
● Deliver capabilities via unconventional channels, including open-source and “freemium” and trial subscription models.
● Leverage our existing relationships for professional references, association and internal private industry level promotional events and other high-value and successful product positional activities.
● Be prepared to capture and execute on opportunities in the acquisition marketplace.
● Continued focus on net bookings with minimum long-term contract value.
● Improve SaaS Services with high increasing ‘attach’ rate for additional capabilities.
● Increase year-over-year conversions from perpetual one-time contract sales to multiyear recurring subscription revenue agreements.
While we report primarily income based on recognized and deferred revenue, another measurement internally for the business is booked revenues. Management utilizes this measure to track numerous indicators such as: contract value growth; initial contract value per customer; and, certain other values that change quarter-over-quarter. These results may also be subject to, and impacted by, sales compensation plans, internal performance objectives, and other activities. We continue to increase revenue from our existing operations. We generally recognize revenue from customers ratably over the terms of their subscription, which is generally one year at a time. As a result, a substantial portion of the revenue we report in each period is attributable to the recognition of deferred revenue relating to agreements that we entered into during previous periods. Consequently, any increase or decline in new sales or renewals in any one period will not be immediately reflected in our revenue for that period. Any such change, however, would affect our revenue in future periods. Accordingly, the effect of downturns or upturns in new sales and potential changes in our rate of renewals may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are outlined below:
Revenue
The increase in revenue was primarily due to continued growth in our financial services customer base, increases in our multi-year renewals and new contracts that are subscription-based. Our Enhanced File Transfer capabilities continue to grow and our customers’ reliance on them are becoming more focused and centralized. This reliance powers incredible business transformation activities, including functions we’ve announced such as over ‘6 nines’ of uptime for over a decade for one customer. Additionally, our data-archiving business that was heavily on-premises based and perpetual software in the past, is now quickly migrating to our cloud-based facilities we invested in other the past few years . Our hosting model contributes higher margins, recurring ARR and a better experience for our customers. Additionally, it greatly accelerates the adoption of other products that Data443 already offers and plans to offer in the future.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue consists of direct expense, such as sales commission, shipping, and supplies. We continue to manage a requisite ratio of expenses to revenues model within the company. The increase in cost of revenue was primarily due to an increase in revenue, with pointed and focused investments in marketing spend and customer outreach.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 our operating expenses are as follows:
General and Administrative Expenses
The general and administrative expenses primarily consisted of management costs, costs to integrate assets we acquired and to expand sales, product enhancements, audit and review fees, filing fees, professional fees, and other expenses related to SEC reporting, including the re-classification of sales-related management expenses, in connection with the projected growth of the Company’s business. The decrease in general and administrative expense was primarily due to a decrease in amortization and stock-based compensation offset by an increase insurance and conference expense.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
The sales and marketing expenses primarily consisted of developing a sales operation, with some previously reported expenses, primarily management costs, reclassified to general and administrative expenses. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily due to an increase in advertising and marketing expenses.
Other income (expense)
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of non-dilutional significant short-term interest expense, loss on change in fair value of derivative, and gain on settlement of debt. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of interest expense, loss on impairment of intangible asset, loss on change in fair value of derivative, and loss on settlement on debt. The decrease in other expense was primarily due to change in fair value of derivative liabilities.
Net Loss
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was mainly derived from an operating loss of $2,637,239, and interest expense of $3,334,413 and loss on change in fair value of derivative liability of $614,658. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly derived from an operating loss of $3,900,485, and loss on change in fair value of derivative liability of $7,406,416.
Cash Flow for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table provides selected financial data about our company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Working Capital
The following table provides selected financial data about our company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We require cash to fund our operating expenses and working capital requirements, including outlays for capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash of $1,204,933, trade accounts receivable of $21,569 and prepaid and other current assets of $70,802, as compared to cash of $58,783 and trade accounts receivable of $136,503 as of December 31, 2020.
During the last two years, and through the date of this Annual Report, we have faced an increasingly challenging liquidity situation that has severely limited our ability to execute our operating plan. We generated no revenue until the fourth quarter of 2018, though we have actively prepared to initiate business in the data security market. We have also been required to maintain our corporate existence, satisfy the requirements of being a public company, and have chosen to become a mandatory filer with the SEC. We will need to obtain capital to continue operations. There is no assurance that we will be able to secure such funding on acceptable (or any) terms. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we reported a loss from operations of $2,637,239 and $3,900,485, respectively, and had negative cash flows used in operating activities of $875,789 and $758,479, respectively, for the same periods.
As of December 31, 2021, we had assets of cash in the amount of $1,204,933 and other current assets in the amount of $92,371. As of December 31, 2020, we had current liabilities of $3,815,945. The Company’s accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2021 was $42,111,274.
As of December 31, 2020, we had assets of cash in the amount of $58,783 and other current assets in the amount of $136,503. As of December 31, 2020, we had current liabilities of $5,638,809. The Company’s accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2020 was $35,542,359.
The revenues, if any, generated from our acquisitions alone will not be sufficient to fund our operations or planned growth. We will require additional capital to continue to operate our business, and to further expand our business. Sources of additional capital through various financing transactions or arrangements with third parties may include equity or debt financing, bank loans or revolving credit facilities. We may not be successful in locating suitable financing transactions in the time period required or at all, and we may not obtain the capital we require by other means. Unless the Company can attract additional investment, the future of the Company operating as a going concern is in serious doubt.
We are now obligated to file annual, quarterly and current reports with the SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act. In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”) and the rules subsequently implemented by the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board have imposed various requirements on public companies, including requiring changes in corporate governance practices. We expect these rules and regulations to increase our legal and financial compliance costs and to make some activities of ours more time-consuming and costly. In order to meet the needs to comply with the requirements of the Exchange Act, we will need investment of capital.
Management has determined that additional capital will be required in the form of equity or debt securities. There is no assurance that management will be able to raise capital on terms acceptable to the Company.
If we are unable to obtain sufficient amounts of additional capital, we may have to cease filing the required reports and cease operations completely. If we obtain additional funds by selling any of our equity securities or by issuing common stock to pay current or future obligations, the percentage ownership of our stockholders will be reduced, stockholders may experience additional dilution, or the equity securities may have rights preferences or privileges senior to the common stock.
Cash Flow
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our Company used $855,540 in operating activities, compared to $758,479 during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in operation activities was primarily due to a decrease in operating liabilities.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used funds in investing activities of $138,331 to acquire property and equipment. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used funds in investing activities of $315,000 to acquire intellectual property and $146,400 to acquire property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we raised $846,801 through the issuance of Common stock; $525,000 through the issuance of Series B Preferred Stock; $1,482,000 from issuance of convertible debt; $4,377,226 from issuance of notes payable; and, $366,943 from loan from related party, offset in part through redemption of Series B Preferred Stock of $63,999; repayment of convertible note payable of $45,000; repayment of $4,577,578 on notes payable; repayment to related party of $680,807 and, $90,565 of capital lease payments. By comparison, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised $50,000 through the issuance of Series B Preferred Stock; $1,502,250 from issuance of convertible debt; $2,147,996 from issuance of notes payable; and, $299,173 from loan from related party, offset in part through repayment of $1,689,846 on notes payable; repayment to related party of $976,257 and, $73,327 of capital lease payments.
We are dependent upon the receipt of capital investment or other financing to fund our ongoing operations and to execute our business plan. In addition, we are dependent upon our controlling stockholder to provide continued funding and capital resources. If continued funding and capital resources are unavailable at reasonable terms, we may not be able to implement our plan of operations.
Going Concern
The consolidated financial statements accompanying this Annual Report have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies that our company will continue to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. Our Company has generated very limited revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends and is unlikely to pay dividends or generate earnings in the immediate or foreseeable future. The continuation of our company as a going concern is dependent upon the ability of our company to obtain necessary financing to achieve our operating objectives, and the attainment of profitable operations. As of December 31, 2021, our Company has an accumulated deficit and working capital deficiency. We do not have sufficient working capital to enable us to carry out our plan of operation for the next twelve months.
Due to the uncertainty of our ability to meet our current operating expenses and the capital expenses noted above in their report on the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, our independent auditors included an explanatory paragraph regarding concerns about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements contain additional note disclosures describing the circumstances that lead to this disclosure by our independent auditors.
The continuation of our business is dependent upon us raising additional financial support. The issuance of additional equity or debt securities by us could result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders. Obtaining commercial loans, assuming those loans would be available, will increase our liabilities and future cash commitments. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise any additional capital.
Management’s Plans
Our plan is to continue to grow our business through strategic acquisitions, and then expand selling across our subsidiaries and affiliated companies. We continue to focus heavily on our renewals business that we inherit from our acquisitions. During the next twelve months, we anticipate incurring costs related to (i) filing of Exchange Act reports; and, (ii) operating our businesses. We will require additional operating capital to maintain and continue operations. We will need to raise additional capital through debt or equity financing, and there is no assurance we will be able to raise the necessary capital. We expect our cost basis for fundraising to be significantly less if we are able to be listed on a major stock exchange. We also expect our equity components to have more value as part of our acquisitions and by virtue be less costly for The Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act, and are not required to provide the information under this Item.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of income and expense during the reporting periods presented.
Our critical estimates include revenue recognition and intangible assets. Although we believe that these estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from those estimates given a change in conditions or assumptions that have been consistently applied. We also have other policies that we consider key accounting policies, such as our policy for revenue recognition, however, the application of these policies does not require us to make significant estimates or judgments that are difficult or subjective.
The critical accounting policies used by management and the methodology for its estimates and assumptions are as follows:
Convertible Financial Instruments
The Company bifurcates conversion options from their host instruments and accounts for them as free standing derivative financial instruments if certain criteria are met. The criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under otherwise applicable generally accepted accounting principles with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument. An exception to this rule is when the host instrument is deemed to be conventional, as that term is described under applicable GAAP.
When the Company has determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments, discounts are recorded for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in the instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the instrument.
Beneficial Conversion Feature
The issuance of the convertible debt described in Note 9, below, generated a beneficial conversion feature (“BCF”), which arises when a debt or equity security is issued with an embedded conversion option that is beneficial to the investor or in the money at inception because the conversion option has an effective strike price that is less than the market price of the underlying stock at the commitment date. The Company recognized the BCF by allocating the intrinsic value of the conversion option, which is the number of shares of common stock available upon conversion multiplied by the difference between the effective conversion price per share and the fair value of common stock per share on the commitment date, resulting in a discount on the convertible debt (recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital). The discount is amortized to interest expense over the term of the convertible debt.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award. For employees and directors, the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date. For non-employees, as per ASU No. 2018-7, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, remeasurement is not required. The fair value amount is then recognized over the period during which services are required to be provided in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. Stock-based compensation expense is recorded by us in the same expense classifications in the consolidated statements of operations, as if such amounts were paid in cash. Also, refer to Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the consolidated financial statements that are included in this Annual Report.