Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual events or results may differ materially from our expectations. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those stated or implied by our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those set forth in Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. All forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report are based on information available to us as of the time we file this Annual Report and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a technology-enabled consumer products platform that uses “data science” (which includes but is not limited to, machine learning, natural language processing, and data analytics) to design, develop, market and sell products. We were founded on the premise that if a company selling consumer packaged goods was founded today, it would apply data science, the synthesis of massive quantities of data and the use of social proof to validate high caliber product offerings as opposed to over-reliance on brand value and other traditional marketing tactics. Today, we predominantly operate through online retail channels such as Amazon.com (“Amazon”) and Walmart, Inc.
We have launched and sold hundreds of SKUs on e-commerce platforms. Through the success of a number of those products we have incubated our own brands. We also have purchased brands and products when we believe it is advantageous. Today, we own and operate fourteen brands that sell products in multiple categories, including home and kitchen appliances, kitchenware, heating, cooling and air quality appliances (dehumidifiers, humidifiers and air conditioners), health and beauty products and essential oils. Our fourteen brands include, hOmeLabs; Vremi; Squatty Potty; Xtava; RIF6; Aussie Health; Holonix; Truweo; Mueller; Pursteam; Pohl and Schmitt; Spiralizer; Healing Solutions; and Photo Paper Direct.
Seasonality of Business and Product Mix
Our individual product categories are typically affected by seasonal sales trends primarily resulting from the timing of the summer season for certain of our environmental appliance products and the fall and holiday season for our small kitchen appliances and accessories. With our current mix of environmental appliances, the sales of those products tend to be significantly higher in the summer season. Further, our small kitchen appliances and accessories tend to have higher sales during the fourth quarter, which includes Thanksgiving and the December holiday season. As a result, our operational results, cash flows, cash and inventory positions may fluctuate materially in any quarterly period depending on, among other things, adverse weather conditions, shifts in the timing of certain holidays and changes in our product mix.
Each of our products typically goes through the Launch phase and depending on its level of success is moved to one of the other phases as further described below:
i.
Launch phase: During this phase, we leverage our technology to target opportunities identified using AIMEE (Artificial Intelligence Marketplace e-Commerce Engine) and other sources. During this period of time and due to the combination of discounts and investment in marketing, our net margin for a product could be as low as approximately negative 35%. Net margin is calculated by taking net revenue less the cost of goods sold, less fulfillment, online advertising and selling expenses. These costs primarily reflect the estimated variable costs related to the sale of a product.
ii.
Sustain phase: Our goal is for every product we launch to enter the sustain phase and become profitable, with a target average of positive 15% net margin, within approximately three months of launch on average. Net margin primarily reflects a combination of manual and automated adjustments in price and marketing spend. Over time, our products benefit from economies of scale stemming from purchasing power both with manufacturers and with fulfillment providers.
iii.
Milk phase or Liquidate phase: If a product does not enter the sustain phase or if the customer satisfaction of the product (i.e., ratings) is not satisfactory, then it will go to the liquidate phase and we will sell through the remaining inventory. In order to enter the milk phase, we believe that a product must be well received and become a strong leader in its category in both customer satisfaction and volume sold as compared to its competition. Products in the milk phase that have achieved profitability should benefit from pricing power and we expect their profitability to increase accordingly. To date, none of our products have achieved the milk phase and we can provide no assurance that any of our products will do so in the future.
To date, our operating results have included a mix of products in the launch and sustain phases, and we expect such results to include a mix of products in all phases at any given period. Product mix can affect our gross profit and the variable portion of our sales and distribution expenses. Ultimately, we believe that the future cash flow generated by our products in the sustain phase will outpace the amount that we will reinvest into launching new products, driving net revenue and profitability at the company level while we continue to invest in growth and technology. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global supply chain, we have been
forced to increase our inventory on hand to avoid disruption in sales. The unpredictability of container availability, space on vessels and shipping lead times, as well as associated manufacturing lead time, has forced us to secure more inventory upfront. Having more inventory on hand not only impacts our working capital but also requires us to increase our storage capacity (warehouse network) which of itself has a capital impact.
The following table shows the number of launches of new products included in our net revenue that have achieved, or are expected to achieve, more than approximately $0.5 million in net revenue per year on average.
Our growth in direct revenue can be impacted by the timing and the season in which products are launched as well as the impact of mergers and acquisitions.
Further due to the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on the global supply chain, we have paused the launch of new products. The sharp increase in shipping costs has made our target competitive pricing difficult to achieve and the current unpredictability of container availability makes it more difficult for us to maintain the required inventory levels, which in turn makes the potential and profitable success of product launches even more difficult to achieve in this current environment. Furthermore, we have concerns about the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on our business including its effects on the global economy, supply chain and financial markets. We will continue to evaluate the impacts of this, in addition to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, on our business.
Financial Operations Overview
Net Revenue-We derive our revenue from the sale of consumer products, primarily in the U.S. We sell products directly to consumers through online retail channels and through wholesale channels. Direct-to-consumer sales (i.e., direct net revenue), which is currently the majority of our revenue, is done through various online retail channels. We sell on Amazon.com, Walmart.com, and our own websites, with substantially all of our sales made through Amazon.com. For all of our sales and distribution channels, revenue is recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer (i.e., when our performance obligation is satisfied), which typically occurs at the shipment date.
Cost of Goods Sold-Cost of goods sold consists of the book value of inventory sold to customers during the reporting period and the amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions. Book value of inventory includes the amounts we pay manufacturers for product, tariffs and duties associated with transporting product across national borders, and freight costs associated with transporting the product from our manufacturers to our warehouses, as applicable. When circumstances dictate that we use net realizable value as the basis for recording inventory, we base our estimates on expected future selling prices, less expected disposal costs. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative has imposed additional tariffs on products imported from China. We contract manufacturers, predominantly in China, through purchase orders, for our consumer products. As such, this exposes us to risks associated with doing business globally, including changes in tariffs, which impact a significant number of our products. We can provide no assurances that future tariff increases will not be enacted. These increases may affect the way we order products, as well as the amount of product we order. If tariff increases are enacted in the future, our pricing actions are expected to be intended to offset the full gross margin impact from such tariffs. Further, we have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and related global supply chain disruption. Together, these have led to substantial increases in the costs of our supply chain, specifically, the costs of shipping containers, which we rely on to import our goods. We have increased pricing, when possible, to offset the full gross margin impact which at times has led to reduced sales velocity on certain products at certain times of the year. There are no assurances that these pricing actions will not reduce customer orders in the future.
Expenses
Research and Development Expenses-Research and development expenses include compensation and employee benefits for technology development employees, travel-related costs and fees paid to outside consultants related to the development of our intellectual property.
Sales and Distribution Expenses- Sales and distribution expenses consist of online advertising costs, marketing and promotional costs, sales and e-commerce platform commissions, fulfillment, including shipping and handling, and warehouse costs (i.e., sales and distribution variable expenses). Sales and distribution expenses also include employee compensation and benefits and other related fixed costs. Shipping and handling expenses are included in our consolidated statements of operations in sales and distribution expenses. This includes inbound, pick and pack costs and outbound transportation costs to ship goods to customers performed by e-commerce platforms or incurred directly by us, through our own direct fulfillment platform, which leverages AIMEE and our third-party logistics partners. Our sales and distribution expenses, specifically our logistics expenses and online advertising, will vary quarter to quarter as they are dependent on our sales volume, our product mix (i.e., products in the launch phase or sustain phase) and whether we fulfill products ourselves, i.e., fulfillment by merchant (“FBM”), or through e-commerce platform service providers, i.e., fulfillment by Amazon (“FBA”) or fulfilled by Walmart (“WFS”). After a product launches and reaches the sustain phase, we seek to maintain the product within its targeted level of profitability. This profitability can be impacted as each product has a unique fulfillment cost due to its size and weight. As such, products with less expensive fulfillment costs as a percentage of net revenue may allow for a lower gross margin, while still maintaining their targeted profitability level. Conversely, products with higher fulfillment costs will need to achieve a higher gross margin to maintain their targeted level of profitability. We are FBM One Day and Two Day Prime certified, allowing us to deliver our sales through Amazon, to approximately 76% of the U.S., within one day and to over 99% of the U.S. within two days, based on our sales history. We continually review the locations and capacity of our third-party warehouses to ensure we have the appropriate geographic reach, which helps to reduce the average last mile shipping zones to the end customer and as such our speed of delivery improves while our shipping costs to customers decrease, prior to the impacts on shipping providers’ rates.
General and Administrative Expenses-General and administrative expenses include compensation and employee benefits for executive management, finance administration, legal, and human resources, facility costs, insurance, travel, professional service fees and other general overhead costs, including the costs of being a public company.
Interest Expense, Net- Interest expense, net includes the interest cost from our credit facility and term loans, and includes amortization of deferred finance costs and debt discounts from our credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) with MidCap Funding IV Trust (“MidCap”) and our term loans with High Trail Investments SA LLC (“High Trail SA”) and High Trail Investments ON LLC (“High Trail ON” and, together with High Trail SA, “High Trail”).
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years-Ended December 31, 2020 and 2021
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years-ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, together with the changes in those items in dollars and percentage:
(1)Amounts include stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth the components of our results of operations as a percentage of net revenue:
Net Revenue
Revenue by Product Categories:
The following table sets forth our net revenue disaggregated by product categories:
Net revenue increased $62.1 million, or 33.4%, during the year-ended December 31, 2021 to $247.8 million, compared to $185.7 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in direct net revenue of $71.6 million, or a 43.6% increase. Direct net revenue consists of both organic net revenue and net revenue from our mergers and acquisitions (“M&A”). For the year-ended December 31, 2021, organic revenue was $118.4 million and revenue from our M&A businesses was $120.9 million. For the year-ended December 31, 2020, organic revenue was $147.9 million and revenue from our M&A businesses was $16.3 million. Our organic revenue decreased by $29.5 million, or 19.9%, during the year-ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year-ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by reduced sales volume, which we attribute to both reduced demand due to the reopening of brick & mortar retail, and increased sale prices due to global supply chain disruptions and inventory shorts due to delayed receipt of goods. Included in our organic net revenue for the year-ended December 31, 2021 is approximately $15.7 million of revenue for products launched in 2021. Included in our organic net revenue for the year-ended December 31, 2020 is approximately $23.6 million of revenue for products launched in 2020.
We also saw a decrease in wholesale revenue of $8.6 million versus the prior year, primarily from a decrease in the sale of personal protective equipment (“PPE”) in the year-ended December 31, 2021. Finally, we saw a decrease in Managed PaaS revenue of $0.9 million in the year-ended December 31, 2021.
Heating, cooling and air quality accounted for $73.7 million in net revenue for the year-ended December 31, 2021 compared to $78.4 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by reduced sales volume, which we attribute to both reduced e-commerce demand due to the reopening of brick & mortar retail, and increased sale prices due to global supply chain disruptions and inventory shorts due to delayed receipt of goods.
Kitchen appliances accounted for $43.2 million in net revenue for the year-ended December 31, 2021 compared to $29.7 million in net revenue for the corresponding period in 2020, an increase of $13.5 million from new products launched and growth in our existing products during the year-ended December 31, 2021, including M&A businesses. Cookware, kitchen tools and gadgets accounted for approximately $22.9 million in net revenue for the year-ended December 31, 2021 compared to $14.9 million in net revenue for the corresponding period in 2020, an increase of $8.1 million from new products launched and growth in our existing products during the year-ended December 31, 2021, including M&A businesses. Net revenue from housewares increased approximately $30.7 million from growth in our existing products and new products obtained through M&A businesses. We started selling essential oils and related accessories in 2021 via M&A, which generated $27.4 million in net revenue for the year-ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
Cost of goods sold increased by $24.9 million from $100.9 million for the year-ended December 20, 2020 to $125.9 million for the year-ended December 21, 2021. The increase in cost of goods sold was primarily attributable to an increase of $42.9 million from our M&A businesses, offset by a $10.5 million decrease in cost of goods sold from our organic business and $7.5 million from PPE.
Gross profit improved from 45.6% for the year-ended December 31, 2020 to 49.2% for the year-ended December 31, 2021. The improvement in gross margin was due to a change of product mix as our net revenue from our M&A businesses, which have a higher gross margin of 59.2% than our organic business of 40.9%. The majority of our M&A businesses’ net revenue tends to be from smaller products that have higher gross margins versus our organic business, which tend to be oversized goods that have lower gross margins. We expect to see future impacts in our gross margin on both our M&A and organic businesses as the international shipping container crisis continues to drive shipping container costs higher and cause reductions in delivery reliability and other, which also increases related shipping container delivery costs, and other inflationary pressures.
Sales and Distribution Expenses
Sales and distribution expenses which included e-commerce platform commissions, online advertising and logistics expenses (i.e., variable sales and distribution expense), increased to $127.4 million for the year-ended December 31, 2021 from $68.0 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to the increase in the volume of products sold in the year- ended December 31, 2021, of $43.1 million as our e-commerce platform commissions, online advertising, selling and logistics expenses increased to $103.3 million in the year- ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $60.2 million in the prior period.
Our sales and distribution fixed costs (e.g., salary and office expenses) increased to $17.3 million for the year- ended December 31, 2021 from $5.2 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to approximately $4.1 million of bad debt reserve from our dispute with a certain PPE supplier, approximately $2.0 million of professional fees from transition services charges from certain of our M&A businesses, and headcount expenses of $5.2 million. Sales and distribution expenses for the year- ended December 31, 2021 included an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $4.3 million as the prior period included reversals of expense of certain restricted stock awards granted pursuant to the 2019 Equity Plan, which restricted stock awards were canceled upon termination of certain employees.
As a percentage of net revenue, sales and distribution expenses increased to 51.4% for the year-ended December 31, 2021 from 36.6% for the year-ended December 31, 2020 primarily from an increase in last mile shipping costs, bad debt reserve (1.7% as a percentage of net revenue), professional fees from transition services (0.8% as a percentage of net revenue) and stock-based compensation expense (1.7% as a percentage of net revenue). E-commerce platform commissions, online advertising, selling and logistics expenses included within sales and distribution expenses, as a percentage of net revenue, were 41.7% for the year-ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 32.4% for the year-ended December 31, 2020. This increase is predominantly due to product mix and to the increase in last mile shipping costs, specifically around oversized goods, due to the demand on those third-party providers’ delivery networks. We expect to see these cost increases continue in the near-term.
Research and Development Expenses
The increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of stock-based compensation expense of approximately $1.4 million from expenses of certain restricted stock awards granted.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase of professional fees of approximately $4.1 million related to M&A costs, including legal, audit and internal control related fees, an increase in intangibles amortization of approximately $6.0 million and $1.3 million reserve related to the litigation settlement.
Change in fair value of contingent earn-out liabilities
The settlement of a contingent earn-out liability was due to the difference of fair value of the shares issued on the settlement date versus the fair value of the earn-out on the date of the settlement.
The increase in change in fair value of contingent earn-out liabilities was related to our M&A, which includes re-assessment of the estimated fair value of contingent consideration as part of the purchase price, primarily driven by the fluctuation of our share price since the date of each acquisition and contribution margin projections.
Interest expense, net
The increase in interest expense was primarily related to the increase in loan interest and related amortization of deferred financing fees and warrant discounts compared to the prior period’s credit facility and term loan, which had lower borrowings and less amortization of deferred financing fees and warrant discounts compared to this current period.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
The increase is attributable to the payment and termination of the December 2020 Note (as defined in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report), the February 2021 Note (as defined in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report) and our prior credit facility, which resulted in $29.8 million in loss on extinguishment of debt consisting of unamortized deferred finance costs, the extinguishment of the majority of the April 2021 Note loan, which resulted in $107.0 million in loss on extinguishment of debt and the extinguishment of the High Trail Note loan, which resulted in $2.1 million in loss on extinguishment of debt.
Change in fair market value of warrant liability
The increase is attributable to the change in the fair value of warrant liability from warrants in connection with the December 2020 Note and the February 2021 Note from the increase of our share price since the issuances of the warrants. The loss on initial issuance of warrants for the year-ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by the increase of our share price since the issuance of the warrants.
Change in fair value of derivative liability
The increase is attributable to the term loan from High Trail as we fair-valued certain embedded derivatives within the term loan, primarily around default interest rates.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to the discussion under the heading “Results of Operations-Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019” in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 16, 2021, as amended by Amendment No. 1 filed with the SEC on April 29, 2021 and Amendment No. 2 filed with the SEC on September 24, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows for Years-Ended December 31, 2020 and 2021
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years-ended December 31, 2020 and 2021:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $6.1 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020, resulting from our net cash losses from operations of $2.4 million, offset by cash from working capital of $8.5 million from changes in accounts receivable, purchase of inventory and insurance and payments of accounts payable.
Net cash used by operating activities was $42.0 million for the year-ended December 31, 2021, resulting from our net cash losses from operations of $24.4 million and cash usage from working capital of $17.6 million from changes in accounts receivable, purchase of inventory and insurance and payments of accounts payable.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year-ended December 31, 2020 was primarily from the acquisition of Truweo Assets for $14.0 million and Smash Assets for $25.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities of $44.9 million for the year-ended December 31, 2021 was primarily for the acquisition of the assets from Healing Solutions, LLC (“Healing Solutions”) for $15.3 million, the assets from Squatty Potty, LLC for $19.0 million and the acquisition of Photo Paper Direct Ltd. of $10.6 million.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
For the year-ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $32.3 million was primarily from the net proceeds of our August 2020 underwritten public offering of $23.4 million and borrowings from the High Trail term loan, net of $35.8 million, which was offset by net repayments on the Credit Facility of $10.1 million and repayments of the Horizon Term Loan of $16.0 million.
For the year-ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities of $95.6 million was primarily from proceeds from borrowings from the High Trail April 2021 Notes of $110.0 million, proceeds from cancellation of a warrant of $16.9 million and proceeds from an equity offering of $36.7 million, net, proceeds from exercise of stock options of $9.0 million, borrowings of $20.0 million of Midcap credit facility offset by repayments of the High Trail December 2020 Note and February 2021 Note of $59.5 million, repayments of the High Trail April 2021 Note of $10.1 million, repayments of the High Trail December 2021 Note of $27.5 million and $10.5 million of repayments of notes issued to certain sellers in connection with our M&A activity.
Cash Flows for Years-Ended December 31, 2019 and 2020
For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to the discussion under the heading “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019” in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 16, 2021, as amended by Amendment No. 1 filed with the SEC on April 29, 2021 and Amendment No. 2 filed with the SEC on September 24, 2021.
Sources of Liquidity and Going Concern
As an emerging growth company, we have been dependent on outside capital through the issuance of equity to investors and borrowings from lenders (collectively “outside capital”) since our inception to execute our growth strategy of investing in organic growth at the expense of short-term profitably and investing in incremental growth through mergers and acquisitions (“M&A strategy”). In addition, our recent financial performance has been adversely impacted by the COVID-19 global pandemic and related global shipping disruption, in particular with respect to substantial increases in supply chain costs for shipping containers (See COVID-19 Pandemic and Supply Chain disclosure below). As a result, we have incurred significant losses and will remain dependent on outside capital for the foreseeable future until such time that we can realize our strategy of growth by generating profits through our organic growth and M&A strategy, and reduce our reliance on outside capital.
Given the inherent uncertainties associated with executing our growth strategy, as well as the uncertainty associated with the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic and related global supply chain disruption, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to obtain
sufficient outside capital or generate sufficient cash from operations to fund our obligations as they become due over the next twelve months from the date these consolidated financial statements were issued.
Since our inception, we have been able to successfully raise a substantial amount of outside capital to fund our growth strategy. However, as of December 31, 2021, we have had no firm commitments of additional outside capital from current or prospective investors or lenders. Furthermore, given the inherent uncertainties associated with our growth strategy, we may be unable to remain in compliance with the financial covenants required by the credit facility agreement over the next twelve months. These uncertainties raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
In order to alleviate substantial doubt, we plan to continue to closely monitor our operating forecast, pursue additional sources of outside capital, and pursue our M&A strategy. If we are (a) unable to improve our operating results, (b) obtain additional outside capital on terms that are acceptable to us to fund our operations and M&A strategy, and/or (c) secure a waiver or forbearance from the lender if we are unable to remain in compliance with the financial covenants required by the credit facility agreement, we may make significant changes to our operating plan, such as delay expenditures, reduce investments in new products, delay the development of our software, reduce our sale and distribution infrastructure, or otherwise significantly reduce the scope of our business. Moreover, if we breach the financial covenants required by the credit facility agreement and fails to secure a waiver or forbearance from the lender, such breach or failure could accelerate the repayment of the outstanding borrowings under the credit facility agreement or the exercise of other rights or remedies the lender may have under applicable law. We can provide no assurance a waiver or forbearance will be granted or the outstanding borrowings under the credit facility will be successfully refinanced on terms that are acceptable to the Company.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Supply Chain-The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and Supply Chain, including the impact associated with preventive and precautionary measures that we, other businesses and governments are taking, continues to evolve.
During 2021, we have been impacted by COVID-19 pandemic and related global shipping disruption. Together these have led to substantial increases in supply chain costs, in particular shipping containers, which we rely on to import our goods, has reduced the reliability and timely delivery of such shipping containers and has substantially increased our last mile shipping costs on its oversized goods. These cost increases have been particularly substantial to oversized goods, which is a material part of our business. The reduced reliability and delivery of such shipping containers is forcing us to spend more on premium shipping to ensure goods are delivered, if at all, and the lack of reliability and timely delivery has further down chain impacts as it takes longer for containers to be offloaded and returned. Further, this global shipping disruption is forcing us to increase our inventory on-hand including advance ordering and taking possession of inventory earlier than expected impacting its working capital.
Third party last mile shipping partners, such as UPS and FedEx, continue to increase the cost of delivering goods to the end consumers as their delivery networks continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to bring uncertainty to consumer demand as price increases related to raw materials, the importing of goods, including tariffs, and the cost of delivering goods to consumers has led to inflation across the U.S. Coupled with the recent reopening of the majority of the country, we have noticed changes to consumer buying habits, which may have reduced demand for its products.
COVID-19 continues to bring uncertainty to consumer demand as price increases related to raw materials, the importing of goods, including tariffs, and the cost of delivering goods to consumers has led to inflation across the U.S. Coupled with continued changes in governmental restrictions and requirements, which continued to vary across the majority of the country, the Company has noticed changes to consumer buying habits, which may have reduced demand for its products. Further, we have increased the sale prices for our products to offset the increased supply chain costs, which has also led to reduced demand for our goods. Reduced demand for our products and increased prices affecting consumer demand generally have also made forecasting more difficult.
We continue to consider the impact of COVID-19 and Supply Chain on the assumptions and estimates used when preparing our consolidated financial statements including inventory valuation, and the impairment of long-lived assets. These assumptions and estimates may change as the current situation evolves or new events occur, and additional information is obtained. If the economic conditions caused by COVID-19 and Supply Chain worsen beyond what is currently estimated by management, such future changes may have an adverse impact on our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity.
Debt Repayment
On August 9, 2021, our lender, High Trail Investments SA LLC (“High Trail SA”) and High Trail Investments ON LLC (“High Trail ON” and, together with High Trail SA, “High Trail”) notified us that High Trail declared an event of default under the April 2021
Notes (as defined in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report) as a result of our failure to maintain Adjusted EBITDA ( primarily due to the impacts of supply chain), as required under the terms of our then-existing debt arrangements with High Trail. On September 22, 2021, we reached an agreement with High Trail to pay down and amend our outstanding secured term debt.
We paid off the remaining $25.0 million High Trail Term Loan as of December 31, 2021 (see the discussion under the heading MidCap Credit Facility December 2021 below). Pursuant to ASC 470, Debt, we concluded the High Trail Term Loan transaction resulted in the extinguishment of the High Trail Term Loan in the amount of $2.5 million of extinguishment of which has been classified within loss on extinguishment of debt on the consolidated statements of operations.
MidCap Credit Facility - December 2021
On December 22, 2021, we entered into a Credit Facility with MidCap, pursuant to which, among other things, (i) the lenders party thereto as lenders (the “Lenders”) agreed to provide a revolving credit facility in a principal amount of up to $40.0 million subject to a borrowing base consisting of, among other things, inventory and sales receivables (subject to certain reserves), and (ii) we agreed to issue to MidCap Funding XXVII Trust a warrant to purchase up to an aggregate of 200,000 shares of our common stock, in exchange for the Lenders extending loans and other extensions of credit to us under the Credit Facility.
The credit facility contains a financial covenant that requires us to maintain a minimum unrestricted cash balance of (a) $12.5 million during the period from February 1st through and including May 31st of each calendar year, and (b) $15.0 million at all other times thereafter. At its election, we may elect to comply with an alternative financial covenant that would require us to maintain a minimum borrowing availability under the credit facility of $10.0 million at all times. We currently do not anticipate electing the alternative financial covenant over the next twelve months and are in compliance with the minimum liquidity covenant as of the date these consolidated financial statements were issued.
On December 22, 2021, we used $27.6 million of the net proceeds from the initial borrowing under the Credit Facility to repay all amounts owed under those certain senior secured promissory notes issued by us to High Trail in an initial principal amount of $110.0 million, as amended. We expect to use the remaining proceeds of any loans under the Credit Facility for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Contingent earn-out liability considerations
As of December 1, 2020, the acquisition date of the assets of the e-commerce business under the brands Mueller, Pursteam, Pohl and Schmitt and Spiralizer (the “Smash Assets”), the initial fair value amount of the earn-out payment was appropriately $9.8 million. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value amount of the earn-out payment with respect to the Smash Assets was approximately $22.5 million representing a change of fair value impact of approximately $12.7 million. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value amount of the earn-out payment with respect to the Smash Assets was approximately $5.2, representing a year-ended December 31, 2021.
As part of the acquisition of the certain assets of Healing Solutions (the “Healing Solutions Assets”), Healing Solutions was entitled to earn-out payments based on the achievement of certain contribution margin thresholds on certain products of the acquired business. If the earn-out consideration event occurs: (i) prior to the date that is nine months following the Closing Date, we were to issue 528,670 shares of our common stock to Healing Solutions; (ii) on or after the date that is nine months following the Closing Date but before the date that is 12 months following the Closing Date, we were to issue 396,502 shares of common stock to Healing Solutions; or (iii) on or after the date that is 12 months following the Closing Date but before the date that is 15 months following the Closing Date (the date that is 15 months following the Closing Date, the “Earn-Out Termination Date”), we were to issue 264,335 shares of common stock to Healing Solutions; or after 15 months, we would not have any obligation to issue any shares of our common stock to Healing Solutions.
As of February 2, 2021, the acquisition date of the Healing Solutions Assets, the initial fair value amount of the earn-out payment with respect to the Healing Solutions Assets was appropriately $16.5 million. In November 2021, we issued 1.4 million shares of common stock in full settlement of the earn-out. As of December 31, 2021 there was no earn-out liability related to Healing Solutions.
As part of the acquisition of the assets of Squatty Potty, LLC (the “Squatty Potty Assets”), Squatty Potty is entitled to earn-out payments based on the achievement of certain contribution margin thresholds on certain products of the acquired business. If the earn-out consideration event occurred in the 12 months ending December 31, 2021, the earn-out payment amount was to be $3.9 million and if the parties terminate the transition service agreement prior to the date that is nine months following the Closing Date, we are to pay an additional $3.9 million.
As of May 5, 2021, the acquisition date the Squatty Potty Assets, the initial fair value amount of the earn-out payment with respect to the Squatty Potty Assets was appropriately $3.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value amount of the earn-out payment with respect to the Squatty Potty Assets was approximately $4.0 million, representing a net change of fair value impact of approximately $0.5 million for year-ended December 31, 2021.
As of May 5, 2021, the acquisition date of Photo Paper Direct Ltd. (“Photo Paper Direct”), the initial fair value amount of the earn-out payment with respect to Photo Paper Direct was appropriately $0.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value amount of the earn-out payment with respect to the Photo Paper Direct acquisition was approximately $0.0 million as the earnout was not achieved, representing a net change of fair value impact of approximately $0.9 million for the year-ended December 31, 2021.
Open Inventory Purchase Orders
As of December 31, 2020 and 2021, the Company had open inventory purchase orders of $55.0 million and $32.3 million, respectively, placed with vendors waiting to be fulfilled.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that our financial statements and the other financial data included in this Annual Report have been prepared in a manner that complies, in all material respects, with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”). However, for the reasons discussed below, we have presented certain non-GAAP measures herein.
We have presented the following non-GAAP measures to assist investors in understanding our core net operating results on an on-going basis: (i) Contribution Margin; (ii) Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue; (iii) EBITDA (iv) Adjusted EBITDA; and (v) Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue. These non-GAAP financial measures may also assist investors in making comparisons of our core operating results with those of other companies.
As used herein, Contribution margin represents gross profit less amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold) and e-commerce platform commissions, online advertising, selling and logistics expenses (included in sales and distribution expenses). As used herein, Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue represents Contribution margin divided by net revenue. As used herein, EBITDA represents net loss plus depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net and provision for income taxes. As used herein, Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA plus stock-based compensation expense, changes in fair-market value of earn-outs, amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold), changes in fair-market value of warrant liability, professional fees related to acquisitions, loss from extinguishment of debt and other expenses, net. As used herein, Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenue. Contribution margin, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not represent and should not be considered as alternatives to loss from operations or net loss, as determined under GAAP.
We present Contribution margin and Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue, as we believe each of these measures provides an additional metric to evaluate our operations and, when considered with both our GAAP results and the reconciliation to gross profit, provides useful supplemental information for investors. Specifically, Contribution margin and Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue are two of our key metrics in running our business. All product decisions made by us, from the approval of launching a new product and to the liquidation of a product at the end of its life cycle, are measured primarily from Contribution margin and/or Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue. Further, we believe these measures provide improved transparency to our stockholders to determine the performance of our products prior to fixed costs as opposed to referencing gross profit alone.
In the reconciliation to calculate contribution margin, we add e-commerce platform commissions, online advertising, selling and logistics expenses (“sales and distribution variable expense”), to gross margin to inform users of our financial statements of what our product profitability is at each period prior to fixed costs (such as sales and distribution expenses such as salaries as well as research and development expenses and general administrative expenses). By excluding these fixed costs, we believe this allows users of our financial statements to understand our products performance and allows them to measure our products performance over time.
We present EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue because we believe each of these measures provides an additional metric to evaluate our operations and, when considered with both our GAAP results and the reconciliation to net loss, provide useful supplemental information for investors. We use these measures with financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, such as sales and gross margins, to assess our historical and prospective operating performance, to provide meaningful comparisons of operating performance across periods, to enhance our understanding of our operating performance and to compare our performance to that of our peers and competitors. We believe EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue are useful to investors in assessing the operating performance of our business without the effect of non-cash items.
Contribution margin, Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net loss, loss from operations or any other measure of financial performance calculated and prescribed in accordance with GAAP. Neither EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue should be considered a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. Our Contribution margin, Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue may not be comparable to similar titled measures in other organizations because other organizations may not calculate Contribution margin, Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue in the same manner as we do. Our presentation of Contribution margin and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by the expenses that are excluded from such terms or by unusual or non-recurring items.
We recognize that EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue, have limitations as analytical financial measures. For example, neither EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA reflects:
•
our capital expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or mergers and acquisitions;
•
the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest expense or principal payments, associated with indebtedness;
•
depreciation and amortization, which are non-cash charges, although the assets being depreciated and amortized will likely have to be replaced in the future, or any cash requirements for the replacement of assets;
•
changes in cash requirements for our working capital needs; or
•
changes in fair value of contingent earn-out liabilities, warrant liabilities, and amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold).
Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA excludes non-cash expense for stock-based compensation, which is and is expected to remain a key element of our overall long-term incentive compensation package.
We also recognize that Contribution margin and Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue have limitations as analytical financial measures. For example, Contribution margin does not reflect:
•
general and administrative expense necessary to operate our business;
•
research and development expenses necessary for the development, operation and support of our software platform;
•
the fixed costs portion of our sales and distribution expenses including stock-based compensation expense; or
•
changes in fair value of contingent earn-out liabilities, warrant liabilities, and amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold).
Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA represents net loss plus depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net and provision for income taxes. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA plus stock-based compensation expense, changes in fair-market value of earn-outs, amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold), change in fair-market value of warrant liability, professional fees related to acquisitions, loss from extinguishment of debt and other expenses, net. As used herein, Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenue.
The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, which is the most directly comparable financial measure presented in accordance with GAAP:
Contribution Margin
Contribution margin represents gross profit less amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold) and e-commerce platform commissions, online advertising, selling and logistics expenses (included in sales and distribution expenses). Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue represents Contribution margin divided by net revenue. The following table provides a reconciliation of Contribution margin to gross profit and Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue to gross profit as a percentage of net revenue, which are the most directly comparable financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition-We account for revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
We derive our revenue from the sale of consumer products. We sell our products directly to consumers through online retail channels and through wholesale channels. For direct-to-consumer sales, we consider customer order confirmations to be a contract with the customer. Customer confirmations are executed at the time an order is placed through third-party online channels. For wholesale sales, we consider the customer purchase order to be the contract. For all of our sales and distribution channels, revenue is recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer (i.e., when our performance obligation is satisfied), which typically occurs at shipment date. As a result, we have a present and unconditional right to payment and record the amount due from the customer in accounts receivable.
Revenue from consumer product sales is recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes an estimate of future returns based on historical return rates.
There is judgment in utilizing historical trends for estimating future returns and estimates around newly launched products which do not have historical data.
Our refund liability for sales returns was $0.5 million and $0.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively, which is included in accrued liabilities and represents the expected value of the refund that will be due to our customers.
Warrant Liability-The fair values of the outstanding warrants were measured using the Monte Carlo Simulation model. Due to the complexity of the warrants issued, we use an outside expert to assist in providing the mark to market fair valuation of the liabilities over the reporting periods in which the original agreement was in effect.
Inputs used to determine estimated fair value of the warrant liabilities include the fair value of the underlying stock at the valuation date, the term of the warrants, and the expected volatility of the underlying stock. The significant unobservable input used in the fair value measurement of the warrant liabilities is the estimated term of the warrants. Generally, increases (decreases) in the fair value of the underlying stock and estimated term result in a directionally similar impact to the periodic fair value measurement of the outstanding warrant liability, and are recorded within the Change in fair market value of warrant line item on the statement of operations.
The fair value of warrant liability was $31.8 million and $0.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
Accounting for contingent consideration-Our acquisitions may include contingent consideration as part of the purchase price. The fair value of the contingent consideration is estimated as of the acquisition date based on the present value of the contingent payments to be made using a weighted probability of possible payments.
The unobservable inputs used in the determination of the fair value of the contingent consideration include management’s assumptions about the likelihood of payment based on the established benchmarks and discount rates based on internal rate of return analysis. The fair value measurement includes inputs that are Level 3 measurement as discussed in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Should actual results increase or decrease as compared to the assumption used in our analysis, the fair value of the contingent consideration obligations will increase or decrease, up to the contracted limit, as applicable. Changes in the fair value of the contingent earn-out consideration could cause a material impact and volatility in our operating results.
Contingent earn-out liabilities were $22.5 million and $9.2 million, at December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
Accounting for Business Combinations-We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. These fair values are typically estimated with assistance from independent valuation specialists.
The purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, contractual support obligations assumed, contingent consideration arrangements, and pre-acquisition contingencies.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
•
future expected cash flows from product sales or other customer contracts;
•
expected costs of fulfillment including marketing, warehousing and product sales;
•
the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio;
•
cost of capital and discount rates; and
•
estimating the useful lives of acquired assets as well as the pattern or manner in which the assets will amortize.
Refer to Note16 - Acquisitions to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report-for more information
Subsequent Measurement of Goodwill-The Company operates under one business component which is the same as its reporting unit based on the guidance in ASC Topic 350-20.
We engaged a third-party valuation specialist to assist in performing our goodwill test in December 2021. For goodwill, impairment testing is based upon the best information available using a combination of the discounted cash flow method (a form of the income approach), the guideline public company method, and guideline transaction method (both market approaches).
Under the income approach, or discounted cash flow method, the significant assumptions used are projected net revenue, projected contribution margin (product operating margin before fixed costs), fixed costs, terminal growth rates and the cost of capital. Projected net revenue, projected contribution margin and terminal growth rates were determined to be significant assumptions because they are the three primary drivers of the projected cash flows in the discounted cash flow fair value model. Cost of capital is another significant assumption as the discount rate is used to calculate the current fair value of those projected cash flows. Under the guideline public company method, and guideline transaction method, significant assumptions relate to the selection of appropriate guideline companies and transactions and the valuation multiples used in the market analysis.
Goodwill was $47.3 million and $120.0 million, at December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates made are reasonable and appropriate, and changes in our assumptions and estimates could have a material impact on our reported financial results. In addition, sustained declines in our stock price and related market capitalization could impact key assumptions in the overall estimated fair values of our reporting unit and could result in non-cash impairment charges that could be material to our consolidated balance sheet or results of operations. We began to experience improvement in our operating margins and additional improvement in our products performance before the inclusion of fixed costs. These improvements, coupled with our acquisitions, supported our conclusion that we would generate significant improvements in the operating results.
Since December 31, 2020, we had an additional increase in the amount of goodwill through acquisitions made in 2021. Although we have experienced volatility in our share price and short-term forecasts, impacting our going concern analysis due lender covenant risks, we believe we have had no triggering events as our overall long-term forecasts remain materially the same as of December 31, 2021. However, if we continue to experience downward share price volatility or there are material reductions in long-term forecasts the excess fair-value over our carrying value could be reduced significantly and could lead to a triggering event and ultimately to a goodwill impairment charge. We performed a full step one impairment test at 12/31/2021 and concluded no impairment and that our estimated fair-values exceeded our carrying values by 21% as of the year-ended December 31, 2021.
We will continue to closely monitor actual results versus expectations as well as whether and to what extent any significant changes in current events or conditions, including changes to the impacts of COVID-19 on our business, result in corresponding changes to our expectations about future estimated cash flows, discount rates and market multiples. If our adjusted expectations of the operating results do not materialize, if the discount rate increases (based on increases in interest rates, market rates of return or market volatility) or if market multiples decline, we may be required to record goodwill impairment charges, which may be material.
While we believe our conclusions regarding the estimates of fair value of our reporting units are appropriate, these estimates are subject to uncertainty and by nature include judgments and estimates regarding various factors. These factors include the rate and extent of growth in the markets that our reporting units serve, the realization of future sales price and volume increases, fluctuations in exchange rates, fluctuations in price and availability of key raw materials, future operating efficiencies and, as it pertains to discount rates, the volatility in interest rates and costs of equity.
Subsequent Measurement of Intangible assets-Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their estimated useful life on a straight-line basis.
We monitor conditions related to these assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining amortization. We test these assets for potential impairment whenever our management concludes events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The original estimate of an asset’s useful life and the impact of an event or circumstance on either an asset’s useful life or carrying value involve significant judgment regarding estimates of the future cash flows associated with each asset.
Intangibles were $31.5 million and $65.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
JOBS Act
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” (“EGC”) can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, as a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to the financial statements of issuers who are required to comply with the effective dates for new or revised accounting standards that are applicable to public companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that we can elect to opt out of the extended transition period at any time, which election is irrevocable.
In addition, as an EGC, we have taken advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
We will remain an EGC until the earlier of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering, or December 31, 2024; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) (i.e., the first day of the fiscal year after we have (1) more than $700.0 million in outstanding common equity held by our non-affiliates, measured each year on the last day of our second fiscal quarter, (2) been public for at least 12 months, and (3) are not eligible to be deemed a “smaller reporting company” because we do not meet the revenue test of the definition of “smaller reporting company”, which includes an initial determination that our annual revenues are more than $100.0 million for the most recently completed fiscal year).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The JOBS Act permits an emerging growth company to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period until we are no longer an emerging growth company or until we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period. As a result, our financial
statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Adopted Accounting Standards
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”). This ASU requires lessees to record most leases on their balance sheets but recognize the expenses on their income statements in a manner similar to current practice. ASU 2016-02 states that a lessee would recognize a lease liability for the obligation to make lease payments and a right-to-use asset for the right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. In July 2019, the FASB delayed the effective date for this ASU for private companies (including emerging growth companies) and it will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. The new guidance was adopted on January 1, 2022 with no material impact on our consolidated financial statements. We adopted this standard by electing the package of practical expedients without hindsight, which permits us to not reassess (1) whether any expired or existing contracts are or contain leases, (2) lease classification for any expired or existing leases, and (3) any initial direct costs for any existing leases as of the adoption date. We have several corporate office leases which are classified as operating leases, for which we are required to record a right-of-use asset and a lease liability equal to the present value of the remaining minimum lease payments and will continue to recognize expenses on a straight-line basis for these leases. On January 1, 2022, we recorded an aggregate of approximately $0.7 million of right-of-use assets and corresponding $0.7 million of lease liabilities upon adoption of this standard. Right-of-use assets and corresponding lease liabilities are included in the prepaid and other assets and accrued and other liabilities line item respectively on the consolidated balance sheets.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-15, “Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Cost Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract” (“ASU 2018-15”). Under the new guidance, customers apply the same criteria for capitalizing implementation costs as they would for an arrangement that has a software license. This will result in certain implementation costs being capitalized; the associated amortization charge will, however, be recorded as an operating expense. Under the previous guidance, costs incurred when implementing a cloud computing arrangement deemed to be a service contract were recorded as an operating expense when incurred. ASU 2018-15 will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. The new guidance was adopted on January 1, 2022 with no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Topic 470) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Topic 814): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”). ASU 2020-06 eliminates the number of accounting models used to account for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. The update also amends the disclosure requirements for convertible instruments and EPS in an effort to increase financial reporting transparency. ASU 2020-06 will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. The new guidance was adopted on January 1, 2022 with no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13: Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). This ASU requires the use of an expected loss model for certain types of financial instruments and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to calculate credit loss estimates. For trade receivables, loans and held-to-maturity debt securities, an estimate of lifetime expected credit losses is required. For available-for-sale debt securities, an allowance for credit losses will be required rather than a reduction to the carrying value of the asset. In July 2019, the FASB delayed the effective date for this ASU for private companies (including emerging growth companies) and will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022, with early adoption permitted. While we have not completed our evaluation of the impact of adoption of this standard, we do not expect it to have a material impact on our condensed consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes. This ASU provides for certain updates to reduce complexity in accounting for income taxes, including the utilization of the incremental approach for intra-period tax allocation, among others. This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and for interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022 with early adoption permitted. While we have not completed our evaluation of the impact of adoption of this standard, we do not expect it to have a material impact on our condensed consolidated financial statements.