Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”), Adtalem Global Education Inc., together with its subsidiaries, is collectively referred to as “Adtalem,” “we,” “our,” “us,” or similar references.
Discussions within this MD&A may contain forward-looking statements. See the “Forward-Looking Statements” section preceding Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details about the uncertainties that could cause our actual results to be materially different than those expressed in our forward-looking statements.
Throughout this MD&A, we sometimes use information derived from the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and the notes thereto but not presented in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). Certain of these items are considered “non-GAAP financial measures” under the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) rules. See the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations” section for the reasons we use these non-GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Certain items presented in tables may not sum due to rounding. Percentages presented are calculated from the underlying numbers in thousands. Discussions throughout this MD&A are based on continuing operations unless otherwise noted. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and the notes thereto.
Segments
During the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, Adtalem made a change to its reportable segments to align with current strategic priorities and resource allocation.
Beginning in the second quarter of fiscal year 2022, Adtalem eliminated its Financial Services segment when the Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists (“ACAMS”), Becker Professional Education (“Becker”), OnCourse Learning (“OCL”), and EduPristine, were classified as discontinued operations and assets held for sale. In accordance with GAAP we have classified the ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine entities as “Held for Sale” and “Discontinued Operations” in all periods presented as applicable. As a result, all financial results, disclosures, and discussions of continuing operations in this Annual Report on Form 10-K exclude ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine operations, unless otherwise noted. On March 10, 2022, we completed the sale of ACAMS, Becker, and OCL and on June 17, 2022, we completed the sale of EduPristine. In addition, we continue to incur costs associated with ongoing litigation and settlements related to the DeVry University divestiture, which was completed during fiscal year 2019, and are classified as expense within discontinued operations. See Note 4 “Discontinued Operations and Assets Held for Sale” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional discontinued operations information.
We present three reportable segments as follows:
Chamberlain - Offers degree and non-degree programs in the nursing and health professions postsecondary education industry. This segment includes the operations of Chamberlain University (“Chamberlain”).
Walden - Offers more than 100 online certificate, bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees, including those in nursing, education, counseling, business, psychology, public health, social work and human services, public administration and public policy, and criminal justice. This segment includes the operations of Walden University (“Walden”), which was acquired by Adtalem on August 12, 2021. See Note 3 “Acquisitions” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on the acquisition.
Medical and Veterinary - Offers degree and non-degree programs in the medical and veterinary postsecondary education industry. This segment includes the operations of the American University of the Caribbean School of Medicine (“AUC”), Ross University School of Medicine (“RUSM”), and Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine (“RUSVM”), which are collectively referred to as the “medical and veterinary schools.”
“Home Office and Other” includes activities not allocated to a reportable segment. Financial and descriptive information about Adtalem’s reportable segments is presented in Note 21 “Segment Information” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Certain expenses previously allocated to ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine within our former Financial Services segment during fiscal year 2020, fiscal year 2021, and the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 have been reclassified to Home Office and Other based on discontinued operations reporting guidance regarding allocation of corporate overhead. Beginning in the second quarter of fiscal year 2022, these costs are being allocated to the Chamberlain, Walden, and Medical and Veterinary segments.
Walden University Acquisition
On August 12, 2021, Adtalem completed the acquisition of all the issued and outstanding equity interest in Walden e-Learning, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“e-Learning”), and its subsidiary, Walden University, LLC, a Florida limited liability company, from Laureate Education, Inc. (“Laureate” or “Seller”) in exchange for a purchase price of $1.5 billion in cash (the “Acquisition”). See the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section of this MD&A for a discussion on the financing used to fund the Acquisition. The risks and uncertainties related to the Acquisition are described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Fiscal Year 2022 Highlights
Financial and operational highlights for fiscal year 2022 include:
● Adtalem revenue grew $480.2 million, or 53.0%, in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Excluding the effect of the Walden acquisition, Adtalem revenue declined $5.2 million, or 0.6%, in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Chamberlain saw a decline in revenue and Medical and Veterinary saw an increase in revenue.
● Net income attributable to Adtalem of $317.7 million ($6.57 diluted earnings per share) increased $240.8 million ($5.08 diluted earnings per share) in fiscal year 2022 compared to net income attributable to Adtalem of $76.9 million in the prior year. This increase was primarily driven by the gain on the disposal of Financial Services, partially offset by increased interest expense. Net income from continuing operations excluding special items of $158.2 million ($3.24 diluted earnings per share) increased $38.9 million ($0.93 diluted earnings per share), or 32.6%, in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. This increase was driven principally by the addition of Walden operations, partially offset by increased interest expense.
● For the May 2022 session, total student enrollment at Chamberlain decreased 5.8% compared to the same session last year. Chamberlain experienced declining enrollment in several programs, with the most pronounced being in the Registered Nurse to Bachelor of Science in Nursing (“RN-to-BSN”) online degree program.
● On August 12, 2021, Adtalem completed its acquisition of Walden. As of June 30, 2022, total student enrollment at Walden was 39,470 students. Total enrollment decreased 9.5% compared to June 30, 2021. (Prior year figures are as calculated in the prior year by Walden while controlled by Laureate - these figures are used for comparative purposes only.)
● For the May 2022 semester, total student enrollment at the medical and veterinary schools increased 3.5% compared to the same semester last year.
● On March 10, 2022, Adtalem completed the sale of ACAMS, Becker, and OCL to Wendel Group and Colibri Group (“Purchaser”), pursuant to the Equity Purchase Agreement (“Purchase Agreement”) dated January 24, 2022. Adtalem received $962.7 million, net of cash of $21.5 million, in sale proceeds.
● On March 11, 2022, we made a prepayment of $396.7 million on our Term Loan B debt. On April 11, 2022, we repaid $373.3 of our 5.50% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (the “Notes”), for cash at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Notes. During June 2022, we repurchased on the open market an additional $20.8 million of Notes at a price equal to approximately 90% of the principal amount of the Notes.
● On March 14, 2022, we entered into an accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) agreement to repurchase $150.0 million of common stock. We received an initial delivery of 4,709,576 shares of common stock. The final settlement of the ASR agreement is expected to be completed no later than during the second quarter of fiscal year 2023 in accordance with the contractual completion date.
● On March 1, 2022, we announced that the Board of Directors (the “Board”) authorized Adtalem’s thirteenth share repurchase program, which allows Adtalem to repurchase up to $300.0 million of its common stock through February 25, 2025. No repurchases were made under this program during fiscal year 2022.
Overview of the Impact of COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) outbreak was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. COVID-19 has had tragic consequences across the globe and altered business and consumer activity across many industries. Management initiated several changes to the operations of our institutions and administrative functions in order to protect the health of our students and employees and to mitigate the financial effects of COVID-19 and its resultant economic slowdown. We will continue to evaluate, and if appropriate, adopt other measures in the future required for the ongoing safety of our students and employees.
Results of Operations
Management believes the decreased enrollments at Chamberlain and Walden, and to a lesser extent at Medical and Veterinary, are partially driven by disruptions in the nursing and healthcare markets caused by COVID-19. The amount of revenue, operating income, and earnings per share losses in fiscal year 2022 driven by this disruption are not quantifiable. Management anticipates COVID-19 will continue to negatively affect consolidated revenue, operating income, and earnings per share during fiscal year 2023 and beyond or for as long as the pandemic and the various surges continue. In fiscal year 2022, we experienced higher variable expenses associated with bringing students back to campus and providing a safe environment in the context of COVID-19 as in-person instruction continues at Chamberlain and the medical and veterinary schools. These higher variable expenses are expenses incurred in the normal course of on campus operations and will not be categorized as COVID-19 expenses. COVID-19 effects on fiscal year 2022 and 2021 results of operations of the Adtalem institutions are described below.
●Chamberlain: Approximately 30% of Chamberlain’s students are based at campus locations and pursuing their Bachelor of Science in Nursing (“BSN”) degree; at the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak, all campus-based students transitioned to online learning for didactic and select clinical experiences. The remaining 70% of Chamberlain’s students are enrolled in online programs that may or may not have clinical components and those programs continued to successfully operate. Students and employees have returned to all Chamberlain campuses for onsite instruction. Management believes that COVID-19 disruptions in the healthcare industry may have driven the enrollment decisions of potential students in the fiscal year 2022 sessions; however, the resulting revenue losses specific to COVID-19 are not quantifiable. COVID-19 did not result in significantly increased costs at Chamberlain in fiscal year 2022 and 2021. The extent of the impact in fiscal year 2023 and beyond will be determined based on the length and severity of the effects of COVID-19, the efficacy and distribution of the vaccines, and whether any pandemic surge affects healthcare facilities’ ability to continue to provide clinical experiences. Chamberlain has clinical partnerships with healthcare facilities across the U.S., minimizing the risk of suspension of all onsite clinical education experiences.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) became law on March 27, 2020. It provided funding for higher education, which included emergency grants, known as Higher Education Emergency Relief Fund (“HEERF”) I, for students who experienced an unexpected expense or hardship as a result of the disruption of campus operations due to COVID-19. In June 2020, Chamberlain received a total of $8.0 million in HEERF I grant funding, for which distribution to eligible students commenced on July 7, 2020. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (the “Appropriations Act”) became law on December 27, 2020. The Appropriations Act includes the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2021 and is referred to as HEERF II. In February 2021, Chamberlain was awarded $7.1 million in HEERF II grant funding, all of which was disbursed to students in fiscal year 2021. The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (the “Rescue Act”) became law on March 11, 2021 and authorized additional grant funds for students, known as HEERF III. Chamberlain was allocated $4.6 million in HEERF III grant funds that are dedicated solely to students who meet the institution’s eligibility criteria and which were disbursed to students in July 2021. HEERF I, II,
and III funds have been a one-time emergency student financial aid resource associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and recovery, and thus are not anticipated to be renewed in the future. All of the funds received under HEERF I, II, and III were redistributed to eligible students who demonstrated exceptional need. As a result, these funds were recorded as zero net revenue in their respective periods and, thus, did not have a significant effect on the results of operations, financial position, or cash flows of Adtalem in fiscal year 2022, 2021, and 2020.
●Walden: All of Walden’s students are enrolled in online programs and these programs have continued to successfully operate throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. Management believes that COVID-19 disruptions in the healthcare industry may have driven the enrollment decisions of potential students in fiscal year 2022; however, the resulting revenue losses specific to COVID-19 are not quantifiable. COVID-19 did not result in increased costs at Walden in fiscal year 2022. The extent of the impact in fiscal year 2023 and beyond will be determined based on the length and severity of the effects of COVID-19 and the efficacy and distribution of the vaccines.
●AUC and RUSM: Medical students enrolled in the basic science portion of their program transitioned to online learning at the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak. Many students left St. Maarten and Barbados to continue their studies remotely from other locations. AUC and RUSM were able to provide remote learning and have students remain eligible for U.S. federal financial aid assistance under a waiver provided by the U.S. Secretary of Education that was included in the CARES Act signed into law in March 2020. The waiver was dependent upon the host country’s coronavirus state of emergency declaration. The nation of St. Maarten lifted their declaration in June 2020, and as a result, AUC’s ability to offer distance education ended after the September 2020 semester, requiring all AUC students to return to St. Maarten for basic science instruction effective January 2021. A limited number of RUSM students began returning to Barbados in January and May 2021 with a full return occurring for the September 2021 semester. The Appropriations Act was signed into law in December 2020, and corrected technical errors in the CARES Act, which clarified the authority to operate via distance learning due to a declaration of an emergency in an applicable country or a qualifying emergency in the U.S. This section also extended these flexibilities through the end of the qualifying emergency or June 30, 2022, whichever was later. The Appropriations Act provided Adtalem’s foreign institutions the ability to continue distance education without disruption to their students’ Title IV federal financial aid. Management believes uncertainties caused by COVID-19 may have driven the enrollment decisions of potential and current students; however, COVID-19 did not result in significant or quantifiable revenue losses or increased costs within the basic science programs at the medical schools in fiscal year 2022 and 2021, except with respect to housing operations in fiscal year 2021, as discussed below. COVID-19 will likely continue to have a minimal impact on basic science program revenue in fiscal year 2023, unless significant numbers of students choose to not continue or start their studies during this time of uncertainty. The extent of the impact in fiscal year 2023 and beyond will be determined based on the length and severity of the effects of COVID-19, the efficacy and distribution of the vaccines, and whether any pandemic surge affects healthcare facilities’ ability to continue to provide clinical experiences. Students who have completed their basic science education progress to clinical rotations in the U.S. and the U.K. Clinical rotations for all students were temporarily suspended in March 2020; however, some students were able to participate in online clinical elective courses during this transition period and beyond. The COVID-19 surge experienced during the winter in fiscal year 2021 across the U.S. caused many partner hospitals to again reduce the hours available for clinical experiences. As a result, although many students were able to resume their clinical education during the second quarter of fiscal year 2021, management estimates that not being able to offer a full clinical program reduced combined revenue of AUC and RUSM by approximately $21 million and operating income losses by approximately $14 million in fiscal year 2021. As of June 2021, all clinical partners of AUC and RUSM resumed their clinical programs. As a result, COVID-19 did not result in any lost clinical revenue in fiscal year 2022. Should future surges in COVID-19 again restrict the number of clinical hours available to our students, we could experience negative effects on revenue and operating income in fiscal year 2023 and beyond. Adtalem has clinical partnerships with hospitals across the U.S. and the U.K., minimizing the risk of suspension of all onsite clinical education experiences. In addition to the loss of clinical revenue and operating income at AUC and RUSM, management estimates losses of housing and student transportation revenue of approximately $13 million and operating income of approximately $10 million in fiscal year 2021 due to students not returning to the St. Maarten and Barbados campuses. All students were allowed back on the two campuses in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, and therefore, COVID-19 did not result in significant lost housing and student transportation revenue in fiscal year 2022.
●RUSVM: All basic science veterinary students transitioned to online learning beginning in March 2020. Many students left St. Kitts in March 2020 to continue their studies remotely from other locations. As of May 2021, all basic
science students returned to St. Kitts where lectures continue to be delivered both in-person and remotely with labs delivered in-person. COVID-19 did not result in significant revenue losses or increased costs within the basic science program in fiscal year 2022 and 2021. We do not expect a significant impact from COVID-19 on the basic science program in fiscal year 2023, unless students choose to not continue or start their studies during this time of uncertainty. RUSVM continued to provide remote learning during the pandemic and students remained eligible for U.S. federal financial aid assistance under a waiver provided by the CARES Act and the Appropriations Act. The Appropriations Act extended through the end of the qualifying emergency or June 30, 2022, whichever was later, as described above. Students who have completed their basic science education progress to clinical rotations at select universities in the U.S., Canada, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, and the U.K. A few universities initially suspended onsite clinical experiences and transitioned students to online education. All universities have since resumed onsite clinical courses. The initial suspensions did not significantly reduce revenue or operating income in fiscal year 2022 and 2021. While we do not expect a significant impact from COVID-19 at RUSVM, the extent of the impact on clinical experiences in fiscal year 2023 and beyond will be determined based on the length and severity of the effects of COVID-19, the efficacy and distribution of the vaccines, and whether any pandemic surge affects healthcare facilities’ ability to continue to provide clinical experiences.
●Administrative Operations: Remote and hybrid work arrangements continue in both the U.S. and at foreign locations, and employees have begun to return to the office. The remote work arrangements have not adversely affected Adtalem’s ability to maintain operations, financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, or disclosure controls and procedures. The effectiveness of our remote technology enables our ability to maintain these systems and controls. Management does not anticipate Adtalem will be materially impacted by any constraints or other impacts on our human capital resources and productivity. Travel restrictions and border closures are not expected to have a material impact on our ability to operate and achieve operational goals. While recent travel expenditures have been lower than historical levels, we would expect these costs to increase as the effects of COVID-19 continue to dissipate. No significant home office costs related to COVID-19 were incurred in fiscal year 2022 and 2021, and no such costs are anticipated in fiscal year 2023 and beyond.
Although COVID-19 has had a negative effect on the operating results of all four reporting units that contain goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets as of June 30, 2022, none of the effects are considered significant enough to create an impairment triggering event during fiscal year 2022. In addition, our annual impairment assessment performed as of May 31, 2022 did not identify any impairments. While management has considered the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in evaluating the existence of an impairment triggering event, it is possible that effects to revenue and cash flows will be more significant than currently expected if the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and measures established to combat the virus become more severe and restrictive and continue for an extended period of time. Should economic conditions deteriorate beyond expectations in fiscal year 2023, an impairment triggering event could arise and require reassessment of the fair values of goodwill and intangible assets.
Liquidity
Adtalem’s cash and cash equivalents balance as of June 30, 2022 was $347.0 million. Adtalem generated $163.8 million in operating cash flow from continuing operations in fiscal year 2022. In the event of unexpected market conditions or negative economic changes, including those caused by COVID-19, that could negatively affect Adtalem’s earnings and/or operating cash flow, Adtalem maintains a $400.0 million revolving credit facility with availability of $316.0 million as of June 30, 2022. On July 14, 2022, the $84.0 million letter of credit under our Credit Facility (as defined in Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”) was released due to Adtalem executing a surety-backed letter of credit. Therefore, the amount undrawn under the Credit Facility was $400.0 million as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form10-K. Management currently projects that COVID-19 will continue to have an effect on operations; however, we believe the current balances of cash, cash generated from operations, and our credit facility will be sufficient to fund both Adtalem’s current domestic and international operations and growth plans for the foreseeable future. See further discussion on the new financing executed to close the Acquisition in the section of this MD&A titled “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Results of Operations
The following table presents selected Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss) data as a percentage of revenue:
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022 vs. Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021
Revenue
The following table presents revenue by segment detailing the changes from the prior year (in thousands):
Chamberlain
Chamberlain Student Enrollment:
Chamberlain revenue decreased 1.1%, or $6.3 million, to $557.5 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year, driven by declining total enrollments in the September 2021 through May 2022 sessions compared to the same sessions from the prior year. Management believes that a decrease in total student enrollment in several programs, with the most pronounced being in the RN-to-BSN online degree program, may partially be driven by prolonged COVID-19 disruptions in the healthcare industry. It is expected disruptions caused by COVID-19 may continue to effect enrollment for as long as the pandemic and its aftermath continue to stress healthcare professionals.
Chamberlain currently operates 23 campuses in 15 states, including Chamberlain’s newest campus in Irwindale, California, which began instruction in May 2021.
Tuition Rates:
Tuition for the BSN onsite and online degree program ranges from $675 to $699 per credit hour. Tuition for the RN-to-BSN online degree program is $590 per credit hour. Tuition for the online Master of Science in Nursing (“MSN”) degree program is $650 per credit hour. Tuition for the online Family Nurse Practitioner (“FNP”) degree program is $665 per credit hour. Tuition for the online Doctor of Nursing Practice (“DNP”) degree program is $775 per credit hour. Tuition for the online Master of Public Health (“MPH”) degree program is $550 per credit hour. Tuition for the online Master of Social Work (“MSW”) degree program is $695 per credit hour. All of these tuition rates are unchanged from the prior year, except for the BSN rates which were $675 to $730 per credit hour in the prior year. These tuition rates do not include the cost of course fees, books, supplies, transportation, clinical fees, living expenses, or other fees as listed in the Chamberlain academic catalog.
Walden
Walden Student Enrollment:
Walden total student enrollment represents those students attending instructional sessions as of September 30, 2021, December 31, 2021, March 31, 2022, and June 30, 2022. Walden revenue was $485.4 million in fiscal year 2022, which includes the deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustment of $8.6 million. There was no comparable revenue in the prior year as Adtalem acquired Walden on August 12, 2021. Management believes that the decrease in total enrollment compared to the previous year may partially be driven by prolonged COVID-19 disruptions in the healthcare industry and the negative publicity surrounding the now concluded U.S. Department of Justice inquiry into potential false representations and false advertising to students. This inquiry ultimately concluded favorably, with no findings of misconduct by Walden. In addition, the uncertainty from potential students around the change in control and the Walden acquisition may have negatively affected enrollment. It is expected disruptions caused by COVID-19 may continue to effect enrollment for as long as the pandemic and its aftermath continue to stress healthcare professionals.
Tuition Rates:
On a per credit hour basis, tuition for Walden programs range from $123 per credit hour to $1,020 per credit hour, with the wide range due to the nature of the programs. General education courses are charged at $333 per credit hour. Other programs such as those with a subscription-based learning modality or those billed on a subscription period or term basis range from $1,500 to $6,970 per term. Students are charged a technology fee that ranges from $50 to $220 per term as well as a clinical fee of $150 per course for specific programs. Some programs require students to attend residencies, skills labs, and pre-practicum labs, which are charged at a range of $938 to $2,475 per event. These tuition rates, event charges, and fees do not include the cost of books or personal technology, supplies, transportation, or living expenses.
Medical and Veterinary Schools
Medical and Veterinary Schools Student Enrollment:
Medical and Veterinary revenue increased 0.3%, or $1.1 million, to $344.2 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year, driven by increased clinical revenue and housing revenue at RUSM, partially offset by lower enrollment.
In the September 2021 semester, total student enrollment increased at AUC but declined at RUSM and RUSVM. In the January 2022 and May 2022 semesters, total student enrollment increased at AUC and RUSM but declined at RUSVM. Previous declines in total student enrollment at RUSM were partially driven by the inability to offer clinical experiences to all students caused by an increase in students waiting to pass their USMLE Step 1 exam. If a student has not yet started in a clinical program, is not eligible to be enrolled in a clinical program, or not participating in other educational experiences, they are not included in the enrollment count for that semester. In the January 2022 and May 2022 semesters, this clinical backlog continued to decrease and is expected to be less of a negative factor in enrollment totals going forward. Management believes increased competition for students and hesitancy on participating in on campus instruction were drivers of lower total student enrollment in the basic science programs at RUSM and RUSVM. Management is executing its plan to differentiate the medical and veterinary schools from the competition, with a core goal of increasing international students, increasing affiliations with historically black colleges and universities (“HBCU”) and Hispanic-serving institutions (“HSI”), expanding AUC’s medical education program based in the U.K. in partnership with the University of Central Lancashire (“UCLAN”), and improving the effectiveness of marketing and enrollment investments.
Tuition Rates:
● Effective for semesters beginning in September 2021, tuition rates for the beginning basic sciences and final clinical rotation portions of AUC’s medical program are $23,800 and $26,625, respectively, per semester. These tuition rates represent a 2.4% increase from the prior academic year.
● Effective for semesters beginning in September 2021, tuition rates for the beginning basic sciences and final clinical rotation portions of RUSM’s medical program are $24,750 and $27,310, respectively, per semester. These tuition rates represent a 2.4% increase from the prior academic year.
● For students who entered the RUSVM program in September 2018 or later, the tuition rate for the pre-clinical (Semesters 1-7) and clinical curriculum (Semesters 8-10) is $21,603 per semester effective September 2021. For students who entered RUSVM before September 2018, tuition rates for the pre-clinical and clinical curriculum are $20,066 and $25,190, respectively, per semester effective September 2021. All of these tuition rates represent a 3.5% increase from the prior academic year.
The respective tuition rates for AUC, RUSM, and RUSVM do not include the cost of transportation, living expenses, or health insurance.
Cost of Educational Services
The largest component of cost of educational services is the cost of faculty and staff who support educational operations. This expense category also includes the costs of facilities, adjunct faculty, supplies, housing, bookstore, other educational materials, student education-related support activities, and the provision for bad debts. We have not yet experienced significant inflationary pressures on wages or other costs of delivering our educational services; however, should inflation
persist in the overall economy, cost increases could affect our results of operations in the future. The following table presents cost of educational services by segment detailing the changes from the prior year (in thousands):
Cost of educational services increased 44.1%, or $201.9 million, to $659.8 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Excluding the effect of the Walden acquisition, cost of educational services decreased 0.2%, or $0.8 million, in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Decreased costs excluding Walden in fiscal year 2022 were primarily driven by cost reduction efforts across all institutions, partially offset by return to campus cost increases at Chamberlain.
As a percentage of revenue, cost of educational services was 47.6% in fiscal year 2022 compared to 50.5% in the prior year. The decrease in the percentage was primarily the result of the influence of Walden’s higher gross margins. Walden’s fully online operating model results in lower comparable cost of educational services.
Student Services and Administrative Expense
The student services and administrative expense category includes expenses related to student admissions, marketing and advertising, general and administrative, and amortization expense of finite-lived intangible assets related to business acquisitions. We have not yet experienced significant inflationary pressures on wages or other costs of providing services to our students and educational institutions; however, should inflation persist in the overall economy, cost increases could affect our results of operations in the future. The following table presents student services and administrative expense by segment detailing the changes from the prior year (in thousands):
Student services and administrative expense increased 94.2%, or $275.6 million, to $568.1 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Excluding the effect of the Walden acquisition and CEO transition costs, student services and
administrative expense decreased 4.6%, or $13.4 million, in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Decreased costs excluding Walden in fiscal year 2022 were primarily driven by cost reduction efforts across all institutions and home office.
As a percentage of revenue, student services and administrative expense was 41.0% in fiscal year 2022 compared to 32.3% in the prior year. The increase in the percentage was primarily the result of an increase in Chamberlain and Medical and Veterinary marketing expense, Walden intangible amortization expense, and CEO transition costs.
Restructuring Expense
Restructuring expense in fiscal year 2022 was $25.6 million compared to $6.9 million in the prior year. The increased restructure expense in fiscal year 2022 was primarily driven by workforce reductions and contract terminations related to synergy actions with regard to the Walden acquisition and Medical and Veterinary and Adtalem’s home office real estate consolidations. See Note 6 “Restructuring Charges” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on restructuring charges.
We continue to incur restructuring charges or reversals related to exiting leased space from previous restructuring activities and have begun implementing additional restructuring plans to achieve synergies after the Walden acquisition. These restructuring costs are expected to continue into fiscal year 2023.
Business Acquisition and Integration Expense
Business acquisition and integration expense in fiscal year 2022 was $53.2 million compared to $31.6 million in the prior year. These are transaction costs associated with acquiring Walden and costs associated with integrating Walden into Adtalem. We expect to incur additional integration costs in fiscal year 2023.
Operating Income
The following table presents operating income by segment detailing the changes from the prior year (in thousands):
The following table presents a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP) to operating income excluding special items (non-GAAP) by segment (in thousands):
Total consolidated operating income decreased 31.8%, or $37.6 million, to $80.5 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Excluding the effect of the Walden acquisition, total consolidated operating income decreased $33.4 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. The primary drivers of the operating income decrease in fiscal year 2022 were decreased revenue at Chamberlain, increased costs at Chamberlain and Medical and Veterinary for return to campus, increased marketing expense at Chamberlain and Medical and Veterinary, CEO transition costs, increased restructuring costs, and increased business acquisition and integration costs.
Consolidated operating income excluding special items increased 73.4%, or $114.8 million, in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. The primary driver of the operating income excluding special items increase was the addition of operating income excluding special items from Walden.
Chamberlain
Chamberlain operating income decreased 3.4%, or $4.4 million, to $124.4 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Segment operating income excluding special items decreased 1.2%, or $1.6 million, in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Cost reduction efforts and a decrease in employee benefit costs were offset with a decrease in revenue, increased costs for return to campus, and increased marketing expense.
Walden
Walden operating loss was $4.2 million in fiscal year 2022, which was impacted by intangible amortization expense and the deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustments. Segment operating income excluding special items was $105.7
million in fiscal year 2022. There was no comparable operating income in the prior year as Adtalem acquired Walden on August 12, 2021.
Medical and Veterinary
Medical and Veterinary operating income decreased 4.7%, or $3.2 million, to $64.6 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. Segment operating income excluding special items increased 9.7%, or $6.6 million, in fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior year. The primary drivers of the increase in operating income excluding special items were cost reduction efforts and decreased employee benefit costs.
Net Other (Expense) Income
Net other expense in fiscal year 2022 was $125.5 million compared to $34.6 million in the prior year. The increase in net other expense was primarily the result of increased borrowings (as discussed in Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”) to finance the Walden acquisition and write-offs of debt discount and issuance costs as a result of debt prepayments.
Benefit from (Provision for) Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rate (“ETR”) from continuing operations can differ from the 21% U.S. federal statutory rate due to several factors, including the rate of tax applied by state and local jurisdictions, the rate of tax applied to earnings outside the U.S., tax incentives, changes in valuation allowances, liabilities for uncertain tax positions, and tax benefits on stock-based compensation awards. Additionally, our ETR is impacted by the provisions from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”), which primarily includes a tax on global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”), and a limitation of tax benefits on certain executive compensation. The impact of the Tax Act may be revised in future periods as we obtain additional data and consider any new regulations or guidance that may be released.
Our income tax benefit from continuing operations was $15.2 million in fiscal year 2022 and our income tax expense from continuing operations was $13.1 million in fiscal year 2021. The fiscal year 2022 income tax benefit is the result of the loss incurred in fiscal year 2022. The effective tax rate includes a tax benefit of $1.7 million from a loss for certain uncollectible subsidiary receivables as well as a benefit of $1.2 million to adjust deferred state tax balances for the acquisition of Walden and the sale of ACAMS, Becker, and OCL, offset by $3.0 million for limitations on deductions for executive compensation.
Discontinued Operations
Beginning in the second quarter of fiscal year 2022, ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine operations were classified as discontinued operations. In addition, we continue to incur costs associated with ongoing litigation and settlements related to the DeVry University divestiture, which was completed during fiscal year 2019, and are classified as expense within discontinued operations.
Net income from discontinued operations for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $347.5 million. This income consisted of the following: (i) loss of $0.4 million driven by the operating results and divestiture costs related to ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine, and ongoing litigation costs and settlements to the DeVry University divestiture; (ii) a gain on the sale of ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine of $473.5 million; and (iii) a provision for income taxes of $125.6 million associated with the items listed above.
Net income from discontinued operations for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $6.1 million. This income consisted of the following: (i) income of $9.5 million driven by the operating results of ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine and ongoing litigation costs and settlements related to the DeVry University divestiture and (ii) a provision for income taxes of $3.3 million associated with the items listed above.
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021 vs. Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
Revenue
The following table presents revenue by segment detailing the changes from the prior year (in thousands):
Chamberlain
Chamberlain Student Enrollment:
Chamberlain revenue increased 10.2%, or $52.2 million, to $563.8 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, driven by increases in total student enrollment during each of the fiscal year 2021 enrollment sessions compared to the same session from fiscal year 2020 as well as select tuition and fee price increases. Chamberlain admitted its largest class of campus students in September 2020.
Tuition Rates (2021):
Tuition for the BSN onsite and online degree program ranged from $675 to $730 per credit hour. Tuition for the RN-to-BSN online degree program was $590 per credit hour. Tuition for the online MSN degree program was $650 per credit hour. Tuition for the online FNP degree program was $665 per credit hour. Tuition for the online DNP degree program was $775 per credit hour. Tuition for the online MPH degree program was $550 per credit hour. Tuition for the online MSW degree program was $695 per credit hour. These tuition rates do not include the cost of course fees, books, supplies, transportation, clinical fees, living expenses, or other fees as listed in the Chamberlain academic catalog.
Medical and Veterinary Schools
Medical and Veterinary Schools Student Enrollment:
Medical and Veterinary revenue decreased 3.3%, or $11.7 million, to $343.1 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The principal drivers of the decrease were an estimated loss of approximately $13 million in fiscal year 2021 in housing and student transportation revenue (compared to $4 million in fiscal year 2020), primarily at RUSM as basic science students were not on campus for the full year due to COVID-19 remote learning. COVID-19 related clinical revenue losses at AUC and RUSM were approximately $21 million in fiscal year 2021 (compared to $13 million in fiscal year 2020) driven by limitations at partner hospitals, which although not as severe as earlier in the pandemic, were reinstituted when COVID-19 cases surged across the U.S. during the winter in fiscal year 2021. These decreases were partially offset with student enrollment increases in the basic science programs at AUC and RUSVM.
In the September 2020 semester, total student enrollment increased at AUC, RUSM, and RUSVM. In the January 2021 and May 2021 semesters, total student enrollment increased at AUC and RUSVM but declined at RUSM. The declines in total student enrollment at RUSM for the January 2021 and May 2021 semesters were partially driven by the inability to offer clinical experiences to all students caused by the COVID-19 restrictions at partner hospitals and partially driven by an increase in students waiting to pass their USMLE Step 1 exam. In previous semesters during the COVID-19 pandemic, students were able to supplement their clinical experience with elective online courses; however, these electives are limited and most were completed. If a student has not yet started in a clinical program, is not eligible to be enrolled in a clinical program, or not participating in other educational experiences, they are not included in the enrollment count for that semester.
Tuition Rates (2021):
● Effective for semesters beginning in September 2020, tuition rates for the beginning basic sciences and final clinical rotation portions of AUC’s medical program were $23,240 and $26,000, respectively, per semester. These tuition rates were unchanged from the prior academic year.
● Effective for semesters beginning in September 2020, tuition rates for the beginning basic sciences and final clinical rotation portions of RUSM’s medical program were $24,170 and $26,676, respectively, per semester. These tuition rates were unchanged from the prior academic year.
● For students who entered the RUSVM program in September 2018 or later, the tuition rate for the pre-clinical (Semesters 1-7) and clinical curriculum (Semesters 8-10) is $20,873 per semester effective September 2020. For students who entered RUSVM before September 2018, tuition rates for the pre-clinical and clinical curriculum were $19,387 and $24,339, respectively, per semester effective September 2020. All of these tuition rates were unchanged from the prior academic year.
The respective tuition rates for AUC, RUSM, and RUSVM do not include the cost of transportation, living expenses, or health insurance.
Cost of Educational Services
The largest component of cost of educational services is the cost of faculty and staff who support educational operations. This expense category also includes the costs of facilities, adjunct faculty, supplies, housing, bookstore, other educational materials, student education-related support activities, and the provision for bad debts. The following table presents cost of educational services by segment detailing the changes from the prior year (in thousands):
Cost of educational services increased 0.2%, or $0.7 million, to $457.9 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. Cost increased in fiscal year 2021 primarily driven by increased costs at Chamberlain and the basic science programs at the medical and veterinary schools to support growth. This increase was partially offset by decreased bad debt expense of $3.4 million primarily related to the credit extension programs at the medical and veterinary schools, cost control initiatives across all institutions, and lower costs of approximately $10 million in fiscal year 2021 (compared to $3 million in fiscal year 2020) associated with campus closure, reduced clinical rotations, and lower services, including housing services.
As a percentage of revenue, cost of educational services was 50.5% in fiscal year 2021 compared to 52.8% in fiscal year 2020. The decrease in the percentage was primarily the result of the decreased bad debt expense related to the credit extension programs at the medical and veterinary schools.
Student Services and Administrative Expense
The student services and administrative expense category includes expenses related to student admissions, marketing and advertising, and general and administrative. The following table presents student services and administrative expense by segment detailing the changes from the prior year (in thousands):
Student services and administrative expense increased 4.3%, or $12.2 million, to $292.5 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily driven by increased marketing expense and employee benefit costs, partially offset by cost control initiatives across all institutions.
As a percentage of revenue, student services and administrative expense was 32.3% in fiscal year 2021 compared to 32.4% in fiscal year 2020.
Restructuring Expense
Restructuring expense in fiscal year 2021 was $6.9 million compared to $23.7 million in fiscal year 2020. The primary driver of the decreased restructuring expense in fiscal year 2021 was the result of the higher amount of charges in fiscal
year 2020 related to Adtalem’s home office real estate consolidations. See Note 6 “Restructuring Charges” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on restructuring charges.
Business Acquisition and Integration Expense
Business acquisition and integration expense in fiscal year 2021 was $31.6 million. These are transaction costs associated with acquiring Walden and costs associated with integrating Walden into Adtalem. There was no corresponding expense in fiscal year 2020.
Gain on Sale of Assets
On September 27, 2019, Adtalem closed on the sale of its Columbus, Ohio, campus facility. Net proceeds of $6.4 million from the sale of this facility resulted in a gain on the sale of $4.8 million in fiscal year 2020. This gain was recorded at Adtalem’s home office, which is classified as “Home Office and Other” in Note 21 “Segment Information” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” There was no corresponding gain in fiscal year 2021.
Operating Income
The following table presents operating income by segment detailing the changes from the prior year (in thousands):
The following table presents a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP) to operating income excluding special items (non-GAAP) by segment (in thousands):
Total consolidated operating income increased 7.3%, or $8.0 million, to $118.1 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. Consolidated operating income excluding special items increased 21.4%, or $27.5 million, in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The primary drivers of the operating income excluding special items increase were increased revenue of $52.2 million at Chamberlain, which generated higher incremental operating income than the lost revenue sources at the medical and veterinary schools due to COVID-19, decreased bad debt expense of $3.4 million, primarily related to the credit extension programs at the medical and veterinary schools, and efforts to manage salary, travel, and discretionary spending across the organization. The positive influences on operating income were partially offset by increased marketing expense and employee benefit costs.
Chamberlain
Chamberlain operating income increased 29.7%, or $29.5 million, to $128.9 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The primary driver of the increase in operating income was the increased revenue of $52.2 million in fiscal year 2021, which generated higher incremental operating income, partially offset by increased marketing expense and employee benefit costs.
Medical and Veterinary
Medical and Veterinary operating income increased 1.8%, or $1.2 million, to $67.9 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The primary drivers of increase in operating income were decreased bad debt expense, primarily related to the credit extension programs, decreased restructuring expense, and efforts to manage salary, travel, and discretionary spending. The positive influences on operating income in fiscal year 2021 were partially offset by the estimated COVID-19 related loss of clinical revenue at AUC and RUSM contributed to approximately $14 million in lost operating income in fiscal year 2021 (compared to $10 million in fiscal year 2020) and lower COVID-19 related housing and student transportation revenue, primarily at RUSM as described above, resulted in approximately $10 million in lost operating income in the fiscal year 2021 (compared to $2 million in fiscal year 2020).
Net Other (Expense) Income
Net other expense in fiscal year 2021 was $34.6 million compared to net other income of $94.9 million in fiscal year 2020. The increase in net other expense was primarily the result of a pre-tax gain of $110.7 million in fiscal year 2020 on the deal-contingent foreign currency hedge arrangement entered into on October 18, 2019 in connection with the sale of Adtalem Brazil, which was completed on April 24, 2020, to economically hedge the Brazilian Real denominated purchase price through mitigation of the currency exchange rate risk (as discussed in Note 4 “Discontinued Operations and Assets Held for Sale” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”). The derivative associated with the hedge did not qualify for hedge accounting treatment under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, and as a result, all changes in fair value were recorded within the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss). In addition, interest expense increased in fiscal year 2021 driven by $26.7 million in pre-acquisition interest expense, which partially offset our lower interest expense on our Prior Credit Facility (as defined in Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”) driven by the repayment of debt in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020 using the proceeds from the sale of Adtalem Brazil.
(Provision for) Benefit from Income Taxes
The ETR from continuing operations in fiscal year 2021 was positive 15.7% compared to negative 7.3% in fiscal year 2020. The increase is primarily due to not recording a tax provision on the pre-tax gain of $110.7 million in fiscal year 2020 on the deal-contingent foreign currency hedge arrangement entered into in connection with the sale of Adtalem Brazil completed on April 24, 2020 (see Note 4 “Discontinued Operations and Assets Held for Sale” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information). Also, during fiscal year 2020, a net tax benefit special item of $25.7 million was recorded related to a former subsidiary investment loss claimed for the tax year ended June 30, 2018. Excluding the one-time effects of the derivative contract and the tax benefit on a former subsidiary investment loss in fiscal year 2020 (a non-GAAP financial measure), the ETR from continuing operations in fiscal year 2021 and 2020 was 15.7% and 11.4%, respectively. This increase in the fiscal year 2021 rate was driven by a decrease in the percentage of earnings from foreign operations compared to the prior year.
Discontinued Operations
Beginning in the second quarter of fiscal year 2022, ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine operations were classified as discontinued operations. Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020, Adtalem Brazil operations were classified as discontinued operations. In addition, we continue to incur costs associated with ongoing litigation and settlements related to the DeVry University divestiture, which was completed during fiscal year 2019, and are classified as expense within discontinued operations.
Net income from discontinued operations for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $6.1 million. This income consisted of the following: (i) income of $9.5 million driven by the operating results of ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine and ongoing litigation costs and settlements related to the DeVry University divestiture and (ii) a provision for income taxes of $3.3 million associated with the items listed above.
Net loss from discontinued operations for the year ended June 30, 2020 was $305.7 million. This loss consisted of the following: (i) a loss of $30.4 million driven by the operating results of ACAMS, Becker, OCL, EduPristine, and Adtalem Brazil and ongoing litigation costs and settlements related to the DeVry University divestiture; (ii) a loss on the sale of Adtalem Brazil of $287.6 million, which included a $293.4 million loss recognized from the reclassification of the cumulative foreign currency translation adjustments from other comprehensive income; and (iii) a benefit from income taxes of $12.2 million associated with the items listed above.
Regulatory Environment
Student Payments
Adtalem’s primary source of liquidity is the cash received from payments for student tuition, books, other educational materials, and fees. These payments include funds originating as financial aid from various federal and state loan and grant programs, student and family educational loans (“private loans”), employer educational reimbursements, scholarships, and
student and family financial resources. Adtalem continues to provide financing options for its students, including Adtalem’s credit extension programs.
The following table, which excludes ACAMS, Adtalem Brazil, Becker, EduPristine, and OCL revenue, summarizes Adtalem’s revenue by fund source as a percentage of total revenue for fiscal years 2021 and 2020. Final data for fiscal year 2022 is not yet available.
The pattern of cash receipts during the year is seasonal. Adtalem’s cash collections on accounts receivable peak at the start of each institution’s term. Accounts receivable reach their lowest level at the end of each institution’s term.
Financial Aid
Like other higher education companies, Adtalem is highly dependent upon the timely receipt of federal financial aid funds. All financial aid and assistance programs are subject to political and governmental budgetary considerations. In the U.S., the Higher Education Act (“HEA”) guides the federal government’s support of postsecondary education. If there are changes to financial aid programs that restrict student eligibility or reduce funding levels, Adtalem’s financial condition and cash flows could be materially and adversely affected. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for a discussion of student financial aid related risks.
In addition, government-funded financial assistance programs are governed by extensive and complex regulations in the U.S. Like any other educational institution, Adtalem’s administration of these programs is periodically reviewed by various regulatory agencies and is subject to audit or investigation by other governmental authorities. Any violation could be the basis for penalties or other disciplinary action, including initiation of a suspension, limitation, or termination proceeding.
If the U.S. Department of Education (“ED”) determines that we have failed to demonstrate either financial responsibility or administrative capability in any pending program review, or otherwise determines that an institution has violated the terms of its Program Participation Agreement (“PPA”), we could be subject to sanctions including: fines, penalties, reimbursement for discharged loan obligations, a requirement to post a letter of credit and/or suspension or termination of our eligibility to participate in the Title IV programs.
Chamberlain was most recently recertified and issued an unrestricted PPA in September 2020, with an expiration date of March 31, 2024. Walden was issued a Temporary Provisional PPA (“TPPPA”) in connection with their acquisition by Adtalem on September 17, 2021. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020 and the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, ED provisionally recertified AUC, RUSM, and RUSVM’s Title IV PPAs with expiration dates of December 31, 2022, March 31, 2023, and June 30, 2023, respectively. The provisional nature of the agreements for AUC, RUSM, and RUSVM stemmed from increased and/or repeated Title IV compliance audit findings. Walden’s TPPPA included financial requirements, which were in place prior to acquisition, such as a letter of credit, heightened cash monitoring, and additional reporting. No similar requirements were imposed on AUC, RUSM, or RUSVM. While corrective actions have been taken to resolve past compliance matters and eliminate the incidence of repetition, if AUC, RUSM, or RUSVM fail to maintain administrative capability as defined by ED while under provisional status or otherwise fail to comply with ED requirements, the institution(s) could lose eligibility to participate in Title IV programs or have that eligibility adversely conditioned, which could have a material adverse effect on the businesses, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
On October 13, 2016, DeVry University and ED reached a negotiated agreement (the “ED Settlement”) to settle the claims asserted in a Notice of Intent to Limit from the Multi-Regional and Foreign School Participation Division of the Federal Student Aid office of the Department of Education (“ED FSA”). Under the terms of the ED Settlement, among other things, without admitting wrongdoing, DeVry University agreed to certain compliance requirements regarding its past and future advertising, that DeVry University’s participation in Title IV programs was subject to provisional certification for five years and that DeVry University was required to post a letter of credit equal to the greater of 10% of DeVry University’s annual Title IV disbursements or $68.4 million for a five-year period. The posted letter of credit continued to be posted by Adtalem following the closing of the sale of DeVry University. This letter of credit expired during the second quarter of fiscal year 2022 and is no longer outstanding as of June 30, 2022.
Walden must apply periodically to ED for continued certification to participate in Title IV programs. Such recertification generally is required every six years, but may be required earlier, including when an institution undergoes a change in control. ED may place an institution on provisional certification status if it finds that the institution does not fully satisfy all of the eligibility and certification standards and in certain other circumstances, such as when an institution is certified for the first time or undergoes a change in control. During the period of provisional certification, the institution must comply with any additional conditions included in the institution’s program participation agreement. In addition, ED may more closely review an institution that is provisionally certified if it applies for recertification or approval to open a new location, add an educational program, acquire another institution or make any other significant change. Students attending provisionally certified institutions remain eligible to receive Title IV program funds. If ED determines that a provisionally certified institution is unable to meet its responsibilities under its program participation agreement, it may seek to revoke the institution’s certification to participate in Title IV programs without advance notice or opportunity for the institution to challenge the action. Walden is currently on a temporary provisional program participation agreement which is required for participation in Title IV programs on a month-to-month basis. Walden’s provisional certification prior to acquisition was due to Walden’s prior parent company (Laureate Education Inc.) failing composite score under ED’s financial responsibility standards and ED’s approval of Laureate’s initial public offering in February 2017, which it viewed as a change in control. As a result of Adtalem’s acquisition of Walden, the provisional nature of Walden’s program participation agreement remains in effect on a month-to-month basis while ED reviews the change in ownership application relating to the acquisition of Walden by Adtalem. Walden also is subject to a letter of credit and is subject to additional cash management requirements with respect to its disbursements of Title IV funds, as well as a restriction on changes to its educational programs, including a prohibition on the addition of new programs or locations that had not been approved by ED prior to the change in ownership during the period in which Walden participates under provisional certification (either as a result of the change in ownership or because of the continuation of the financial responsibility letter of credit). As of June 30, 2022, Adtalem maintains a letter of credit for $84.0 million in favor of ED, which allows Walden to participate in Title IV programs. This letter of credit, which was assumed in the Acquisition, reduces Adtalem’s borrowing capacity dollar-for-dollar under its Credit Facility (as defined in Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”). On July 14, 2022, the $84.0 million letter of credit under our Credit Facility was released due to Adtalem executing a surety-backed letter of credit for the same amount in favor of ED. Therefore, the amount undrawn under the Revolver (as defined in Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”) was $400.0 million as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form10-K.
An ED regulation known as the “90/10 Rule” affects only proprietary postsecondary institutions, such as Chamberlain, Walden, AUC, RUSM, and RUSVM. Under this regulation, an institution that derives more than 90% of its revenue on a cash basis from Title IV student financial assistance programs in two consecutive fiscal years loses eligibility to participate in these programs for at least two fiscal years. The Rescue Act enacted on March 11, 2021 amended the 90/10 rule to require that a proprietary institution derive no more than 90% of its revenue from federal education assistance funds, including but not limited to previously excluded U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and military tuition assistance benefits. This change was subject to negotiated rulemaking, which ended in March 2022. The amended rule will first apply to institutional fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 2023. The following table details the percentage of revenue on a cash basis from federal financial assistance programs as calculated under the current regulations (excluding the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and military tuition assistance benefits) for each of Adtalem’s Title IV-eligible institutions for fiscal years 2021 and 2020. Final data for fiscal year 2022 is not yet available.
Fiscal year data for Walden is not available as they previously reported on a calendar year basis. As reported by Laureate Education, Inc. in their February 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K, Walden derived approximately 76% of its revenues (calculated on a cash basis) from Title IV program funds for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In September 2016, Adtalem committed to voluntarily limit to 85% the amount of revenue that each of its Title IV-eligible institutions derive from federal funding, including the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and military tuition assistance benefits. As disclosed in the third-party review reports that have been made publicly available, Adtalem’s institutions that were owned at each reporting date have met this lower threshold for each fiscal year since the commitment was made. Adtalem is committed to implementing measures to promote responsible recruitment and enrollment, successful student outcomes, and informed student choice. Management believes students deserve greater transparency to make informed choices about their education. This commitment builds upon a solid foundation and brings Adtalem to a new self-imposed level of public accountability and transparency.
A financial responsibility test is required for continued participation by an institution’s students in U.S. federal financial assistance programs. For Adtalem’s participating institutions, this test is calculated at the consolidated Adtalem level. The test is based upon a composite score of three ratios: an equity ratio that measures the institution’s capital resources; a primary reserve ratio that measures an institution’s ability to fund its operations from current resources; and a net income ratio that measures an institution’s ability to operate profitably. A minimum score of 1.5 is necessary to meet ED’s financial standards. Institutions with scores of less than 1.5 but greater than or equal to 1.0 are considered financially responsible, but require additional oversight. These institutions are subject to heightened cash monitoring and other participation requirements. An institution with a score of less than 1.0 is considered not financially responsible. However, an institution with a score of less than 1.0 may continue to participate in the Title IV programs under provisional certification. In addition, this lower score typically requires that the institution be subject to heightened cash monitoring requirements and post a letter of credit (equal to a minimum of 10% of the Title IV aid it received in the institution's most recent fiscal year).
For the past several years, Adtalem’s composite score has exceeded the required minimum of 1.5. Changes to the manner in which the composite score is calculated that were effective on July 1, 2020 has negatively affected Adtalem’s composite score for fiscal year 2022 and will continue to negatively affect future Adtalem scores. At this time, management does not believe these changes by themselves will result in the score falling below 1.5. However, as a result of the acquisition of Walden and the related transactions, Adtalem expects its consolidated composite score to fall below 1.5 for its fiscal year 2022 financial responsibility test. If Adtalem becomes unable to meet requisite financial responsibility standards within the regulations, management believes it will be able to otherwise demonstrate its ability to continue to provide educational services; however, our institutions will be required to request additional state regulatory approvals, heightened cash monitoring, and/or be required to post a letter of credit to continue to participate in federal and state financial assistance programs.
ED has initiated rulemaking proceedings to amend the financial responsibility regulations. The earliest we believe any new rules will be effective is July 1, 2024.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Adtalem’s consolidated cash and cash equivalents balance of $347.0 million and $476.4 million as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, included cash and cash equivalents held at Adtalem’s international operations of $34.2 million and $111.7 million as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, which is available to Adtalem for general corporate purposes. The decrease in cash was principally driven by payment of $1,488.1 million for the acquisition of Walden, net repayments of debt of $229.7 million, and payment of $150.0 million for the ASR agreement, partially offset by proceeds of $960.8 million from the sale of Financial Services and cash transferred of $818.6 million from restricted accounts.
Under the terms of Adtalem institutions’ participation in financial aid programs, certain cash received from state governments and ED is maintained in restricted bank accounts. Adtalem receives these funds either after the financial aid authorization and disbursement process for the benefit of the student is completed, or just prior to that authorization. Once the authorization and disbursement process for a particular student is completed, the funds may be transferred to unrestricted accounts and become available for Adtalem to use in operations. This process generally occurs during the academic term for which such funds have been authorized. Cash in the amount of $1.0 million and $0.4 million was held in these restricted bank accounts as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. In addition, $818.6 million was recorded within restricted cash on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2021, which represents cash held in an escrow account designated to fund the Acquisition and was not available to Adtalem for general corporate purposes (see Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information).
Cash Flow Summary
Operating Activities
The following table provides a summary of cash flows from operating activities (in thousands):
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations in fiscal year 2022 was $163.8 million compared to $168.8 million in the prior year. The decrease was driven by increased interest payments and payments for business acquisition and integration expenses related to the Walden acquisition, partially offset by additional cash flow from Walden operations. The increase of $169.6 million in non-cash items between fiscal year 2022 and 2021 was principally driven by increases in Walden intangible asset amortization, Walden depreciation, Walden bad debt expense, amortization and write-off of debt discount and issuance costs, and stock-based compensation expense related to the CEO transition. The decrease of $74.4 million in cash generated from changes in assets and liabilities was primarily due to timing differences in accounts receivable, prepaid assets, prepaid income taxes, accounts payable, accrued payroll and benefits, accrued liabilities, accrued interest, and deferred revenue.
Investing Activities
Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2022 were $31.1 million compared to $39.9 million in the prior year. The capital expenditures in fiscal year 2022 primarily consisted of spending for Chamberlain’s new campus development and improvements. Capital spending for fiscal year 2023 will support continued investment for new campus development at Chamberlain, maintenance at the medical and veterinary schools, and Adtalem’s home office. Management anticipates fiscal year 2023 capital spending to be in the $60 to $70 million range. The source of funds for this capital spending will be from operations or the Credit Facility (as defined and discussed in Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”).
On March 10, 2022, Adtalem completed the sale of ACAMS, Becker, and OCL to Wendel Group and Colibri Group (“Purchaser”), pursuant to the Equity Purchase Agreement (“Purchase Agreement”) dated January 24, 2022. Adtalem received $962.7 million, net of cash of $21.5 million, in sale proceeds.
On June 17, 2022, Adtalem completed the sale of EduPristine for de minimis consideration, which resulted in a transfer of $1.9 million in cash to EduPristine.
On August 12, 2021, Adtalem completed the acquisition of 100% of the equity interest of Walden for $1,488.1 million, net of cash and restricted cash of $83.4 million.
On April 24, 2020, Adtalem completed the sale of Adtalem Brazil to Estácio Participações S.A. (“Estácio”) and Sociedade de Ensino Superior Estaćio de Sá Ltda, a wholly owned subsidiary of Estácio, pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement dated October 18, 2019. Adtalem received $345.9 million in sale proceeds and $56.0 million of Adtalem Brazil’s cash, for a combined $401.9 million upon the sale. Adtalem Brazil’s cash balance on the sale date was $88.4 million, resulting in $313.5 million of cash proceeds, net of this cash transferred. In addition, Adtalem received $110.7 million from the settlement of the deal-contingent foreign currency hedge arrangement to economically hedge the Brazilian Real denominated purchase price through mitigation of the currency exchange rate risk.
On September 27, 2019, Adtalem closed on the sale of its Columbus, Ohio, campus facility. Net proceeds of $6.4 million from the sale of this facility resulted in a gain on the sale of $4.8 million in fiscal year 2020. This gain was recorded at Adtalem’s home office, which is classified as “Home Office and Other” in Note 21 “Segment Information” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Financing Activities
The following table provides a summary of cash flows from financing activities (in thousands):
On November 8, 2018, we announced that the Board authorized Adtalem’s eleventh share repurchase program, which allowed Adtalem to repurchase up to $300.0 million of its common stock through December 31, 2021. The eleventh share repurchase program commenced in January 2019 and was completed in January 2021. On February 4, 2020, we announced that the Board authorized Adtalem’s twelfth share repurchase program, which allowed Adtalem to repurchase up to $300.0 million of its common stock through December 31, 2021. The twelfth share repurchase program commenced in January 2021 and expired on December 31, 2021. On March 1, 2022, we announced that the Board authorized Adtalem’s thirteenth share repurchase program, which allows Adtalem to repurchase up to $300.0 million of its common stock through February 25, 2025. We did not make any share repurchases under these programs during fiscal year 2022. See Note 15 “Share Repurchases” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on our share repurchase programs.
On March 14, 2022, we entered into an ASR agreement to repurchase $150.0 million of common stock. We received an initial delivery of 4,709,576 shares of common stock representing approximately 80% of the total shares expected to be delivered at the time of executing the ASR based on the per share price on the day prior to the execution date. The final number of shares to be repurchased will be based on the average of the daily volume-weighted average price of Adtalem’s common stock during the term of the ASR agreement, less a discount and subject to adjustments pursuant to the terms of the ASR agreement. The final settlement of the ASR agreement is expected to be completed no later than during the second quarter of fiscal year 2023 in accordance with the contractual completion date. At settlement, our counterparty may be required to deliver additional shares of common stock to us, or, under certain circumstances, we may be required to deliver shares of our common stock or may elect to make a cash payment to our counterparty.
On March 24, 2020, we executed a pay-fixed, receive-variable interest rate swap agreement (the “Swap”) with a multinational financial institution to mitigate risks associated with the variable interest rate on our Prior Term Loan B (as defined in Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”) debt. We paid interest at a fixed rate of 0.946% and received variable interest of one-month LIBOR (subject to a minimum of 0.00%), on a notional amount equal to the amount outstanding under the Prior Term Loan B. The effective date of the Swap was March 31, 2020 and settlements with the counterparty occurred on a monthly basis. The Swap was set to terminate on February 28, 2025. On July 29, 2021, prior to refinancing our Prior Credit Agreement (as discussed
below), we settled and terminated the Swap for $4.5 million, which resulted in a charge to interest expense for this amount in fiscal year 2022. During the operating term of the Swap, the annual interest rate on the amount of the Prior Term Loan B was fixed at 3.946% (including the impact of the 3% interest rate margin on LIBOR loans) for the applicable interest rate period. The Swap was designated as a cash flow hedge and as such, changes in its fair value were recognized in accumulated other comprehensive loss on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and were reclassified into the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss) within interest expense in the periods in which the hedged transactions affected earnings.
As discussed in the previous section of this MD&A titled “Walden University Acquisition,” on August 12, 2021, Adtalem acquired all of the issued and outstanding equity interest in Walden, in exchange for a purchase price of $1.5 billion in cash. On March 1, 2021, we issued $800.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.50% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (the “Notes”), which mature on March 1, 2028. On August 12, 2021, Adtalem replaced the Prior Credit Facility and Prior Credit Agreement (as defined in Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”) by entering into its new credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) that provides for (1) a $850.0 million senior secured term loan (“Term Loan B”) with a maturity date of August 12, 2028 and (2) a $400.0 million senior secured revolving loan facility (“Revolver”) with a maturity date of August 12, 2026. We refer to the Term Loan B and Revolver collectively as the “Credit Facility.” The proceeds of the Notes and the Term Loan B were used, among other things, to finance the Acquisition, refinance Adtalem’s Prior Credit Agreement, and pay fees and expenses related to the Acquisition. The Revolver will be used to finance ongoing working capital and for general corporate purposes. During fiscal year 2022, we made a prepayment of $396.7 million on the Term Loan B. With this prepayment, we are no longer required to make quarterly installment payments. On April 11, 2022, we repaid $373.3 million of Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Notes. During June 2022, we repurchased on the open market an additional $20.8 million of Notes at a price equal to approximately 90% of the principal amount of the Notes, resulting in a gain on extinguishment of $2.1 million recorded within interest expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss) for the year ended June 30, 2022. This debt was subsequently retired. As of June 30, 2022, the amount of debt outstanding under the Notes and Credit Facility was $859.2 million. See Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on the Notes and our Credit Agreement.
Management currently projects that COVID-19 will continue to have an effect on operations and, as a result, liquidity, as discussed in the previous section of this MD&A titled “Overview of the Impact of COVID-19”; however, we believe the current balances of cash, cash generated from operations, and our Credit Facility will be sufficient to fund both Adtalem’s current domestic and international operations and growth plans for the foreseeable future.
Material Cash Requirements
Long-Term Debt - We have outstanding $405.9 million of Notes and maintain an $853.3 million Credit Facility, which requires interest payments. With the prepayment noted above, we are no longer required to make quarterly principal installment payments. As of June 30, 2022, the amount of debt outstanding under the Notes and our Credit Facility was $859.2 million. See Note 13 “Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on our Notes and Credit Agreement.
Operating Lease Obligations - We have operating lease obligations for the minimum payments required under various lease agreements which are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. In addition, we sublease certain space to third parties, which partially offsets the lease obligations at these facilities. See Note 11 “Leases” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on our lease agreements.
Contingencies
For a discussion of legal proceedings, see Note 20 “Commitments and Contingencies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Critical Accounting Estimates
We describe our significant accounting policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure
of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Critical accounting estimates discussed below are those that we believe involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. Management has discussed our critical accounting estimates with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Board. Although management believes its assumptions and estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Although our current estimates contemplate current conditions, including the impact of COVID-19, and how we anticipate them to change in the future, as appropriate, it is reasonably possible that actual conditions could differ from what was anticipated in those estimates, which could materially affect our results of operations and financial condition. On March 11, 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization, which recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. COVID-19 and the response of governmental and public health organizations in dealing with the pandemic included restricting general activity levels within communities, the economy, and operations of our customers. While we have experienced an impact to our business, operations, and financial results as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, it may have even more far-reaching impacts on many aspects of our operations including the impact on customer behaviors, business operations, our employees, and the market in general. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately impacts our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity may differ from management’s current estimates due to inherent uncertainties regarding the duration and further spread of COVID-19, actions taken to contain the virus, the efficacy and distribution of the vaccines, as well as, how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses represents an estimate of the lifetime expected credit losses inherent in our accounts receivable balances as of each balance sheet date. In evaluating the collectability of all our accounts receivable balances, we utilize historical events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts about the future. The estimate of our credit losses involves a significant level of uncertainty as it requires significant judgment to estimate the amount we will collect in the future on our account receivable balances. See Note 9 “Accounts Receivable and Credit Losses” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on our credit losses.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset or asset group. Events that may trigger an impairment analysis could include a decision by management to exit a market or a line of business or to consolidate operating locations.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles are not amortized, but are tested for impairment annually and when an event occurs or circumstances change such that it is more likely than not that an impairment may exist. Our annual testing date is May 31.
Adtalem first assesses goodwill for impairment qualitatively for each reporting unit that contains goodwill. Management analyzes factors that include results of operations and business conditions, significant changes in cash flows at the reporting unit level, as well as how much previously calculated fair values exceed carrying values to determine if it is more likely than not that the reporting units have been impaired. If there is reason to believe the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, then management performs a quantitative impairment review. Adtalem uses a discounted cash flow model to compute fair value. The estimated fair values of the reporting units are based on management’s projection of revenue, gross margin, operating costs, and cash flows considering planned business and operational strategies over a long-term planning horizon of five years. These reporting units constitute components for which discrete financial information is available and regularly reviewed by segment management. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit
containing the goodwill exceeds the fair value of that reporting unit, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent of the excess, up to the amount of goodwill recorded.
For indefinite-lived intangible assets, management first analyzes qualitative factors, including results of operations and business conditions of each reporting unit that contain indefinite-lived intangible assets, significant changes in cash flows at the individual indefinite-lived intangible asset level, if applicable, as well as how much previously calculated fair values exceed carrying values to determine if it is more likely than not that the intangible assets associated with these reporting units have been impaired. If there is reason to believe the carrying value of an intangible asset exceeds its fair value, then management performs a quantitative impairment review. In calculating fair value, Adtalem uses various valuation techniques including a royalty rate model for trade names and a discounted cash flow model for Title IV eligibility and accreditation. The estimated fair values of these indefinite-lived intangible assets are based on management’s projection of revenue, gross margin, operating costs, and cash flows considering planned business and operational strategies over a long-term planning horizon of five years. The assumed royalty rates and the growth rates used to project cash flows and operating results are based upon historical results and analysis of the economic environment in which the reporting units that record indefinite-lived intangible assets operate. The valuations employ present value techniques to measure fair value and consider market factors. Management believes the assumptions used for the impairment testing are consistent with those that would be utilized by a market participant in performing similar valuations of its indefinite-lived intangible assets. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
For intangible assets with finite lives, we evaluate for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset or asset group. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their expected economic lives, ranging from 3 to 5 years.
All intangible assets and certain goodwill are being amortized for tax reporting purposes over statutory lives.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit or an intangible asset involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Management bases its fair value estimates on assumptions it believes to be reasonable at the time, but such assumptions are subject to inherent uncertainty. Actual results may differ from those estimates, which could lead to future impairments of goodwill or intangible assets. See Note 12 “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on our goodwill and intangible assets impairment analysis.
Significant judgments were used in determining the fair value of the intangible assets acquired from the Walden acquisition. The Title IV eligibility and accreditations intangible asset was valued using the with and without method of the income approach. The student relationships intangible asset was valued using the multi-period excess earnings method. The trade name intangible asset was valued using the relief-from-royalty method. The curriculum intangible asset was valued using the cost to replace method. Significant judgments and assumptions were used in these valuations. We applied judgment which involved the use of significant assumptions with respect to (i) the discount rate and recovery period for the Title IV eligibility and accreditations intangible asset; (ii) the discount rate and EBITDA margin for the student relationships intangible asset; (iii) royalty rate and discount rate for the trade name intangible asset; and (iv) labor rates and hours and obsolescence rate for the curriculum intangible asset.
Income Taxes
Adtalem accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Adtalem also recognizes future tax benefits associated with tax loss and credit carryforwards as deferred tax assets. Adtalem’s deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance, when in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Adtalem measures deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which Adtalem expects to recover or settle the temporary differences. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred taxes is recognized in the period that the change is enacted. Adtalem reduces its net tax assets for the estimated additional tax and interest that may result from tax authorities disputing uncertain tax positions Adtalem has taken.
Contingencies
Adtalem is subject to contingencies, such as various claims and legal actions that arise in the normal conduct of its business. We record an accrual for those matters where management believes a loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated. For those matters for which we have not recorded an accrual, their possible impact on Adtalem’s business, financial condition, or results of operations, cannot be predicted at this time. A significant amount of judgment and the use of estimates are required to quantify our ultimate exposure in these matters. The valuation of liabilities for these contingencies is reviewed on a quarterly basis to ensure that we have accrued the proper level of expense. While we believe that the amount accrued to-date is adequate, future changes in circumstances could impact these determinations. See Note 20 “Commitments and Contingencies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on our loss contingencies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations
We believe that certain non-GAAP financial measures provide investors with useful supplemental information regarding the underlying business trends and performance of Adtalem’s ongoing operations as seen through the eyes of management and are useful for period-over-period comparisons. We use these supplemental non-GAAP financial measures internally in our assessment of performance and budgeting process. However, these non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. The following are non-GAAP financial measures used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K:
Net income from continuing operations excluding special items (most comparable GAAP measure: net income (loss) attributable to Adtalem) - Measure of Adtalem’s net income (loss) attributable to Adtalem adjusted for deferred revenue adjustment, CEO transition costs, restructuring expense, business acquisition and integration expense, Walden intangible amortization expense, pre-acquisition interest expense, write-off of debt discount and issuance costs, gain on extinguishment of debt, gain on sale of assets, gain on derivative, tax charges related to the implementation of the Tax Act and the divestiture of DeVry University, a net tax benefit for a former subsidiary investment loss, and net (income) loss from discontinued operations attributable to Adtalem.
Earnings per share from continuing operations excluding special items (most comparable GAAP measure: earnings (loss) per share) - Measure of Adtalem’s diluted earnings (loss) per share adjusted for deferred revenue adjustment, CEO transition costs, restructuring expense, business acquisition and integration expense, Walden intangible amortization expense, pre-acquisition interest expense, write-off of debt discount and issuance costs, gain on extinguishment of debt, gain on sale of assets, gain on derivative, tax charges related to the implementation of the Tax Act and the divestiture of DeVry University, a net tax benefit for a former subsidiary investment loss, and net (income) loss from discontinued operations attributable to Adtalem.
Operating income excluding special items (most comparable GAAP measure: operating income) - Measure of Adtalem’s operating income adjusted for deferred revenue adjustment, CEO transition costs, restructuring expense, business acquisition and integration expense, Walden intangible amortization expense, and gain on sale of assets. This measure is applied on a consolidated and segment basis, depending on the context of the discussion.
Effective income tax rate from continuing operations excluding special items (most comparable GAAP measure: effective income tax rate from continuing operations) - Measure of Adtalem’s effective tax rate from continuing operations adjusted for tax effect on gain on derivative and a net tax benefit for a former subsidiary investment loss.
A description of special items in our non-GAAP financial measures described above are as follows:
● Deferred revenue adjustment related to a revenue purchase accounting adjustment to record Walden’s deferred revenue at fair value.
● CEO transition costs related to acceleration of stock-based compensation expense.
● Restructuring expense primarily related to plans to achieve synergies with the Walden acquisition and real estate consolidations at Medical and Veterinary and Adtalem’s home office.
● Business acquisition and integration expense include expenses related to the Walden acquisition.
● Walden intangible amortization expense on acquired intangible assets.
● Pre-acquisition interest expense, write-off of debt discount and issuance costs, and gain on extinguishment of debt related to financing arrangements in connection with the Walden acquisition and prepayment of debt.
● Gain on the sale of Adtalem’s Columbus, Ohio, campus facility.
● Gain on the deal-contingent foreign currency hedge arrangement entered into in connection with the sale of Adtalem Brazil completed on April 24, 2020 to economically hedge the Brazilian Real denominated purchase price through mitigation of the currency exchange rate risk.
● Tax charges related to the implementation of the Tax Act and the divestiture of DeVry University.
● A net tax benefit for a former subsidiary investment loss.
● Net (income) loss from discontinued operations attributable to Adtalem includes the operations of Adtalem Brazil, ACAMS, Becker, OCL, and EduPristine, including the after-tax gain (loss) on the sale of these businesses, in addition to costs related to DeVry University.
The following tables provide a reconciliation from the most directly comparable GAAP measure to these non-GAAP financial measures. The operating income reconciliation is included in the results of operations section within this MD&A.
Net income (loss) attributable to Adtalem reconciliation to net income from continuing operations attributable to Adtalem excluding special items (in thousands):
(1) Represents the income tax impact of non-GAAP continuing operations adjustments that is recognized in our GAAP financial statements.
Earnings (loss) per share reconciliation to earnings per share from continuing operations excluding special items (shares in thousands):
(1) Represents the income tax impact of non-GAAP continuing operations adjustments that is recognized in our GAAP financial statements.
Effective income tax rate from continuing operations reconciliation to effective income tax rate from continuing operations excluding special items (in thousands):
The calculation of the effective income tax rate from continuing operations excluding special items in this MD&A does not include all of the same special items used in our calculation of net income from continuing operations excluding special items because we do not include all the special item adjustments from our GAAP results in discussing our effective tax rates in this MD&A discussion.