ITEM 7. - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the statements contained in the following discussion of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations refer to future expectations or include other “forward-looking” information. Those statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause the actual results to differ materially from those contemplated, including, but not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this report under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. See “Special Note regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included in this Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of factors to be considered when evaluating forward-looking information detailed below. These factors could cause our actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements.
Business Overview
We offer financial consulting services to small and medium-sized enterprise customers in Asia and North America. Our goal is to become an international financial consulting company with clients and offices throughout Asia. Since our inception in 2015, the focus of our consulting business has been providing comprehensive going public consulting services designed to help SMEs become public companies on suitable markets and exchanges.
On January 4, 2021, we established an office in California, USA, through our wholly owned subsidiary ATIF Inc., a California corporation, and launched, in addition to our business consulting services, additional service models consisting of asset management, investment holding and media services to expand our business with a flexible business concept to achieve a goal of high growth revenue and strong profit growth.
Reverse Split
On August 12, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a reverse stock split (the “Reverse Split”) of our issued and outstanding ordinary shares, par value $0.001 per share, at a ratio of 5-for-1 so that every five (5) shares of US$0.001 par value in issue on the date of the Reverse Split was combined into one (1) share of US$0.005 par value. Shareholders otherwise entitled to receive a fractional share as a result of the reverse stock split will receive a whole share in lieu of such factional share, as relevant. Both before and after completion of the Reverse Split, the Company is and will be authorized to issue 100,000,000,000 ordinary shares of US$0.001 par value each. As a result of the Reverse Split, the Company’s issued and outstanding ordinary shares was reduced from 45,806,952 ordinary shares of US$0.001 par value each to approximately 9,161,390 ordinary shares of par value $0.005 per share. On August 23, 2021, we amended our Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association in connection with our five-for-one reverse stock split to amend the par value back to $0.001 per ordinary share. Our ordinary shares, as adjusted per the Reverse Split, began trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market on August 30, 2021.
Recent Updates
On February 16, 2021, ATIF-1, LP (“ATIF LP”) was established as a private equity fund through our indirectly-wholly owned subsidiary, ATIF-1 GP, LLC (“ATIF GP”), a Delaware limited liability company, as the general partner. We own 76.6% limited partner interest in ATIF, LP. The investment manager for the fund is ATIF Inc. ATIF LP manages approximately $1.3 million and $4.8 million assets under management (“AUM”) as of July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. For the year ended July 31, 2022, three limited partners of ATIF LP withdrew the investment of $3.0 million. In addition, the Company also paid investment gain of $29,149 to the limited partner, which was recorded as a reduction of non-controlling interest. On August 1, 2022, ATIF USA entered into and closed a Sale and Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Asia Time (HK) International Finance Service Limited (the “Buyer”), pursuant to which the Company sold all of its equity interest in ATIF GP for cash consideration of US$50,000 (the “Agreement”). The management believed the disposition does not represent a strategic shift because it is not changing the way it is running its business. The Company has not shifted the nature of its operations. The termination is not accounted as discontinued operations in accordance with ASC 205-20. Upon the closing of the Agreement, ATIF GP is no longer our subsidiary and ATIF USA ceased to be the investment manager of ATIF LP.
On May 31, 2022, we completed the transfer of our equity interest in ATIF HK and Huaya to Mr. Pishan Chi for $nil consideration. The transfer of equity interest was to mitigate the potential risks arising from the PRC government provision of new guidance to and restrictions on China-based companies raising capital offshore. We determined that the transfer of our equity interest in ATIF HK and Huaya did not have a major effect on its operations and financial results as we did not change our way of running business. We also determined that the transfer of equity interest does not represent a strategic shift in our business because there was no change to our operation of our consulting services. There was no change to the nature of our business, and did not affect our customers in North America, which is the major geographic market area of our business. The termination is not accounted as discontinued operations in accordance with ASC 205-20.
On February 3, 2021, we closed termination of our variable interest entity (“VIE”) agreements with Qianhai Asia Times (Shenzhen) International Financial Services Co., Ltd. (“Qianhai”) and its shareholders. As of the date of this report, we do not, and do not plan to use variable interest entities to execute our business plan or to conduct our China-based operations. Qianhai transferred all of its China-based business and employees to Huaya before termination of the VIE agreements. The termination of the VIE agreements did not cause material impairment of our long-lived assets (primarily including fixed assets such as office furniture and equipment and automobile) because all of the fixed assets have been transferred to our PRC subsidiary Huaya upon termination of the VIE agreements and there were no assets held for sale or disposal. The termination of the Qianhai VIE agreements does not represent a strategic shift that has (or will have) a major effect on the Company’s operations because our consulting service business as originally undertook by Qianhai has been transferred to Huaya and ATIF Inc. to serve the clients located in China and U.S. respectively. The termination of the VIE agreements did not cause any regulatory penalties or non-compete agreements. As a result, management concluded that the termination of the Qianhai VIE agreements does not deemed to be a discontinued operation of our consulting service business.
On January 29, 2021, we completed the disposition of 51.2% of the equity interest of LGC. We sold all of our shares of LGC to Jiang Bo, Jiang Tao and Wang Di (collectively, the “Buyers”) in exchange for (i) 1,111,110 of our ordinary shares owned by the Buyers and (ii) payment by the Buyers in the amount of $2,300,000 plus interest at an interest rate of 10% per annum on the unpaid amount if the principal amount of US$2,300,000 is not paid by January 14, 2022. All principal and accrued and unpaid interest shall be due on January 14, 2023. As of July 31, 2022, the principal and accrued and unpaid interest amounted to $2,654,767.
As of July 31, 2022, we have one reporting segment, which is the provision of financial consulting services.
Our financial consulting services
We launched our consulting services in 2015. Our aim was to assist these Chinese enterprises by filling the gaps and forming a bridge between PRC companies and overseas markets and exchanges. We have a team of qualified and experienced personnel with legal, regulatory, and language expertise in several overseas jurisdictions. Our services are designed to help SMEs in China achieve their goal of becoming public companies. We create a going public strategy for each client based on many factors, including our assessment of the client’s financial and operational situations, market conditions, and the client’s business and financing requirements. Since our inception and up to the date of this report, we have successfully helped three Chinese enterprises to be quoted on the U.S. OTC markets and are currently assisting our other clients in their respective going public efforts. All of our current and past clients have been Chinese companies, and we plan to expand our operations to other Asian countries, such as Malaysia, Vietnam, and Singapore in the coming years.
For the year ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, we provided consulting services to three customers and three customers, respectively, which primarily engaged the Company to provide consulting services relating to going public in the US through IPO, reverse merger and acquisition. The low volume of consulting services was due to the recent intense tariff issues between the U.S. and China, which has become more fragile as a result of the outbreak and spread of COVID-19, plus the tightening of U.S. legislation and public listing rules to curb some small Chinese companies to access the U.S. capital markets. As a result, an increasing number of Chinese companies are putting off or slowing down their plans for U.S. listings due to these uncertainties. On May 31, 2022, we completed the transfer of our equity interest in ATIF HK and Huaya, through which we provided consulting services to Chinese companies We plan to focus on providing consulting services to customers based in North America and other areas and intend to continue cooperating with Huaya in connection with the expansion and provision of our business services in China. From April 2022 through the date of this report, the Company entered into consulting agreements with five customers, among which four are based in the North America.
Our total revenue generated from consulting services amounted to $1.6 million and $0.9 million for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Key Factors that Affect our Business
We believe the following key factors may affect our consulting services:
The trade disputes between China and the United States has negatively impacted our business.
During the past two years, the U.S. government has, among other actions, imposed new or higher tariffs on specified products imported from China to penalize China for what it characterizes as unfair trade practices and China has responded by imposing new or higher tariffs on specified products imported from the United States. The uncertainties arising from the trade disputes between China and the United States negatively impacted our potential customers’ confidence to go public through IPOs in the United States in fiscal year 2020 through 2022. As a result, both the number of our new going public consulting service customers and our going public consulting service revenue were kept at low volume in fiscal year 2022 and 2021.
Our business success depends on our ability to acquire customers effectively.
Our customer acquisition channels primarily include our sales and marketing campaigns and existing customer referrals. In order to acquire customers, we have made significant efforts in building mutually beneficial long-term relationships with local government, academic institutions, and local business associations. In addition, we also market our consulting services through social media, such as WeChat or Weibo. If any of our current customer acquisition channels becomes less effective, if we are unable to continue to use any of these channels or if we are not successful in using new channels, we may not be able to attract new customers in a cost-effective manner or convert potential customers into active customers or even lose our existing customers to our competitors. To the extent that our current customer acquisition and retention efforts become less effective, our service revenue may be significantly impacted, which would have a significant adverse effect on our revenues, financial condition, and results of operations.
Our consulting business faces strong market competition.
We are currently facing intense market competition. Some of our current or potential competitors have significantly more financial, technical, marketing, and other resources than we do and may be able to devote greater resources to the development, promotion, and support of their customer acquisition and retention channels. In light of the low barriers to entry in the financial consulting industry, we expect more players to enter this market and increase the level of competition. Our ability to differentiate our services from other competitors will have significant impact on our business growth in the future
Changes in PRC regulatory environment may impact our business and results of operations.
The regulatory environment for the financial consulting industry in China is evolving. Recently, many local governments have established various subsidization schemes and policies to stimulate and encourage local business enterprises to go public, and this may stimulate the growth of more financial consulting firms to become new players given the low barrier of entry into the financial consulting industry as well. As more players enter into the competition, PRC governmental authorities may publish and promulgate various new laws and rules to regulate the financial consulting marketplace. We have been closely tracking the development and implementation of new rules and regulations likely to affect us. We will continue to ensure timely compliance with any new rules and regulations and believe that such timely compliance is essential to our growth. To the extent that we may be required to adapt our operations to new laws and regulations, our operating costs may increase which will impact our profitability.
Our business depends on our ability to attract and retain key personnel.
We rely heavily on the expertise and leadership of our directors and officers to maintain our core competence. Under their leadership, we have been able to achieve rapid expansion and significant growth since our inception in 2015. As our business scope increases, we expect to continue to invest significant resources in hiring and retaining a deep talent pool of financial consultancy professionals. Our ability to sustain our growth will depend on our ability to attract qualified personnel and retain our current staff.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Operation Results for the Years Ended July 31, 2022 and 2021
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and provides information regarding the dollar and percentage increase or (decrease) during such periods.
Revenues. Our total revenue increased by $0.73 million, or 78%, from $0.9 million in fiscal year 2021, to $1.7 million in fiscal year 2022, primarily attributable to completion of more phases of consulting services to customers. Among the revenues of $1.7 million, $0.8 million was contributed from a related party. In July 2022, we provided consulting services to one of our related party’s customers and earned revenues $0.8 million.
For the year ended July 31, 2022, provision of our going public consulting services remained stable as compared with that of the same period of 2021. For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, we provided going public services to three and three customers. Our low-volume provision of consulting services was mainly attributable to tightening of U.S. legislation and public listing rules to curb some small Chinese companies to access the U.S. capital markets. Accordingly an increasing number of Chinese companies are putting off or slowing down their plans for U.S. listings due to these uncertainties. As a result, our potential customers’ perception and confidence to go public through initial public offerings (“IPOs”) in the United States has been negatively impacted.
Given the uncertainty arising from the tightened U.S. legislation and public listing rules to curb IPOs by small Chinese companies to access the United States capital market, we anticipate our limited revenue growth from our consulting services and our continuous operating net loss in the near terms. However, we terminated VIE agreements with Qianhai and its shareholders, and we transferred equity interest in ATIF HK and Huaya, and we aimed to provide our consulting services to more customers based in the U.S. We also plan to hire more specialized and talented employees in order to provide better services to our customers in the future. We believe our competitive strengths, including but not limited to, highly qualified professional service team with extensive experience in going public and consulting services, recognition and reputation of our services achieved from our previous success helping our clients going public, established long-term professional relationships with a group of well-known third-party professional providers both domestically and in the U.S., and established long-term cooperation relationships with local chambers of commerce and associations, will help us develop more customers for our consulting services to generate increased revenue in the long run.
From April 2022 through the date of this report, we have entered into consulting service agreement with five customers, among which four are based in the North America.
Cost of revenues. We incurred cost of revenues of $0.7 million in the fiscal year 2022 which was mainly incurred for direct costs including purchase of a shell company on the over-the-counter (“OTC”) market and consulting expenses for one customer.
Selling expenses. Selling expenses increased by $0.1 million, or 30%, from $0.4 million in fiscal year 2021 to $0.5 million in fiscal year 2022. Our selling expenses primarily consisted of outsourced service fees charged by third-party service providers, business development expenses, potential customer referral commissions, salary and welfare expenses of our business development team, and business travel expenses. The decrease in our selling expenses was primarily due to the following reasons: 1) an increase of $0.3 million in consulting service fees for two consultants and marketing services for three consulting firms; partially offset against 2) a decrease of $0.2 million in expenses incurred by Qianhai, the VIE agreement with which was terminated in February 2021.
As a percentage of sales, our selling expenses were 34% and 47% of our total revenues for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
General and administrative expenses. Our general and administrative expenses decreased by $0.3 million, or 9%, from $2.9 million in fiscal year 2021 to $2.6 million in fiscal year 2022. Our general and administrative expenses primarily consisted of salary and welfare expenses of management and administrative team, office expenses, operating lease expenses, and professional fees such as audit and legal fees. The decrease was mainly due to a decrease of professional fees of $0.4 million because our auditor and counselor decreased service fees with termination of Qianhai VIE Agreement, partially offset against an increase of payroll and welfare expenses of $0.1 million as we employed increasing headcount in the USA.
As a percentage of sales, our general and administrative expenses were 159% and 312% of our total revenues for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Interest income, net. For the year ended July 31, 2022, interest income represented 1) the interest income of $0.4 million from outstanding balance of $2.3 million due from buyers of LGC arising from the Company’s disposition of 51.2% equity interest in LGC. The interest rate for outstanding balance was 10% per annum, and 2) the minimal interest income from bank deposits. For the year ended July 31, 2021, interest income arose from bank deposits.
Loss from investment in trading securities. Loss from investment in trading securities represented fair value changes from investment in trading securities, which was measured at market price. For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, we recorded an investment loss of $2.4 million and $0.3 million, respectively.
Gain from disposal of subsidiaries and VIE. For the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company reported a gain of $1.0 million from disposal of ATIF HK and Huaya. For the year ended July 31, 2021, the Company reported a gain of $0.4 million from termination of VIE agreement with Qianhai.
Net loss from discontinued operations. In January 2021, we completed the disposition of 51.2% of the equity interest of LGC. The results of LGC, as a discontinued operation, for the years ended July 31, 2021 are reported as components of net loss separate from the net loss of continuing operations. For details of composition of net loss from discontinued operations, please see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included with this annual report.
Income taxes. We are incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. Under the current laws of the British Virgin Islands, we are not subject to tax on income or capital gains in the British Virgin Islands. Additionally, upon payments of dividends to the shareholders, no British Virgin Islands withholding tax will be imposed.
ATIF HK is subject to Hong Kong profits tax at a rate of 16.5%. However, ATIF HK did not have any assessable profits arising in or derived from Hong Kong for the fiscal years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, and accordingly no provision for Hong Kong profits tax had been made in these periods.
Huaya was incorporated in the PRC. Under the Income Tax Laws of the PRC, Huaya is subject to income tax at a rate of 10% under the preferential tax treatment to Smaller-scale Taxpayers.
ATIF Inc, ATIF GP, ATIF LP and ATIF BD were incorporated in the U.S and are subject to federal and state income taxes on its business operations. The federal tax rate is 21% and state tax rate is 8.84%. We also evaluated the impact from the recent tax reforms in the United States, including the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) and Health and Economic Recovery Omnibus Emergency Solutions Act (“HERO Act”), which were both passed in 2020, No material impact on the ATIF US is expected based on our analysis. We will continue to monitor the potential impact going forward.
Income tax expense was $nil and $nil for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021 due to significant net operating loss in fiscal year 2022 and 2021 which resulted in taxable losses.
Net loss. As a result of foregoing, net loss was $3.4 million for the year ended July 31, 2022, a decrease of $5.6 million from net loss of $9.0 million in fiscal year 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash flows from operations, working capital loans from our major shareholders, proceeds from our initial public offering, and equity financing through public offerings of our securities. We plan to support our future operations primarily from cash generated from our operations and cash on hand.
Liquidity and Going concern
For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, the Company reported a net loss from continuing operations of approximately $3.4 million and $2.4 million, respectively, and operating cash outflows from continuing operations of approximately $0.1 million and $2.5 million.
In assessing the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, the Company monitors and analyzes its cash and its ability to generate sufficient cash flow in the future to support its operating and capital expenditure commitments.
As of July 31, 2022, the Company had cash of $1.8 million. On the other hand, the Company had current liabilities of $2.8 million. Currently the Company had three service-in-progress agreements, and expected to generate consulting service fees of $2.5 million for the next 12 months. The Company also had $2.7 million receivable from buyers of LGC in connection with the disposal of LGC which will be due in early 2023. In addition, due to the recent intense relationship between the U.S. and China, which has become more fragile as a result of the outbreak and spread of COVID-19, plus the tightening of U.S. legislation and public listing rules to curb some small Chinese companies to access the U.S. capital markets, an increasing number of Chinese companies are putting off or slowing down their plans for U.S. listings due to these uncertainties. Furthermore, due to the impact of COVID-19, some of our existing customers may experience financial distress or business disruptions, which could lead to potential delay or default on their payments. Any increased difficulty in collecting accounts receivable, or early termination of our existing consulting service agreements due to deterioration in economic conditions could further negatively impact our cash flows. Given these factors, our potential customers’ perception and confidence to go public in the United States has been negatively impacted and our operating revenue and cash flows may continue to underperform in the near terms. Although we had cash of $1.8 million as of July 31, 2022, given the above-mentioned uncertainties, the management believes that the Company will continue as a going concern in the following 12 months from the date the Company’s 2022 consolidated financial statements are issued.
We believe that our existing cash, together with $3.2 million that currently remains available under our $8.0 million revolving line of credit with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB Credit Facility”), and $4.0 million available under the subordinated line of credit (“Subordinated LOC”) as of September 12, 2022, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated capital resources to fund planned operations for the next twelve (12) months.
Currently, the Company intends to finance its future working capital requirements and capital expenditures from cash generated from operating activities and funds raised from equity financings. In October 2021, the Company raised proceeds of $1.1 million from exercise of warrants to purchase 389,855 of its ordinary shares by warrant holders who subscribed for ordinary shares in the registered direct offering closed in November 2020.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the ordinary course of business. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of the uncertainties described above.
We have not declared nor paid any cash dividends to our shareholders. We do not plan to pay any dividends out of our restricted net assets as of July 31, 2022.
We have limited financial obligations denominated in U.S. dollars, thus the foreign currency restrictions and regulations in the PRC on the dividends distribution will not have a material impact on our liquidity, financial condition, and results of operations.
The following table sets forth summary of our cash flows for the years indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $0.1 million in fiscal year ended July 31, 2022. Net cash used in operating activities was primarily comprised of net loss of $3.4 million, adjusted for loss of $2.4 million from investment in trading securities, and net changes in our operating assets and liabilities, principally comprising of an increase of accounts receivable of $0.8 million due from a related party, and an increase of accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1.8 million as the Company is liable to an investment bank for loss making during the year ended July 31, 2022.
Net cash used in operating activities was $2.7 million in fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, consisting of the net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations and discontinued operations of $2.6 million and $0.1 million, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was primarily comprised of net loss from continuing operations of $2.4 million, adjusted for amortization of right-of-use assets of $0.5 million, loss of $0.3 million from investment in trading securities, and net changes in our operating assets and liabilities, principally comprising of a decrease of tax payable by $0.6 million and a decrease of lease liabilities of $0.5 million due to the termination of our VIE agreements with Qianhai and its shareholders, leading to the decrease of such accounts.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.6 million in fiscal year 2022, primarily consisting of purchase of investment of $1.4 million in listed equity securities, investment of $0.3 million in two equity securities, against proceeds of $0.2 million from disposal of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $0.9 million in fiscal year 2021, primarily consisting of purchase of investment of $0.4 million in listed equity securities, collection of investment deposit of $1.2 million for life insurance contract, against cash of $0.1 million provided by discontinued operations.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $2.0 million in fiscal year 2022, primarily consisting of payment of $3.0 million to three limited partners of ATIF LP, as withdrawal of investment, partially offset by proceeds of $1.1 million in relation to exercise of warrants by investors who subscribed for ordinary shares offered in registered direct offering which closed in November 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $6.8 million in fiscal year 2021, primarily consisting of capital injection of $3.3 million from ATIF LP, and capital of $3.5 million raised in a registered direct offering in November 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimate
We prepare our audited consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires our management to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet dates, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations would be affected. We base our estimates on our own historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable after taking account of our circumstances and expectations for the future based on available information. We evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis.
Our expectations regarding the future are based on available information and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, which together form our basis for making judgments about matters that are not readily apparent from other sources. Since the use of estimates is an integral component of the financial reporting process, our actual results could differ from those estimates. Some of our accounting policies require a higher degree of judgment than others in their application.
We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if: (i) the accounting estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made, and (ii) changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period or use of different estimates that we reasonably could have used in the current period, would have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. When reading our audited consolidated financial statements, you should consider our selection of critical accounting policies, the judgment and other uncertainties affecting the application of such policies and the sensitivity of reported results to changes in conditions and assumptions.
Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets
We account for income taxes using the liability method in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in earnings. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance through a charge to income tax expense when, in the opinion of management, it is more-likely-than-not that a portion of or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We operate through our subsidiaries. The valuation allowance is considered on an individual entity basis. As of July 31, 2022 and 2021, valuation allowances on deferred tax assets are provided because we believe that it is more-likely-than-not that certain of the subsidiaries will not be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the near future, to realize the deferred tax assets carried-forwards.
As of July 31, 2022 and 2021, the total valuation allowance for deferred tax assets was $1,668,413 and $997,378, respectively.
Uncertain tax position
In order to assess uncertain tax positions, we apply a more likely than not threshold and a two-step approach for the tax position measurement and financial statement recognition. Under the two-step approach, the first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. we recognize interest and penalties, if any, under accrued expenses and other current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet and under other expenses in its consolidated statement of comprehensive loss. As of July 31, 2022 and 2021, we did not have any significant unrecognized uncertain tax positions.
Fair value of trading securities
We measured our trading securities, which consisted of certain publicly-listed equity securities through various open market transactions, at market value. We reported a loss of $2,432,107 and $258,738 from investment in trading securities for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021.