Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of ATI Physical Therapy, Inc. and its subsidiaries (herein referred to as “we,” ”us,” “the Company,” “our Company,” or "ATI") should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. For management's discussion and analysis on the Company's financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the Company's amended S-1 registration statement filed with the SEC on July 28, 2021 (the "Amended S-1").
We make statements in this discussion that are forward-looking and involve risks and uncertainties. These statements contain forward-looking information relating to the financial condition, results of operations, plans, objectives, future performance and business of the Company. The forward-looking statements are based on our current views and assumptions, and actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in such forward-looking statements due to factors including, but not limited to, those discussed under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Many factors are beyond our control. Given these uncertainties, you should not place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. Our forward-looking statements represent our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this Annual Report. Except as required by law, we are under no obligation to update any forward-looking statement, regardless of the reason the statement may no longer be accurate.
Certain amounts in this Management's Discussion and Analysis may not add due to rounding. All percentages have been calculated using unrounded amounts for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
All dollar amounts are presented in thousands, unless indicated otherwise.
Company Overview
We are a nationally recognized outpatient physical therapy provider in the United States specializing in outpatient rehabilitation and adjacent healthcare services, with 910 owned clinics (as well as 20 clinics under management service agreements) located in 25 states as of December 31, 2021. We operate with a commitment to providing our patients, medical provider partners, payors and employers with evidence-based, patient-centric care.
We offer a variety of services within our clinics, including physical therapy to treat spine, shoulder, knee and neck injuries or pain; work injury rehabilitation services, including work conditioning and work hardening; hand therapy; and other specialized treatment services. Our Company’s team of professionals is dedicated to helping return patients to optimal physical health.
Physical therapy patients receive team-based care, leading-edge techniques and individualized treatment plans in an encouraging environment. To achieve optimal results, we use an extensive array of techniques including therapeutic exercise, manual therapy and strength training, among others. Our physical therapy model aims to deliver optimized outcomes and time to recovery for patients, insights and service satisfaction for referring providers and predictable costs and measurable value for payors.
In addition to providing services to physical therapy patients at outpatient rehabilitation clinics, we provide services through our ATI Worksite Solutions (“AWS”) program, Management Service Agreements (“MSA”) and Sports Medicine arrangements. AWS provides an on-site team of healthcare professionals at employer worksites to promote work-related injury prevention, facilitate expedient and appropriate return-to-work follow-up and maintain the health and well-being of the workforce. Our MSA arrangements typically include the Company providing management and physical therapy-related services to physician-owned physical therapy clinics. Sports Medicine arrangements provide certified healthcare professionals to various schools, universities and other institutions to perform on-site physical therapy and rehabilitation services.
The Business Combination
On June 16, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), a Business Combination transaction (the “Business Combination”) was finalized pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Merger ("Merger Agreement"), dated February 21, 2021 between the operating company, Wilco Holdco, Inc. (“Wilco Holdco”), and Fortress Value Acquisition Corp. II (herein referred to as "FAII" and "FVAC"), a special purpose acquisition company. In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, the Company changed its name from Fortress Value Acquisition Corp. II to ATI Physical Therapy, Inc. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The Company’s common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange ("NYSE") under the symbol “ATIP.”
At the time of the Business Combination, stockholders of Wilco Holdco, Inc. received 130.3 million shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Common Stock”), for the outstanding shares of Wilco Holdco common stock, par value $0.01 per share, that such stockholders owned. Immediately following the Business Combination, there were 207.3 million issued shares of Class A common stock of ATI Physical Therapy, Inc.
As part of the Business Combination, the Company received cash of $345.0 million from cash in trust with FAII and $300.0 million of cash from the PIPE investment, net of $89.9 million of cash used for redemptions and Wilco Holdco and FAII transaction costs. The funds received by the Company were used for full repayment of the second lien term loan of $231.3 million, partial repayment of the first lien term loan of $216.7 million, cash payment to Wilco Holdco preferred stockholders of $59.0 million and Wilco Holdco transaction costs. Refer to Note 3 - Business Combinations and Divestiture in the consolidated financial statements for further details.
The Company had outstanding Public Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 6.9 million shares of the Company’s Class A common stock and outstanding Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 3.0 million shares of the Company's Class A common stock immediately following the closing of the Business Combination. Refer to Note 13 - Warrant Liability in the consolidated financial statements for further details.
In addition, certain stockholders may receive up to 15.0 million Earnout Shares and 8.6 million Vesting Shares if the price of Class A common stock trading on the New York Stock Exchange exceeds certain thresholds during the ten-year period following the completion of the Business Combination. Refer to Note 14 - Contingent Common Shares Liability in the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Home Health divestiture
On August 25, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to divest its Home Health service line. On October 1, 2021, the transaction closed with a sale price of $7.3 million, and the Company recognized a gain of $5.8 million in other expense (income), net in its consolidated statement of operations. The major classes of assets and liabilities associated with the Home Health service line consisted of predominantly accounts receivable, accrued expenses and other liabilities which were not material.
2021 acquisitions
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company completed 3 acquisitions consisting of 7 total clinics. The Company paid approximately $4.5 million in cash and $1.4 million in future payment consideration, subject to certain time or performance conditions set out in the purchase agreements, to complete the acquisitions.
Recent changes in company CEO and CHRO leadership
Effective July 23, 2021, Cedric Coco, Chief Human Resources Officer ("CHRO"), resigned from the Company. The Company and Mr. Coco entered into a mutual release pursuant to which Mr. Coco is eligible for the payments and benefits in accordance with Mr. Coco's employment agreement.
Effective August 7, 2021, Labeed Diab stepped down from his positions as Chief Executive Officer ("CEO") of the Company and as a member of the board of directors of the Company. The Company and Mr. Diab entered into a mutual release pursuant to which Mr. Diab is eligible for the payments and benefits in accordance with Mr. Diab's employment agreement.
Effective August 9, 2021, John (Jack) Larsen was named Executive Chairman of the Company and has taken an active role in leading the Company. The Company is conducting a national search for a new Chief Executive Officer with the assistance of an executive search firm.
Trends and Factors Affecting the Company’s Future Performance and Comparability of Results
As a result of developing trends in our business, our results for 2021 were significantly adversely affected as compared to our prior historical periods and prior expectations, including in respect of revenue, net (loss) income and Adjusted EBITDA. These trends may continue to have adverse effects on us in future periods as well.
We believe that these adverse effects are attributable to a combination of factors, which include:
•The attrition of our workforce during periods of 2021 caused, in part, by changes made during the COVID-19 pandemic related to compensation, staffing levels and support for clinicians. We have taken swift actions to offset those changes, but the impact of attrition has impacted overall profitability for the year.
•Labor market dynamics increased competition for the available physical therapy providers in the workforce, creating wage inflation and elevated employee attrition at ATI.
•Decrease in rate per visit primarily driven by continuing less favorable payor and state mix when compared to pre-pandemic profile, with general shift from workers' compensation and auto personal injury to commercial and government, and further impacted by mix-shift out of higher reimbursement states.
•Lower than expected referral and patient visit volumes caused, in part, by volume softness in certain regions and states and the increase in COVID-19 cases during the fourth quarter of 2021, which has continued into the beginning of 2022, due to the outbreak of additional variants.
Our ability to achieve our business plan depends upon a number of factors, including the success of a number of continued steps being taken related to clinical staffing levels and increasing visit volumes.
The Company determined that the revision to its forecast in late July 2021, including the factors related to the revision of its forecast, constituted an interim triggering event that required further analysis with respect to potential impairment to goodwill, trade name indefinite-lived intangible and other assets. Accordingly, the Company performed interim quantitative impairment testing and determined that the fair value amounts were below the respective carrying amounts. As a result, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $419.4 million related to goodwill and $33.7 million related to the trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset as of the June 30, 2021 balance sheet date. These charges are non-cash in nature and do not affect our liquidity or debt covenants.
In October 2021, the Company reported a further revision to its forecast to reflect lower than expected patient visit volume. The Company determined that the factors related to the revision of its forecast that were present as of September 30, 2021 constituted an interim triggering event that required further analysis with respect to potential impairment to goodwill, trade name indefinite-lived intangible and other assets. Accordingly, the Company performed interim quantitative impairment testing and determined that the fair value amounts were below the respective carrying amounts. As a result, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $307.4 million related to goodwill and $200.6 million related to the trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset as of the September 30, 2021 balance sheet date. These charges are non-cash in nature and do not affect our liquidity or debt covenants. Refer to Note 5 - Goodwill, Trade Name and Other Intangible Assets in the consolidated financial statements for further details.
COVID-19 pandemic and volume impacts
The coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic in the United States resulted in changes to our operating environment. We continue to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business, and our priorities remain protecting the health and safety of employees and patients, maximizing the availability of services to satisfy patient needs, and improving the operational and financial stability of our business.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, visits per day ("VPD") decreased to a low point of 12,643 during the quarter ended June 30, 2020. Since then, quarterly VPD was 18,159, 19,441, 19,520, 21,569, 20,674 and 20,649 in the quarters ended September 30, 2020, December 31, 2020, March 31, 2021, June 30, 2021, September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021, respectively, as local restrictions in certain markets, referral levels and individual routines evolved compared to prior periods. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we observed volume softness caused, in part, by the recent increase in COVID-19 cases due to the outbreak of additional variants, which has continued to impact visit volumes in the beginning of 2022.
As demand for physical therapy services has increased in the market since its low-point during the quarter ended June 30, 2020, the Company has focused on increasing its clinical staffing levels by hiring clinicians and reducing levels of clinician attrition that have been elevated relative to historical levels. The elevated levels of attrition were caused, in part, by changes made during the COVID-19 pandemic related to compensation, staffing levels and support for clinicians. We have implemented a range of actions related to compensation, staffing levels, clinical and professional development and other initiatives in an effort to retain and attract therapists across our platform, which has increased our current and future expectations for labor costs. As we improve our staffing levels, we are working toward improving labor productivity as we onboard newly hired clinicians. In an effort to drive more volume and visits per day, in addition to integrating our new team members, we are working to strengthen relationships with our partner providers and other referral sources across our geographic footprint.
The chart below reflects the quarterly trend in VPD.
The COVID-19 pandemic is still evolving and the full extent of its future impact remains unknown and difficult to predict. The future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the virus and its newly identified strains, effectiveness and adoption rates of vaccines and other therapeutic remedies, the potential for continued or reinstated restrictive policies enforced by federal, state and local governments, and the impact of the virus and vaccination requirements on our workforce, all of which create uncertainty and cannot be predicted. While we expect the disruption caused by COVID-19 and resulting impacts to diminish over time, we cannot predict the length of such impacts, and if such impacts continue for an extended period, it could have a continued effect on the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows, which could be material.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law providing reimbursement, grants, waivers and other funds to assist health care providers during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company has realized benefits under the CARES Act including, but not limited to, the following:
•In 2020, the Company received approximately $91.5 million of general distribution payments under the Provider Relief Fund. These payments have been recognized as other income in the consolidated statements of operations throughout 2020 in a manner commensurate with the reporting and eligibility requirements issued by HHS. Based on the terms and conditions of the program, including reporting guidance issued by HHS in 2021, the Company believes that it has met the applicable terms and conditions. This includes, but is not limited to, the fact that the Company’s COVID-19 related expenses and lost revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 exceeded the amount of funds received. To the extent that reporting requirements and terms and conditions are subsequently modified, it may affect the Company’s ability to comply and ability to retain the funds. The following table summarizes the quarterly recognition of general distribution payments recognized in other expense (income), net in the Company's 2020 consolidated statements of operations (in millions):
•The Company applied for and obtained approval to receive $26.7 million of Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program ("MAAPP") funds during the quarter ended June 30, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company applied $12.6 million in MAAPP funds and transferred $1.8 million in MAAPP funds as part of the divestiture of its Home Health service line. The remaining amounts are required to be applied or repaid by the quarter ending September 30, 2022. Because the Company has not yet met all required performance obligations or performed the services related to the remaining funds, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, $12.3 million and $15.5 million of the funds are recorded in accrued expenses and other liabilities, respectively, and zero and $11.2 million of the funds are recorded in other non-current liabilities, respectively. The Company expects the remaining advanced payments to be applied by the quarter ending September 30, 2022.
•The Company elected to defer depositing the employer portion of Social Security taxes for payments due from March 27, 2020 through December 31, 2020, interest-free and penalty-free. Related to these payments, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, $5.9 million and $5.5 million is included in accrued expenses and other liabilities, respectively, and zero and $5.5 million is included in other non-current liabilities, respectively.
Market and industry trends and factors
•Outpatient physical therapy services growth. Outpatient physical therapy continues to play a key role in treating musculoskeletal conditions for patients. According to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ("CMS"), musculoskeletal conditions impact individuals of all ages and include some of the most common health issues in the U.S. As healthcare trends in the U.S. continue to evolve, with a growing focus on value-based care emphasizing up-front, conservative care to deliver better outcomes, quality healthcare services addressing such conditions in lower cost outpatient settings may continue increasing in prevalence.
•U.S. population demographics. The population of adults aged 65 and older in the U.S. is expected to continue to grow and thus expand the Company’s market opportunity. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the population of adults over the age of 65 is expected to grow 30% from 2020 through 2030.
•Federal funding for Medicare and Medicaid. Federal and state funding of Medicare and Medicaid and the terms of access to these reimbursement programs affect demand for physical therapy services. Beginning in January 2021, the physical therapy industry observed a reduction of Medicare reimbursement rates of approximately 3% in accordance with the Medicare physician fee schedule for therapy services. The proposed 2022 budget, released by CMS in July 2021, called for an approximate 3.75% further reduction in reimbursement rates as well as a 15% decrease in payments for services performed by physical therapy assistants. However, in December 2021, the Protecting Medicare and American Farmers from Sequester Cuts Act was signed into law. As a result, the reimbursement rate reduction beginning in January 2022 was approximately 0.75%. The Act did not address the 15% decrease in payments for services performed by physical therapy assistants, which began on January 1, 2022. Additionally, a further reduction through resuming sequestration has been postponed. Sequestration reductions will resume at 1% after March 31, 2022, and by an additional 1% after June 30, 2022, which will result in an overall reduction of 2% in reimbursement rates by June 30, 2022 unless acted upon through a Congressional measure.
•Workers’ compensation funding. Payments received under certain workers’ compensation arrangements may be based on predetermined state fee schedules, which may be impacted by changes in state funding.
•Number of people with private health insurance. Physical therapy services are often covered by private health insurance. Individuals covered by private health insurance may be more likely to use healthcare services because it helps offset the cost of such services. As health insurance coverage rises, demand for physical therapy services tends to also increase.
Key Components of Operating Results
Net patient revenue. Net patient revenues are recorded for physical therapy services that the Company provides to patients including physical therapy, work conditioning, hand therapy, aquatic therapy and functional capacity assessment. Net patient revenue is recognized based on contracted amounts with payors or other established rates, adjusted for the estimated effects of any variable consideration, such as contractual allowances and implicit price concessions. Visit volume is primarily driven by conversion of physician referrals and marketing efforts.
Other revenue. Other revenue consists of revenue generated by our AWS, MSA and Sports Medicine service lines.
Salaries and related costs. Salaries and related costs consist primarily of wages and benefits for our healthcare professionals engaged directly and indirectly in providing services to patients.
Rent, clinic supplies, contract labor and other. Comprised of non-salary, clinic related expenses consisting of rent, clinic supplies, contract labor and other costs including travel expenses and depreciation at our clinics.
Provision for doubtful accounts. Provision for doubtful accounts represents the Company’s estimate of accounts receivable recorded during the period that may ultimately prove uncollectible based upon several factors, including the age of outstanding receivables, the historical experience of collections, the impact of economic conditions and, in some cases, the specific customer account's ability to pay.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of wages and benefits for corporate personnel, corporate outside services, marketing costs, depreciation of corporate fixed assets, amortization of intangible assets and certain corporate level professional fees, including those related to legal, accounting and payroll.
Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges. Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges represent non-cash charges associated with the write-down of both goodwill and trade name indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Change in fair value of warrant liability. Represents non-cash amounts related to the change in the estimated fair value of Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants.
Change in fair value of contingent common shares liability. Represents non-cash amounts related to the change in the estimated fair value of Earnout Shares and Vesting Shares.
Loss on settlement of redeemable preferred stock. Represents the loss on settlement of the redeemable preferred stock liability based on the value of cash and equity provided to preferred stockholders in relation to the outstanding redeemable preferred stock liability at the time of the closing of the Business Combination.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense includes the cost of borrowing under the Company’s credit facility and amortization of deferred financing costs.
Interest expense on redeemable preferred stock. Represents interest expense related to accruing dividends on the Company’s redeemable preferred stock based on contract terms.
Other expense (income). Other expense (income) is comprised of income statement activity not related to the core operations of the Company.
Key Business Metrics
When evaluating the results of operations, management has identified a number of metrics that allow for specific evaluation of performance on a more detailed basis. See “Results of Operations” for further discussion on financial statement metrics such as net operating revenue, net income, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
Patient visits
As the main operations of the Company are driven by physical therapy services provided to patients, management considers total patient visits to be a key volume measure of such services. In addition to total patient visits, management analyzes (1) average VPD calculated as total patient visits divided by business days for the period, as this allows for comparability between time periods with an unequal number of business days, and (2) average VPD per clinic, calculated as average VPD divided by the average number of owned clinics open during the period.
Net patient revenue ("NPR") per visit
The Company calculates net patient revenue per visit, its most significant reimbursement metric, by dividing net patient revenue in a period by total patient visits in the same period.
Clinics
To better understand geographical and location-based trends, the Company evaluates metrics based on the 910 owned and 20 managed clinic locations as of December 31, 2021. De novo clinics represent organic new clinics opened during the current period based on sophisticated site selection analytics. Acqui-novo clinics represent an existing clinic, not previously owned by the Company, in a target geography that provides the Company with an immediate presence, available staff and referral relationships of the former owner within the surrounding areas. Same clinic revenue growth rate identifies revenue growth year over year on clinics that have been owned and operating for over one year. This metric is determined by isolating the population of clinics that have been open for at least 12 months and calculating the percentage change in revenue of this population between the current and prior period.
The following table presents selected operating and financial data that we believe are key indicators of our operating performance:
The following table provides a rollforward of activity related to the number of clinics owned during the corresponding periods:
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes the Company’s consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net patient revenue. Net patient revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $561.1 million compared to $529.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $31.5 million or 5.9%.
The increase in net patient revenue was primarily driven by increased visit volumes as a result of COVID-19 restrictions in local markets and referral levels evolving, partially offset by unfavorable net patient revenue per visit in the current period. Total patient visits increased by approximately 0.6 million visits, or 12.8%, driving an increase in average visits per day of 2,334, or 12.8%. Net patient revenue per visit decreased $6.82, or 6.0%, to $105.94 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in net patient revenue per visit during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by unfavorable mix shifts related to payor classes, states and services.
The following chart reflects additional detail with respect to drivers of the change in net patient revenue (in millions):
Other revenue. Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $66.8 million compared to $62.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.1 million or 6.6%. The increase in other revenue was primarily driven by higher volumes in the Sports Medicine service line as a result of the evolution of COVID-19 related restrictions, as well as higher volumes in the AWS service line as a result of the evolution of COVID-19 related restrictions and expanded offerings in new locations. This was partially offset by lower Home Health service line revenue as a result of its divestiture on October 1, 2021.
Salaries and related costs. Salaries and related costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $336.5 million compared to $306.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $30.0 million or 9.8%. Salaries and related costs as a percentage of net operating revenue was 53.6% and 51.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $30.0 million was primarily due to the higher level of wages and benefits as the Company increased its clinician and support staff labor supply as a result of higher visit volumes. The increase as a percentage of net operating revenue was primarily driven by higher compensation due to wage inflation for clinic labor during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Rent, clinic supplies, contract labor and other. Rent, clinic supplies, contract labor and other costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $180.9 million compared to $166.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $14.8 million or 8.9%. Rent, clinic supplies, contract labor and other costs as a percentage of net operating revenue was 28.8% and 28.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $14.8 million and increase as a percentage of net operating revenue was primarily driven by a higher clinic count and higher contract labor costs during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Provision for doubtful accounts. Provision for doubtful accounts for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $16.4 million compared to $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $0.1 million or 0.9%. Provision for doubtful accounts for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 remained relatively consistent year over year.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $111.8 million compared to $104.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $7.5 million or 7.2%. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net operating revenue was 17.8% and 17.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $7.5 million was primarily due to higher transaction costs, share-based compensation, public company operating costs and non-ordinary legal and regulatory costs, partially offset by lower business optimization, reorganization and severance costs during the year ended December 31, 2021. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net operating revenue was relatively consistent year over year.
Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges. Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $962.3 million. The amount relates to the non-cash write-down of both goodwill and trade name indefinite-lived intangible assets triggered by lower than expected patient visit volumes, the acceleration of clinician attrition, competition for clinicians in the labor market and net patient revenue per visit decreases primarily driven by unfavorable payor, state and service mix shifts. Refer to Note 5 - Goodwill, Trade Name and Other Intangible Assets in the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Change in fair value of warrant liability. Change in fair value of warrant liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $22.6 million. The amount relates to the change in the estimated fair value of the Company’s Private Placement Warrants and Public Warrants between June 16, 2021, the date that the liabilities were established in connection with the closing of the Business Combination, and December 31, 2021.
Change in fair value of contingent common shares liability. Change in fair value of contingent common shares liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $175.1 million. The amount relates to the change in the estimated fair value of the Company’s Earnout Shares and Vesting Shares between June 16, 2021, the date that the liabilities were established in connection with the closing of the Business Combination, and December 31, 2021.
Loss on settlement of redeemable preferred stock. Loss on settlement of redeemable preferred stock for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $14.0 million. The loss is based on the value of cash and equity provided to preferred stockholders in relation to the outstanding redeemable preferred stock liability at the time of the closing of the Business Combination.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $46.3 million compared to $69.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $23.0 million or 33.2%. The decrease in interest expense was primarily driven by lower outstanding principal balances and lower weighted average interest rates under the Company’s first and second lien credit agreements during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest expense on redeemable preferred stock. Interest expense on redeemable preferred stock for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $10.1 million compared to $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $8.9 million or 47.0%. The decrease was driven by the settlement of the redeemable preferred stock in June 2021.
Other expense (income), net. Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.2 million compared to $91.0 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2020, a change of $91.2 million. The change was driven by $91.5 million of income related to general distribution payments under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act in the year ended December 31, 2020 that did not recur in 2021. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded $5.5 million of charges related to the loss on debt extinguishment associated with the partial and full repayment of the first and second lien term loans, respectively, and recorded a $5.8 million gain on the sale of its Home Health service line.
Income tax (benefit) expense. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $71.0 million compared to $2.1 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, a change of $73.0 million. The change was primarily driven by the difference in the effective tax rate for the respective periods. The effective tax rate was different between the respective periods primarily due to nondeductible impairment charges, nondeductible transaction costs, nondeductible loss on settlement of redeemable preferred stock, fair value adjustments related to liability-classified share-based instruments and increases in valuation allowances for the year ended December 31, 2021, and the tax-effect of income related to general distribution payments recognized under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net loss. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $782.0 million compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in loss of $781.7 million. The comparatively higher loss was primarily driven by goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges, partially offset by the change in fair value of warrant liability and change in fair value of contingent common shares liability for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following table reconciles the supplemental non-GAAP financial measures, as defined under the rules of the SEC, presented herein to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The Company has provided the non-GAAP financial measures, which are not calculated or presented in accordance with GAAP, as supplemental information and in addition to the financial measures that are calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are defined as net income from continuing operations calculated in accordance with GAAP, less net income attributable to non-controlling interests, plus the sum of income tax expense, interest expense, net, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) and further adjusted to exclude certain items of a significant or unusual nature, including but not limited to, goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges, changes in fair value of warrant liability and contingent common shares liability, loss on debt extinguishment, loss on settlement of redeemable preferred stock, business optimization costs, reorganization and severance costs, transaction and integration costs, charges related to lease terminations, share-based compensation, pre-opening de novo costs, gain on sale of Home Health service line and non-ordinary legal and regulatory matters (“Adjusted EBITDA”).
We present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA because they are key measures used by our management team to evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans and make strategic decisions. The Company believes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are useful to investors for the purposes of comparing our results period-to-period and alongside peers and understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management team and board of directors.
These supplemental measures should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented. In addition, since these non-GAAP measures are not determined in accordance with GAAP, they are susceptible to varying calculations and may not be comparable to other similarly titled non-GAAP measures of other companies.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (Non-GAAP Financial Measures)
The following is a reconciliation of net (loss) income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure) for each of the periods indicated. For additional information on these non-GAAP financial measures, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above.
(1)Represents non-cash charges related to the write-down of goodwill and trade name indefinite-lived intangible assets. Refer to Note 5 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further details.
(2)Represents non-cash amounts related to the change in the estimated fair value of Warrants, Earnout Shares and Vesting Shares. Refer to Notes 3, 13 and 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further details.
(3)Represents loss on settlement of redeemable preferred stock based on the value of cash and equity provided to preferred stockholders in relation to the outstanding redeemable preferred stock liability at the time of the closing of the Business Combination.
(4)Represents costs related to the Business Combination, non-capitalizable debt transaction costs, clinic acquisitions and acquisition-related integration and consulting and planning costs related to preparation to operate as a public company.
(5)Represents charges related to the derecognition of the proportionate amount of remaining unamortized deferred financing costs and original issuance discount associated with the partial repayment of the first lien term loan and derecognition of the unamortized original issuance discount associated with the full repayment of the subordinated second lien term loan. Refer to Note 8 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further details.
(6)Represents severance, consulting and other costs related to discrete initiatives focused on reorganization and delayering of the Company’s labor model, management structure and support functions.
(7)Represents non-ordinary course legal costs related to the previously-disclosed ATIP shareholder class action complaints, derivative complaint and SEC inquiry. Refer to Note 18 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further details.
(8)Represents expenses associated with renovation, equipment and marketing costs relating to the start-up and launch of new locations incurred prior to opening.
(9)Represents non-recurring costs to optimize our platform and ATI transformative initiatives. Costs primarily relate to duplicate costs driven by IT and Revenue Cycle Management conversions, labor related costs during the transition of key positions and other incremental costs of driving optimization initiatives.
(10)Represents charges related to lease terminations prior to the end of term for corporate facilities no longer in use.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are operating cash flows, borrowings under our credit agreements and proceeds from equity issuances. We have used these funds for our short-term and long-term capital uses, which include salaries, benefits and other employee-related expenses, rent, clinical supplies, outside services, capital expenditures, acquisitions, de novos and acqui-novos and debt service. Our capital expenditure, acquisition, de novo and acqui-novo spend will depend on many factors, including the targeted number of new clinic openings, patient volumes, revenue growth rates and level of operating cash flows.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had $48.6 million and $142.1 million in cash and cash equivalents, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $70.0 million available under our revolving credit facility, less $1.2 million of outstanding letters of credit. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $21.0 million available under our revolving credit facility, less $1.2 million of outstanding letters of credit, as a result of our ratio of consolidated first lien net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA, as defined in the Credit Agreement, exceeding 6.25:1.00.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had operating cash outflows of $42.1 million driven by items including expenses related to activity associated with the Business Combination, payments on credit balances due to patients and payors, payment of transaction-related amount due to former owners, partial application of MAAPP funds and partial repayment of deferred employer Social Security taxes. Our ability to generate future operating cash flows depends on many factors, including patient volumes and revenue growth rates.
As part of the Business Combination, the Company received cash of $345.0 million from cash in trust with FAII and $300.0 million of cash from the PIPE investment, net of $89.9 million of cash used for redemptions and Wilco Holdco and FAII transaction costs. The funds received by the Company were used for full repayment of the second lien term loan of $231.3 million, partial repayment of the first lien term loan of $216.7 million, cash payment to Wilco Holdco preferred stockholders of $59.0 million and Wilco Holdco transaction costs. Refer to Note 3 - Business Combinations and Divestiture in the consolidated financial statements for further details.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had $12.3 million and $26.7 million of MAAPP funds included in the balance of cash and cash equivalents, respectively. In addition, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had $5.9 million and $11.0 million of deferred Social Security taxes included in the balance of cash and cash equivalents. The Company began applying MAAPP funds to Medicare billings in the second quarter of 2021 and remitted payments on its deferred employer Social Security taxes in the third and fourth quarters of 2021. The MAAPP funds and deferred employer Social Security taxes are required to be applied or repaid prior to the end of 2022, which together with other operational activity, may result in a net operating cash outflow for 2022. As noted previously, during the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received approximately $91.5 million of general distribution payments under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act.
We make reasonable and appropriate efforts to collect accounts receivable, including payor amounts and applicable patient deductibles, co-payments and co-insurance, in a consistent manner for all payor types. Claims are submitted to payors daily, weekly or monthly in accordance with our policy or payor’s requirements. When possible, we submit our claims electronically. The collection process is time consuming and typically involves the submission of claims to multiple payors whose payment of claims may be dependent upon the payment of another payor. Claims under litigation and vehicular incidents can take a year or longer to collect.
2022 credit agreement, Series A Senior Preferred Stock and warrants
On February 24, 2022, ATI Holdings Acquisition, Inc., an indirect subsidiary of ATI Physical Therapy, Inc., refinanced its outstanding debt by entering into a new 2022 credit agreement. The Company's outstanding 2016 first lien term loan had a principal balance of $555.0 million which was paid down in its entirety on the refinancing date. The new 2022 credit agreement includes a senior secured term loan with a principal balance of $500.0 million which matures on February 24, 2028. Borrowings on the new senior secured term loan initially bear interest at a rate equal to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR"), subject to a 1.0% floor, plus 7.25%, and includes step-downs based on the Company's net leverage ratio. The Company may elect to pay 2.0% interest in-kind at a 0.5% premium during the first year under the agreement. The 2022 credit agreement contains customary covenants and restrictions, including financial and non-financial covenants. The financial covenants require the Company to maintain $30.0 million of minimum liquidity through the first quarter of 2024. Additionally, beginning in the second quarter of 2024, the Company must maintain a net leverage ratio, as defined in the agreements, not to exceed 7.00:1.00. The net leverage ratio covenant contains a step-down in the third quarter of 2024 to 6.75:1.00 and an additional step-down in the first quarter of 2025 to 6.25:1.00, which remains applicable through maturity.
The 2022 credit agreement includes a super priority revolving credit facility which has a maximum borrowing capacity of $50.0 million and matures on February 24, 2027. Borrowings on the new revolving credit facility bear interest, at the Company's election, at a base interest rate of the ABR, as defined in the agreement, plus a credit spread or SOFR plus an applicable credit spread adjustment plus 4.0%. The interest rate related to borrowings on the revolving credit facility includes step-downs based on the Company's net leverage ratio.
On February 24, 2022, the Company issued, in the aggregate, 165,000 shares of non-convertible Series A Senior Preferred Stock with an initial stated value of $1,000 per share, or $165.0 million of stated value in the aggregate ("Series A Preferred Stock"), which includes warrants to purchase up to 11.5 million shares of the Company's common stock. The Series A Preferred Stock has priority over the Class A common stock with respect to distribution rights, liquidation rights and dividend rights. The holders of the Series A Preferred Stock are entitled to cumulative dividends on the preferred shares at an initial dividend rate of 12.0%, which are payable in-kind, increasing 1.0% per annum on the first day following the fifth anniversary of the issuance and each one-year anniversary thereafter. However, from and after the third anniversary of the issuance of such preferred equity, the Company has the option to pay such dividends in cash at an interest rate of 1.0% lower than the paid-in-kind rate. The Series A Preferred Stock is perpetual and is mandatorily redeemable in certain circumstances such as a change of control, liquidation, winding up or dissolution, bankruptcy or other insolvency event, restructuring or capitalization transaction, or event of noncompliance.
The Series A Preferred Stock includes approximately 11.5 million detachable warrants. Each warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of the Company's Class A common stock. The warrants are exercisable within 5 years from issuance. The strike price is $3.00 for 5.2 million of the issued warrants, and the strike price is $0.01 for 6.3 million of the issued warrants.
As a result of the debt refinancing transactions and issuance of Series A Preferred Stock, the Company added approximately $77.3 million of cash to its balance sheet. We believe our operating cash flow, combined with our existing cash, cash equivalents and credit facility will continue to be sufficient to fund our operations for the next 12 months.
2016 first and second lien credit agreements (prior to refinancing in February 2022)
On May 10, 2016, ATI Holdings Acquisition, Inc. (the “Borrower”) entered into (a) a First Lien Credit Agreement (the “First Lien Credit Agreement”) with, among others, the lenders party thereto and Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent, and (b) a Second Lien Credit Agreement (the “Second Lien Credit Agreement” and, together with the First Lien Credit Agreement, the “Credit Agreements” and each, a “Credit Agreement”) with, among others, the lenders party thereto and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as administrative agent.
In connection with the Business Combination on June 16, 2021, the Company paid down $216.7 million under its first lien term loan and paid $231.3 million to settle its second lien subordinated term loan.
The aggregate outstanding principal amount under the First Lien Credit Agreement was $552.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and the aggregate outstanding principal under the Credit Agreements was $999.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The term loan under the First Lien Credit Agreement is payable in quarterly installments and matures on May 10, 2023.
The First Lien Credit Agreement includes a revolving credit facility with a maximum borrowing capacity of $70.0 million, including $15.0 million sub-limit for swingline loans and amounts available for letters of credit. The issuance of such letters of credit and the making of swingline loans reduces the amount available under the applicable revolving credit facility. The Borrower may make draws under the revolving credit facility for general corporate purposes until the maturity date of the revolving credit facility.
The revolving facility under the First Lien Credit Agreement matures on May 10, 2023 unless (a) as of February 9, 2023 (the “Springing Maturity Date”), either (i) more than $100.0 million of first lien term loans remain outstanding on the Springing Maturity Date or (ii) the debt incurred to refinance any portion of the first lien term loans in excess of $100.0 million does not satisfy specified parameters, in which case the first lien revolving facility will mature on February 9, 2023, or (b) the Borrower makes certain prohibited restricted payments, in which case the first lien revolving facility will mature on the date of such restricted payment.
The 2016 first lien credit arrangement is guaranteed by Wilco Intermediate Holdings, Inc. and its domestic subsidiaries, subject to customary exceptions (collectively, the “Guarantors”) and secured by substantially all of the assets of the Borrower and Guarantors.
The borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest, at the Borrower’s election, at a base interest rate of the Alternate Base Rate (“ABR”) or London InterBank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus an interest rate spread, as defined in the Credit Agreement. The ABR is the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (ii) one-month LIBOR plus 1.0%, and (iii) the prime rate. The LIBOR term may be one, two, three, or six months (or, to the extent available, 12 months or a shorter period).
The per annum interest rate spread for revolving and swingline loans are based on a pricing grid with applicable margin determined by the first lien leverage ratio. As of December 31, 2021, the applicable interest rate spreads were 3.5% for ABR revolving loans and 4.5% for LIBOR revolving loans. In addition to the stated interest rate on borrowings under the revolving credit facility, we are required to pay a commitment fee of between 0.25% and 0.5% per annum on any unused portion of the revolving credit facility based on the pricing grid and our first lien leverage ratio.
The per annum interest rate spread for first lien term loan is (a) 2.5% for ABR loans and (b) 3.5% for LIBOR loans. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the effective interest rate for the first lien term loan was 4.9%.
The 2016 Credit Agreement contains covenants with which the Borrower must comply. For the First Lien Credit Agreement, the Borrower must maintain, as of the last day of each fiscal quarter when the sum of the outstanding balance of revolving loans, swingline loans and certain letters of credit exceeds 30% of the total revolving credit facility commitment, a ratio of consolidated first lien net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA, as defined in the Credit Agreement, not to exceed 6.25:1.00. As of December 31, 2021, the ratio exceeded 6.25:1.00. As a result, the sum of the outstanding balance of revolving loans, swingline loans and certain letters of credit is effectively limited to 30%, or approximately $21.0 million, of the total revolving credit facility commitment. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Borrower was in compliance with the covenants contained in the First Lien Credit Agreement.
Consolidated Cash Flows
The following table presents selected data from our consolidated statements of cash flows:
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $42.1 million compared to $138.6 million provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 a change of $180.7 million. The change was primarily the result of approximately $5.5 million in cash outflows from expenses related to activity associated with the Business Combination, $5.4 million in payments on credit balances due to patients and payors, a $3.6 million payment of transaction-related amount due to former owners, $12.6 million of partial application of MAAPP funds, $5.1 million of partial repayments of deferred employer Social Security taxes, $6.9 million in year-over-year collection of accounts receivable, the 2020 inflow of $26.7 million of MAAPP funds not recurring in 2021, and the 2020 inflow of $91.5 million of general distribution payments under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act not recurring in 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $39.9 million compared to $21.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $18.1 million. The increase is primarily driven by $19.8 million of higher capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of a higher number of new clinics in the current period.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11.5 million compared to $13.0 million of cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.5 million. The decrease in cash used was primarily driven by net cash inflows related to the Business Combination (refer to Note 3 - Business Combinations and Divestiture for further details) partially offset by higher distributions to non-controlling interest during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Commitments and Contingencies
The Company may be subject to loss contingencies, such as legal proceedings and claims arising out of its business. The Company records accruals for such loss contingencies when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not record any accruals related to the outcomes of the legal matters described in Note 18 - Commitments and Contingencies. Refer to Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further information.
We enter into contractual obligations and commitments from time to time in the normal course of business, primarily related to our debt financing and operating leases. Refer to Notes 8 and 17 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further information. As noted previously, we have commitments related to MAAPP funds and deferred Social Security taxes which are required to be applied or repaid prior to the end of 2022. Additionally, the Company has contractual commitments related to cloud computing and telecommunication services agreements. Refer to Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon the Company’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements requires its management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures. The Company’s management bases its estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Different assumptions and judgments would change the estimates used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements which, in turn, could change the results from those reported. In addition, actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences could be material to the Company’s financial position and results of operations.
Critical accounting estimates are those that the Company’s management considers the most important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations because they require management's most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company’s critical accounting estimates in relation to its consolidated financial statements include those related to:
•Patient revenue recognition and allowance for doubtful accounts
•Realization of deferred tax assets
•Goodwill and intangible assets
Additional information related to our critical accounting estimates can be found in Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Patient revenue recognition and allowance for doubtful accounts
Net patient revenue
We provide an array of services to our patients including physical therapy, work conditioning, hand therapy, aquatic therapy, functional capacity assessment, sports medicine and wellness programs. Net patient revenue consists of these physical therapy services.
Net patient revenue is recognized at an amount equal to the consideration the Company expects to receive from third-party payors, patients and others for services rendered when the performance obligations under the terms of the contract are satisfied.
There is an implied contract between the Company and the patient upon each patient visit resulting in the Company’s patient service performance obligation. Generally, the performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time, as each service provided is distinct and future services rendered are not dependent on previously rendered services. The Company has separate contractual agreements with third-party payors (e.g., insurers, managed care programs, government programs, workers' compensation) that provide for payments to the Company at amounts different from its established rates. While these agreements are not considered contracts with the customer, they are used for determining the transaction price for services provided to the patients covered by the third-party payors. The payor contracts do not indicate performance obligations of the Company but indicate reimbursement rates for patients who are covered by those payors when the services are provided.
To determine the transaction price associated with the implied contract, the Company includes the estimated effects of any variable consideration, such as contractual allowances and implicit price concessions. When the Company has contracts with negotiated prices for services provided (contracted payors), the Company considers the contractual rates when estimating contractual allowances. Variable consideration is estimated using a portfolio approach that incorporates whether or not the Company has historical differences from negotiated rates due to non-compliance with contract provisions. Historical results indicate that it is probable that negotiated prices less variable consideration will be realized; therefore, this amount is deemed the transaction price and recorded as revenue. The Company records an estimated provision for doubtful accounts based on historical collections for claims with similar characteristics, such as location of service and type of third-party payor, at the time of recognition. Any subsequent impairment of the related receivable is recorded as provision for doubtful accounts.
For non-contracted payors, the Company determines the transaction price by applying established rates to the services provided and adjusting for contractual allowances provided to third-party payors and implicit price concessions. The Company estimates the contractual allowances and implicit price concessions using a portfolio approach based on historical collections for claims with similar characteristics, such as location of service and type of third-party payor, in relation to established rates, because the Company does not have a contract with the underlying payor. Any subsequent changes in estimate on the realization of the receivable is recorded as a revenue adjustment. Management believes that calculating at the portfolio level would not differ materially from considering each patient account separately.
The Company continually reviews the revenue transaction price estimation process to consider updates to laws and regulations and changes in third-party payor contractual terms that result from contract renegotiations and renewals. Due to complexities involved in determining amounts ultimately due under reimbursement arrangements with third-party payors and government entities, which are often subject to interpretation, the Company may receive reimbursement for healthcare services that is different from the estimates, and such differences could be material.
In its evaluation of the revenue transaction price, management assesses historical collection experience in relation to contracted rates, or for non-contracted payors, established rates. The practice of applying historical collection experience to determine the revenue transaction price for current transactions involves significant judgment and estimation. Management subsequently monitors the appropriateness of its estimates for claims on a date of service basis as cash collections on previous periods mature. Actual cash collections upon maturity may differ from the transaction price estimated upon initial recognition, and such differences could be material. If initial revenue recognition estimates increased or decreased by 100 basis points, the impact to annual net patient revenue would be approximately $5.6 million. Management believes subsequent changes in estimate as a result of maturity of claims with dates of service in 2018, 2019 and 2020 have not been material to the consolidated statements of operations.
The following table disaggregates net patient revenue for each associated payor class for the periods indicated below:
(1) Other is primarily comprised of net patient revenue related to auto personal injury which by its nature may have longer-term collection characteristics relative to other payor classes.
The following table disaggregates accounts receivable, net associated with net patient revenue for each associated payor class as of:
(1) Other is primarily comprised of accounts receivable associated with net patient revenue related to auto personal injury.
Allowance for doubtful accounts
The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on estimates of losses related to receivable balances. The risk of collection varies based upon the service, the payor class and the patient’s ability to pay the amounts not reimbursed by the payor. The Company estimates the allowance for doubtful accounts based upon several factors, including the age of the outstanding receivables, the historical experience of collections, the impact of economic conditions and, in some cases, evaluating specific customer accounts for the ability to pay. Management judgment is used to assess the collectability of accounts and the ability of the Company’s customers to pay. The provision for doubtful accounts is included in cost of services in the consolidated statements of operations. When it is determined that a customer account is uncollectible, that balance is written off against the existing allowance.
Realization of deferred tax assets
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under ASC 740, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and the respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rate is recognized in operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
We evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets and reduce those assets using a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Among the factors used to assess the likelihood of realization are projections of future taxable income streams and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences. The judgments made at any point in time may be impacted by changes in tax codes, statutory tax rates or future taxable income levels. This could materially impact our assessment of the need for valuation allowance reserves and could cause our provision for income taxes to vary significantly from period to period.
Goodwill and intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The Company accounts for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets under ASC Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, which requires the Company to test goodwill and other indefinite-lived assets for impairment annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate that impairment may exist.
The cost of acquired businesses is allocated first to its identifiable assets, both tangible and intangible, based on estimated fair values. Costs allocated to finite-lived identifiable intangible assets are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the remaining estimated useful lives of the assets. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of identifiable assets acquired, net of liabilities assumed, is recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized but must be reviewed at least annually for impairment. If the impairment test indicates that the carrying value of an intangible asset exceeds its fair value, then an impairment loss should be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations in an amount equal to the excess carrying value over fair value. Fair value is determined using valuation techniques based on estimates, judgments and assumptions the Company believes are appropriate in the circumstances. The Company completed the interim and annual impairment analyses of goodwill as of June 30, 2021, September 30, 2021 and October 1, 2021 using an average of a discounted cash flow analysis and comparable public company analysis. The Company concluded that no goodwill impairment occurred during the fourth quarter of 2021. The key assumptions associated with determining the estimated fair value include projected revenue growth rates, EBITDA margins, the terminal growth rate, the discount rate and relevant market multiples.
The Company completed the interim and annual impairment analyses of indefinite lived intangible assets as of June 30, 2021, September 30, 2021 and October 1, 2021 using the relief from royalty method. The Company concluded that no indefinite lived intangible asset impairment occurred during the fourth quarter of 2021. The key assumptions associated with determining the estimated fair value include projected revenue growth rates, the royalty rate, the discount rate and the terminal growth rate.
The Company has one reporting unit for purposes of the Company’s goodwill impairment tests. The Company concluded that no goodwill impairment occurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
In July 2021, the Company determined that the revision to its forecast, including factors related to the revision to its forecast, constituted an interim triggering event that required further analysis with respect to potential impairment to goodwill, trade name indefinite-lived intangible and other assets. Accordingly, the Company performed interim quantitative impairment testing and determined that the fair value amounts were below the respective carrying amounts. As a result, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $419.4 million related to goodwill and $33.7 million related to the trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset during the period ended June 30, 2021.
In October 2021, the Company reported a further revision to its forecast to reflect lower than expected patient visit volume. The Company determined that the factors related to the revision to its forecast constituted an interim triggering event that required further analysis with respect to potential impairment to goodwill, trade name indefinite-lived intangible and other assets. Accordingly, the Company performed interim quantitative impairment testing and determined that the fair value amounts were below the respective carrying amounts. As a result, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $307.4 million related to goodwill and $200.6 million related to the trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset during the period ended September 30, 2021. Refer to Note 5 - Goodwill, Trade Name and Other Intangible Assets in the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Fair value determinations require considerable judgment and are sensitive to changes in underlying assumptions, estimates and market factors. Estimating the fair value of the Company’s reporting unit and indefinite-lived intangible assets requires us to make assumptions and estimates regarding our future plans, as well as industry, economic, and regulatory conditions. These assumptions and estimates include projected revenue growth rates, EBITDA margins, terminal growth rates, discount rates, relevant market multiples, royalty rates and other market factors. If current expectations of future growth rates, margins and cash flows are not met, or if market factors outside of our control change significantly, then our reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible assets might become impaired in the future, negatively impacting our operating results and financial position. As the carrying amounts of goodwill and the Company’s trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset were impaired as of June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2021 and written down to fair value, those amounts are more susceptible to an impairment risk if there are unfavorable changes in assumptions and estimates. Additionally, goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets associated with acquisitions that may occur in the future are recorded on the balance sheet at their estimated acquisition date fair values, those amounts are more susceptible to impairment risk if business operating results or market conditions deteriorate.
To further illustrate sensitivity of the valuation models, if we had changed the assumptions used to estimate the fair value of our goodwill reporting unit and trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset in our most recent quantitative analysis, these isolated changes, which are reasonably possible to occur, would have led to the following approximate increase/(decrease) in the aggregate fair value of the reporting unit under the discounted cash flow analysis or trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset (in thousands):
(1) An increase of 100 basis points to our assumed non-terminal revenue growth rates would result in approximately $60 million of an estimated increase to the fair value of our goodwill reporting unit, whereas, a 100 basis point decrease would result in approximately $100 million of an estimated decrease to the fair value of our goodwill reporting unit.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.