Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes to those financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.
This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements for Brazil Minerals, Inc. reflect current expectations, as of the date of this Annual Report, and involve certain risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward- looking statements as a result of various factors. Factors that could cause future results to materially differ from the recent results or those projected in forward-looking statements include, among others: unprofitable efforts resulting not only from the failure to discover mineral deposits, but also from finding mineral deposits that, though present, are insufficient in quantity and quality to return a profit from production; market fluctuations; government regulations, including regulations relating to royalties, allowable production, importing and exporting of minerals, and environmental protection; competition; the loss of services of key personnel; unusual or infrequent weather phenomena, sabotage, government or other interference in the maintenance or provision of infrastructure as well as general economic conditions.
Overview
Brazil Minerals, Inc. (“Brazil Minerals”, the “Company”, “we”, “us”, or “our”) is a U.S. mineral exploration and mining company with projects and properties in essentially all battery metals to power the Green Energy Revolution - lithium, rare earths, graphite, nickel, cobalt, and titanium. Our current focus is on developing our hard-rock lithium project located in a premier pegmatitic district in Brazil - as lithium is essential for batteries in electric vehicles. Additionally, through subsidiaries, we participate in iron, gold, and quartzite projects. We also own multiple mining concessions for gold, diamond, and industrial sand.
All of our mineral projects and properties are located in Brazil and, as of the date of this Report, our mineral rights portfolio for battery metals includes approximately 60,077 acres (243 km2) for lithium, 30,009 acres (121 km2) for rare earths, 22,050 acres (89 km2) for titanium, 14,507 acres (59 km2) for graphite, and 7,509 acres (30 km2) for nickel and cobalt We believe we are among the largest listed companies by size and breadth in exploration projects for strategic minerals in Brazil, a premier mineral jurisdiction.
We are primarily focused on advancing and developing our hard-rock lithium project located in the state of Minas Gerais, Brazil, where some of our high-potential mineral rights are adjacent to or near large lithium deposits that belong to a large, publicly traded competitor. Our Minas Gerais Lithium Project is our largest endeavor and consists of 44 mineral rights spread over 45,456 acres (184 km2) and predominantly located within the Brazilian Eastern Pegmatitic Province which has been surveyed by the Brazilian Geological Survey and is known for the presence of hard rock formations known as pegmatites which contain lithium-bearing minerals such as spodumene and petalite. In general, lithium derived from pegmatites is less costly to purify for uses in high technology applications than lithium obtained from brine. Such applications include the battery supply chain for electric vehicles (“EVs”), an area of expected high growth for the next several decades.
We believe that we can materially increase our value by the acceleration of our exploratory work and quantification of our lithium mineralization. Our initial commercial goal is to be able to enter production of lithium-bearing concentrate, a product which is highly sought after in the battery supply chain for EVs.
We also have 100%-ownership of early-stage projects and properties in other minerals that are needed in the battery supply chain and high technology applications such as rare earths, titanium, nickel, and cobalt. Our goal is to become “the Mineral Resources Company for the Green Energy Revolution”. We believe that the shift from fossil fuels to battery power will yield long-term opportunities for us not only in lithium but also in such other minerals.
Additionally, we have 100%-ownership of several mining concessions for gold and diamonds. Historically we have had revenues from mining and selling gold and diamonds. More recently we have had revenues from mining and selling industrial sand for the local construction industry, which is at the time of this Report our primary source of revenues. Such endeavors have given us the critical management experience needed to take early-stage projects in Brazil from the exploration phase through successful licensing from regulators and to revenues.
As of the date of this Report we also own 46.17% of the common shares of Apollo Resources Corporation (“Apollo Resources”), a private company currently primarily focused on the development of its initial iron mine, expected to start operations and revenues in early 2023.
As of the date of this Report, we also own approximately 24.56% of Jupiter Gold Corporation (“Jupiter Gold”), a company focused on the development of gold projects and of a quartzite mine, and whose common shares are quoted on the OTCQB under the symbol “JUPGF”. The quartzite mine is expected to start operations and revenues in 2022.
The results of operations from both Apollo Resources and Jupiter Gold are consolidated in our financial statements under USGAAP.
As the “Mineral Resources Company for the Green Energy Revolution” we are deeply committed to Environmental, Social, and Corporate Governance (“ESG”) causes. We have an ESG Chief who coordinates our efforts in these important matters. Within the last few years, we planted more than 6,000 trees of diverse types for the benefit of local populations in areas in which we operate and constructed over 1,000 small retention walls to preserve and enhance dirt access roads used by such communities. Separately, many of our work needs have been specifically delegated to firms owned or managed by women and minorities.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $10,232, compared to revenue of $23,446 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of 56.4%. Such revenue was comprised solely of sales of industrial sand that we mine in one of our mineral rights. The decrease in revnues was attributable to less demand due to prolonged covid-19 pandemic restrictions in Brazil, resulting in less demand.
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $245,810, as compared to cost of goods sold of $129,943 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 89.2%. Cost of goods sold is primarily comprised of labor, fuel, repairs and maintenance on our mining equipment and write down of inventory of $135,656.
Gross loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $235,578, compared to gross loss of $106,497 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase of 121.2%.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $3,280,514, compared to operating expenses of $1,175,056 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase of 179.2%. The increase was mostly due to general and administrative expenses related to public company costs and increased financing efforts, and non-cash stock-based compensation from issuances of stock options to officers and directors.
Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $509,374, compared to other expenses of $264,482 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase of 92.6%. The Company realized an increase in interest expense on promissory notes due to amortization debt discounts during the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Company recorded a $224,812 loss on the extinguishment of debt related to common stock purchase warrants issued in a settlement with a noteholder during the year ended December 31, 2021.
As a result, we incurred a net loss attributable to our stockholders of $2,772,358, or $0.00 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a net loss attributable to our stockholders of $1,141,663, or $0.00 per share, during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $22,776 and a working capital deficit of $800,253, compared to cash and cash equivalents of $253,598 and a working capital deficit of $2,021,744 as of December 31, 2020. Despite the decrease in cash and cash equivalents, the substantial improvement on working capital deficit is a result of the Company’s efforts torwards improving debt position. All convertible debt has been removed from the Company’s books as of December 31, 2021.
Net cash used in operating activities totaled $1,914,503 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash used of $996,781 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase in cash used of $917,722 or 92%.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $288,761 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash used of $13,643 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase in cash used of $275,118 or 2,016%.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $1,789,938 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1,104,549 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase in cash provided of $685,389 or 62.1%.
We have limited working capital, have historically incurred net operating losses, and have not yet received material revenues from the sale of products or services. These factors create substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our primary sources of liquidity have been derived through proceeds from the (i) issuance of debt and (ii) sales of our equity and the equity of one of our subsidiaries. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our capability to generate cash flows from operations and successfully raise new capital through debt issuances and sales of our equity. We believe that we will be successful in the execution of our initiatives, but there can be no assurance. We have no plans for any significant cash acquisitions in the foreseeable future.
The condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has limited working capital, has incurred losses in each of the past two years, and has not yet received material revenues from sales of products or services. These factors create substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company generating cash from its operations, the sale of its stock and/or obtaining debt financing. Historically, the Company has funded its operations primarily through the issuance of debt and equity securities. Management’s plan to fund its capital requirements and ongoing operations include the generation of revenue from its mining operations and projects. Management’s secondary plan to cover any shortfall is selling its equity securities, including common stock in the Company, or common stock in Apollo Resources and Jupiter Gold that it owns, and obtaining debt financing. There can be no assurance the Company will be successful in these efforts.
Currency Risk
We operate primarily in Brazil which exposes us to currency risks. Our business activities may generate intercompany receivables or payables that are in a currency other than the functional currency of the entity. Changes in exchange rates from the time the activity occurs to the time payments are made may result in it receiving either more or less in local currency than the local currency equivalent at the time of the original activity.
Our condensed consolidated financial statements are denominated in U.S. dollars. Accordingly, changes in exchange rates between the applicable foreign currency and the U.S. dollar affect the translation of each foreign subsidiary’s financial results into U.S. dollars for purposes of reporting in the consolidated financial statements. Our foreign subsidiaries translate their financial results from the local currency into U.S. dollars in the following manner: (a) income statement accounts are translated at average exchange rates for the period; (b) balance sheet asset and liability accounts are translated at end of period exchange rates; and (c) equity accounts are translated at historical exchange rates. Translation in this manner affects the shareholders’ equity account referred to as the foreign currency translation adjustment account. This account exists only in the foreign subsidiaries’ U.S. dollar balance sheets and is necessary to keep the foreign subsidiaries’ balance sheets in agreement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, loans to a related party, accrued expenses, and an amount due to a director. The carrying amount of these financial instruments approximates fair value due either to length of maturity or interest rates that approximate prevailing market rates unless otherwise disclosed in our financial statements. If our estimate of the fair value is incorrect at December 31, 2021, it could negatively affect our financial position and liquidity and could result in our having understated our net loss.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingencies at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We follow the guidance of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 820 - Fair Value Measurement and Disclosure. Fair value is defined as the exit price, or the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants as of the measurement date. The guidance also establishes a hierarchy for inputs used in measuring fair value that maximizes the use of observable inputs and minimizes the use of unobservable inputs by requiring that the most observable inputs be used when available. Observable inputs are inputs market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability and are developed based on market data obtained from sources independent of us. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect our assumptions about the factors market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability. The guidance establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1. Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets;
Level 2. Inputs, other than the quoted prices in active markets, that are observable either directly or indirectly; and
Level 3. Unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data, which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our derivative liabilities were considered a level 2 liability. We do not have any level 3 assets or liabilities.
Our financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, taxes receivable, prepaid expenses, deposits and other assets, accounts payable, accrued expenses and convertible notes payable. The carrying amount of these financial instruments approximates fair value due to either length of maturity or interest rates that approximate prevailing market rates unless otherwise disclosed in these consolidated financial statements.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation. Major improvements and betterments are capitalized. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life. At the time of retirement or other disposition of property and equipment, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any resulting gain or loss is reflected in the statements of operations as other gain or loss, net.
The diamond and gold processing plant and other machinery are depreciated over an estimated useful life of ten years; vehicles are depreciated over an estimated life of four years; and computer and other office equipment over an estimated useful life of three years.
Mineral Properties
Costs of exploration, carrying and retaining unproven mineral lease properties are expensed as incurred. Mineral property acquisition costs, including licenses and lease payments, are capitalized. Although we have taken steps to verify title to mineral properties in which it has an interest, these procedures do not guarantee our rights. Such properties may be subject to prior agreements or transfers and title may be affected by undetected defects.
Impairment losses are recorded on mineral properties used in operations when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the assets’ carrying amount. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not recognize any impairment losses related to mineral properties held.
Impairment of Intangible Assets with Indefinite Useful Lives
We account for intangible assets in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). ASC 350 requires that intangible assets with indefinite useful lives no longer be amortized, but instead be evaluated for impairment at least annually. On an annual basis, in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year, we review our intangible assets with indefinite useful lives for impairment by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances makes it more-likely-than-not that the fair value of an intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. If it is determined that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of an intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, the intangible asset is further tested for impairment by comparing the carrying amount to its estimated fair value using a discounted cash flow. Impairment, if any, is measured as the amount by which an indefinite-lived intangible asset’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
Application of impairment tests requires significant management judgment, including the determination of fair value of each indefinite-lived intangible asset. Judgment applied when performing the qualitative analysis includes consideration of macroeconomic, industry and market conditions, overall financial performance of the entity, composition, or strategy changes affecting the recoverability of asset groups. Judgments applied when performing the quantitative analysis includes estimating future cash flows, determining appropriate discount rates and making other assumptions. Changes in these judgments, estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each indefinite-lived intangible asset.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
For long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and intangible assets subject to amortization, we continually monitor events and changes in circumstances that could indicate carrying amounts of long-lived assets may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances are present, we assess the recoverability of long-lived assets by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the total of the future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of those assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or the fair value less costs to sell.
Convertible Instruments
We evaluate and account for conversion options embedded in convertible instruments in accordance with ASC 470-20, “Debt with Conversion and Other Options”.
Applicable GAAP requires companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under other GAAP with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
We account for convertible instruments (when it has been determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments) by recording, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Debt discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt to their stated date of redemption.
Variable Interest Entities
We determine at the inception of each arrangement whether an entity in which we hold an investment or in which we have other variable interests in is considered a variable interest entity. We consolidate VIEs when we are the primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary of a VIE is the party that meets both of the following criteria: (1) has the power to make decisions that most significantly affect the economic performance of the VIE; and (2) has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits that in either case could potentially be significant to the VIE. Periodically, we assess whether any changes in the interest or relationship with the entity affect the determination of whether the entity is still a VIE and, if so, whether we are the primary beneficiary. If we are not the primary beneficiary in a VIE, we account for the investment under the equity method or cost method in accordance with the applicable GAAP.
We have concluded that Apollo Resources, Jupiter Gold and their subsidiaries are VIEs in accordance with applicable accounting standards and guidance; and although the operations of Apollo Resources and Jupiter Gold are independent of ours, through governance rights, we have the power to direct the activities that are most significant to Apollo Resources and Jupiter Gold. Therefore, we concluded that we are the primary beneficiary of both Apollo Resources and Jupiter Gold.
Stock-Based Compensation
We record stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. ASC 718 requires companies to measure compensation cost for stock-based employee compensation at fair value at the grant date and recognize the expense over the employee’s requisite service period. Under ASC 718, volatility is based on the historical volatility of our stock or the expected volatility of the stock of similar companies. The expected life assumption is primarily based on historical exercise patterns and employee post-vesting termination behavior. The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant.
We utilize the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which was developed for use in estimating the fair value of options. Option-pricing models require the input of highly complex and subjective variables including the expected life of options granted and the expected volatility of our stock price over a period equal to or greater than the expected life of the options. Because changes in the subjective assumptions can materially affect the estimated value of our employee stock options, it is management’s opinion that the Black-Scholes option-pricing model may not provide an accurate measure of the fair value of our employee stock options. Although the fair value of employee stock options is determined in accordance with ASC Topic 718 using an option-pricing model, that value may not be indicative of the fair value observed in a willing buyer/willing seller market transaction.
On June 20, 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07 which simplifies the accounting for share-based payments granted to nonemployees for goods and services. Under the ASU, most of the guidance on such payments to nonemployees would be aligned with the requirements for share-based payments granted to employees. Equity classified share-based payments for employees was fixed at the time of grant. Equity-classified nonemployee share-based payment awards are measured at the grant date of the award which is the same as share-based payments for employees. We adopted the requirements of the new rule as of January 1, 2019, the effective date of the new guidance.
Foreign Currency
Our foreign subsidiaries use a local currency as the functional currency. Resulting translation gains or losses are recognized as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. Transaction gains or losses related to balances denominated in a currency other than the functional currency are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations. Net foreign currency transaction losses included in our consolidated statements of operations were negligible for all periods presented.
Reclassifications
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. These reclassifications had no impact on net earnings (loss) or and financial position.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 of the financial statements. We have reviewed all recent accounting pronouncements issued to the date of the issuance of these financial statements, and we do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on us.