ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition of 180 Life Sciences Corp. as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains statements that are forward-looking. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information” above. Actual results could differ materially because of the factors discussed in “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report, and other factors that we may not know.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $68,682,286 and net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $20,324,648. As of December 31, 2021, we had a working capital deficit of $8,498,193. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. As we are not generating revenues, we need to raise a significant amount of capital in order to pay our debts and cover our operating costs. While the Company raised money in August 2021, there is no assurance that we will be able to raise additional needed capital or that such capital will be available under favorable terms.
We are subject to all the substantial risks inherent in the development of a new business enterprise within an extremely competitive industry. Due to the absence of a long-standing operating history and the emerging nature of the markets in which we compete, we anticipate operating losses until we can successfully implement our business strategy, which includes all associated revenue streams. We may never ever achieve profitable operations or generate significant revenues.
We currently have a minimum monthly cash requirement spend of approximately $500,000. We believe that in the aggregate, we will require significant additional capital funding to support and expand the research and development and marketing of our products, fund future clinical trials, repay debt obligations, provide capital expenditures for additional equipment and development costs, payment obligations, office space and systems for managing the business, and cover other operating costs until our planned revenue streams from products are fully-implemented and begin to offset our operating costs, if ever.
Since our inception, we have funded our operations with the proceeds from equity and debt financings. We have experienced liquidity issues due to, among other reasons, our limited ability to raise adequate capital on acceptable terms. We have historically relied upon the issuance equity and promissory notes that are convertible into shares of our common stock to fund our operations and have devoted significant efforts to reduce that exposure. We anticipate that we will need to issue equity to fund our operations and repay our outstanding debt for the foreseeable future. If we are unable to achieve operational profitability or we are not successful in securing other forms of financing, we will have to evaluate alternative actions to reduce our operating expenses and conserve cash.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements included in this prospectus also include a going concern footnote.
Additionally, wherever possible, our Board of Directors will attempt to use non-cash consideration to satisfy obligations. In many instances, we believe that the non-cash consideration will consist of restricted shares of our common stock, preferred stock or warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. Our Board of Directors has authority, without action or vote of the shareholders, but subject to NASDAQ rules and regulations (which generally require shareholder approval for any transactions which would result in the issuance of more than 20% of our then outstanding shares of common stock or voting rights representing over 20% of our then outstanding shares of stock), to issue all or part of the authorized but unissued shares of common stock, preferred stock or warrants to purchase such shares of common stock. In addition, we may attempt to raise capital by selling shares of our common stock, possibly at a discount to market in the future. These actions will result in dilution of the ownership interests of existing shareholders, may further dilute common stock book value, and that dilution may be material. Such issuances may also serve to enhance existing management’s ability to maintain control of us, because the shares may be issued to parties or entities committed to supporting existing management.
Organization of MD&A
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (the “MD&A”) is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
● Business Overview and Recent Events. A summary of the Company’s business and certain material recent events.
● Significant Financial Statement Components. A summary of the Company’s significant financial statement components.
● Results of Operations. An analysis of our financial results comparing the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our balance sheets and cash flows and discussion of our financial condition.
● Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. Accounting estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
Business Overview and Recent Events
On November 6, 2020 (“Closing Date”), the previously announced Business Combination was consummated following a special meeting of stockholders, where the stockholders of KBL considered and approved, among other matters, a proposal to adopt the Business Combination Agreement. Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, Merger Sub merged with 180, with 180 continuing as the surviving entity and becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of KBL. As part of the Business Combination, KBL issued 17,500,000 shares of common stock and equivalents to the stockholders of 180, in exchange for all of the outstanding capital stock of 180. The Business Combination became effective November 6, 2020 and 180 filed a Certificate of Amendment of its Certificate of Incorporation in Delaware to change its name to 180 Life Corp., and KBL changed its name to 180 Life Sciences Corp.
This MD&A and the related financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily covers the historical operations of 180 to the Closing Date (November 6, 2020) and then the combined operations of the two entities from the Closing Date to December 31, 2020. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization with the assets and liabilities of KBL being consolidated commencing with the Closing Date. Thus, the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, only include the combined results after the Closing Date. See Note 4 - Business Combination to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Following the Closing of the Business Combination, we transitioned our operations to those of 180, which is a clinical stage biotechnology company headquartered in Palo Alto, California, focused on the development of therapeutics for unmet medical needs in chronic pain, inflammation, fibrosis and other inflammatory diseases, where anti-TNF therapy will provide a clear benefit to patients, by employing innovative research, and, where appropriate, combination therapy. We have three product development platforms:
● fibrosis and anti-tumor necrosis factor (“TNF”);
● drugs which are derivatives of cannabidiol (“CBD”); and
● alpha 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (“α7nAChR”).
We have several future product candidates in development, including one product candidate which has recently completed a successful Phase 2b clinical trial in the United Kingdom for Dupuytren’s Contracture, a condition that affects the development of fibrous connective tissue in the palm of the hand. 180 was founded by several world-leading scientists in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical sectors.
We intend to invest resources to successfully complete the clinical programs that are underway, discover new drug candidates, and develop new molecules to build up on our existing pipeline to address unmet clinical needs. The product candidates are designed via a platform comprised of defined unit operations and technologies. This work is performed in a research and development environment that evaluates and assesses variability in each step of the process in order to define the most reliable production conditions.
We may rely on third-party contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) and other third parties for the manufacturing and processing of the product candidates in the future. We believe the use of contract manufacturing and testing for the first clinical product candidates is cost-effective and has allowed us to rapidly prepare for clinical trials in accordance with our development plans. We expect that third-party manufacturers will be capable of providing and processing sufficient quantities of these product candidates to meet anticipated clinical trial demands.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, a new strain of the coronavirus (COVID-19) was reported in Mainland China and during the first quarter of 2020 the virus had spread to over 150 countries, resulting in a global pandemic. This COVID-19 pandemic and the public health responses to contain it have resulted in global recessionary conditions, which did not exist at December 31, 2019. Among other effects, government-mandated closures, stay-at-home orders and other related measures have significantly impacted global economic activity and business investment in general. A continuation or worsening of the levels of market disruption and volatility seen in the recent past could have an adverse effect on our ability to access capital, and on our business, results of operations and financial condition. We have been closely monitoring the developments and have taken active measures to protect the health of our employees, their families, and our communities. The ultimate impact on the 2021 fiscal year and beyond will depend heavily on the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and public health responses, including government-mandated closures, stay-at-home orders and social distancing mandates, as well as the substance and pace of macroeconomic recovery, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict considering the rapidly evolving landscape of the COVID-19 pandemic and the public health responses to contain it.
The follow up time for patient data and the statistical analysis for the Phase 2b Dupuytren’s Contracture clinical trial was delayed as a result of COVID-19, but such follow-up and statistical analysis are now completed and the Company announced the top-line data results from the Phase 2b trial on December 1, 2021. Additionally, COVID-19 has delayed the initiation of certain clinical trials and may delay the initiation of other clinical trials in the future or otherwise have a material adverse effect on our future operations.
Close of Business Combination
On November 6, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), the Company consummated the previously announced Business Combination following a special meeting of stockholders held on November 5, 2020, where the stockholders of the Company considered and approved, among other matters, a proposal to adopt the Business Combination Agreement (as amended, the “Business Combination Agreement”), dated as of July 25, 2019. Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, among other things, a subsidiary of the Company merged with and into 180, with 180 continuing as the surviving entity and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”). The Merger became effective on November 6, 2020. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization of 180. All of 180’s capital stock outstanding immediately prior to the merger was exchanged for (i) 15,736,348 shares of 180LS common stock, (ii) 2 shares of Class C and Class K Special Voting Shares exchangeable into 1,763,652 shares of 180LS common stock which are presented as outstanding in the accompanying Statement of Changes in Stockholders’ Equity (Deficiency) due to the reverse recapitalization. The Company’s 6,928,645 outstanding shares of common stock are presented as being issued on the date of the Business Combination.
Significant Financial Statement Components
Research and Development
To date, 180’s research and development expenses have related primarily to discovery efforts and preclinical and clinical development of its three product platforms: fibrosis and anti-TNF; drugs which are derivatives of CBD, and α7nAChR. Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs associated with those three product platforms, which include:
● expenses incurred under agreements with 180’s collaboration partners and third-party contract organizations, investigative clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on its behalf, and consultants;
● costs related to production of clinical materials, including fees paid to contract manufacturers;
● laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical and clinical trials;
● employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation; and
● facilities and other expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation and amortization expense and other supplies.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. We accrue for costs incurred as services are provided by monitoring the status of each project and the invoices received from our external service providers. We adjust our accrual as actual costs become known. When contingent milestone payments are owed to third parties under research and development arrangements or license agreements, the milestone payment obligations are expensed when the milestone results are achieved.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that research and development expenses will increase over the next several years as clinical programs progress and as we seek to initiate clinical trials of additional product candidates. It is also expected that increased research and development expenses will be incurred as additional product candidates are selectively identified and developed. However, it is difficult to determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of current or future preclinical programs and clinical trials of product candidates.
The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of product candidates will depend on a variety of factors that include, but are not limited to, the following:
● per patient trial costs;
● the number of patients that participate in the trials;
● the number of sites included in the trials;
● the countries in which the trials are conducted;
● the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
● the number of doses that patients receive;
● the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
● potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
● the impact of COVID-19 on the length of our trials;
● the duration of patient follow-up; and
● the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidates.
In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and fund in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, as well as an assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential.
Because the product candidates are still in clinical and preclinical development and the outcome of these efforts is uncertain, we cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability. Due to the early-stage nature of these programs, we do not track costs on a project-by-project basis. As these programs become more advanced, we intend to track the external and internal cost of each program.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other staff-related costs, including stock-based compensation for shares of common stock issued and options granted to founders, directors and personnel in executive, commercial, finance, accounting, legal, investor relations, facilities, business development and human resources functions and include vesting conditions.
Other significant general and administrative costs include costs relating to facilities and overhead costs, legal fees relating to corporate and patent matters, litigation, SEC filings, insurance, investor relations costs, fees for accounting and consulting services, and other general and administrative costs. General and administrative costs are expensed as incurred, and we accrue amounts for services provided by third parties related to the above expenses by monitoring the status of services provided and receiving estimates from our service providers and adjusting our accruals as actual costs become known.
It is expected that the general and administrative expenses will increase over the next several years to support our continued research and development activities, manufacturing activities, potential commercialization of our product candidates and the increased costs of operating as a public company. These increases are anticipated to include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel, developing commercial infrastructure, fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, and increased costs associated with being a public company, as well as expenses related to services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and SEC requirements, insurance and investor relations costs.
Other Income
Other income primarily represents fees earned for research and development work performed for other companies, some of which are related parties.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense related to debt instruments.
Gain (Loss) on Extinguishment of Convertible Notes
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of convertible notes represents the shortfall (excess) of the reacquisition cost of convertible notes as compared to their carrying value.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities represents the non-cash change in fair value of derivative liabilities during the reporting period. Gains resulting from change in fair value of derivative liabilities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were driven by decreases in stock price during the period, resulting in a lower fair value of the underlying liability.
Offering Costs Allocated to Warrant Liabilities
Change in offering costs allocated to warrant liabilities represents placement agent fees and offering expenses which were allocated to the PIPE Warrants and expensed immediately as they are liability classified.
Change in Fair Value of Accrued Issuable Equity
Change in fair value of accrued issuable equity represents the non-cash change in fair value of accrued equity prior to its formal issuance.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results of Operations
For the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Research and Development
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred research and development expenses of $1,000,769 compared to $2,217,371 incurred for the year ended December 30, 2020, representing a decrease of $1,216,602 or 55%. The decrease includes a $90,000 decrease in research and development expenses related to drug discovery services provided by Evotec International GmbH in connection with a research and development agreement, a reduction in consulting expenses for the Scientific Advisory Board of $70,000, a decrease of $260,000 in research and development expenses related to the agreements amended and entered into with Yissum during 2020 and a decrease of $1,100,000 related to stock compensation paid to Yissum Research Development Company in 2020, offset by an increase in R&D tax credit of $500,000.
Research and Development - Related Parties
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred research and development expenses - related parties of $2,947,536 compared to $75,633 incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 2,871,903 or 3,797%. The increase includes related party consultation fees paid to Jagdeep Nanchahal for his research in the Phase 2b clinical trial for Dupuytren’s Contracture (RIDD) totaling $800,000 and stock compensation expense paid to Mr. Nanchahal of approximately $1,400,000 and an additional overall increase in stock compensation expense of approximately $700,000.
General and Administrative
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred general and administrative expenses of $11,230,118 compared to $3,169,260 incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $8,060,858 or 254%. The increase is attributable to an increase in professional fees of $2,800,000, which is comprised of legal fees of $1,600,000, penalties related to late filing of the Form S-1 for the February 2021 Offering of $525,000, fees of $275,000 related to the EarlyBird Settlement (see Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies), and an increase in consulting fees of $700,000, which was offset by decreases in audit fees and merger expenses totaling $545,000. Salaries expense increased by approximately $830,000 due to increases in salaries expense, vacation expense, bonus expense and employee benefits expense resulting from hiring of additional personnel and accrued but unpaid bonuses. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $2,000,000 resulting from expense during 2021 for Directors and management. The prior year also had reversal of a bad debt provision of $1,700,000, while 2021 had no bad debt expense and there was in increase in D&O insurance of $1,100,000 for the year ended 2021.
General and Administrative - Related Parties
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred general and administrative expenses - related parties of $462,580 compared to $185,848 incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $276,732, or 149%. The increase is primarily related to bad debt expense of $300,000 incurred in connection with a receivable from related parties.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred other expenses, net of $4,706,849 compared to $5,256,373 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease in other expenses of $549,524 or 10%. The decrease was primarily due to an increase of $2,861,079 in the change in fair value of derivative liabilities and an increase in warrant costs of $604,118 due to the offering, offset by a gain on the settlement of liabilities of $926,829 and a decrease in interest expense of $864,988 due to convertible debt being converted to stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, there was a loss on the extinguishment of convertible notes payable of $9,737 compared to a loss of $2,580,655 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash balances of $8,224,508 and $2,108,544, respectively, and working capital deficits of $8,498,193 and $17,406,356, respectively.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash used in operating activities was $19,371,428 and $3,871,961, respectively. Our cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to our net loss of $20,324,648, adjusted for non-cash expenses in the aggregate amount of $9,760,161, as well as $8,806,941 of net cash used in changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities. A significant portion of cash used in operations during the year relates to $4.8 million of non-recurring expenses associated with the business combination (see Note 4). Our cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to our net loss of $10,884,058, adjusted for non-cash expenses in the aggregate amount of $4,679,931, as well as $2,332,166 of net cash provided by changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash provided by investing activities was $0 and $14,490,724, respectively. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $10,280,739 of cash withdrawn from a trust account in connection with the Business Combination, $3,006,235 of cash acquired in the reverse recapitalization and $1,203,750 of proceeds received from the collection of notes receivable.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash provided by (used in) financing activities was $25,411,919 and ($8,733,927), respectively. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was comprised of proceeds from the sale of common stock and warrants of $26,666,200 and proceeds from loans payable in the amount of $1,618,443, partially offset by repayments of convertible debt and loans payable of ($10,000) and ($807,594), respectively, and offering costs paid of ($2,055,130). The net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to payment of common stock redemptions in the amount of ($9,006,493), repayments made to related parties in the amount of ($201,859), and the repayment of loans in the amount of ($72,843), partially offset by sources of cash from the net proceeds from the sale of common stock in the amount of $72,500 and proceeds from loans and convertible notes in the amount of $474,768.
Our product candidates may never achieve commercialization and we anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase. As a result, until such time, if ever, as we are able to generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements, which may not be available on favorable terms, if at all. The sale of additional equity or debt securities, if accomplished, may result in dilution to our then stockholders. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, license payments or milestone obligations that may arise, laboratory and related supplies, clinical costs, potential manufacturing costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
Our material cash requirements and time periods of such requirements from known contractual and other obligations include milestone and royalty payments related to license agreements with Oxford University and Yissum, payments related to the D&O insurance, payments to consultants and payments related to outside consulting firms, such as legal counsel, auditors, accountants, etc. These cash requirements, in the aggregate, amount to approximately $7,100,000 for 2022 and $33,400,000 for the years 2023 through 2026.
Further, our operating plans may change, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements for clinical trials and other research and development activities. We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated product development programs.
We have not yet achieved profitability and expect to continue to incur cash outflows from operations. It is expected that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase and, as a result, we will eventually need to raise additional capital to fund our operations. If we are unable to obtain adequate funds on reasonable terms, we may be required to significantly curtail or discontinue operations or obtain funds by entering into financing agreements on unattractive terms. Our operating needs include the planned costs to operate our business, including amounts required to fund working capital and capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2021, the conditions outlined above indicated that there was a substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the financial statement issuance date. However, in August 2021, the Company raised additional capital of approximately $13.88 million and with current cash on hand of $6,045,848 as of March 28, 2022, the Company expects to be able to continue as a going concern through the third quarter of 2022.
Our condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern and the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The carrying amounts of assets and liabilities presented in the condensed consolidated financial statements do not necessarily purport to represent realizable or settlement values. The condensed consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustment that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Recent Financing and Settlement Transactions
February 2021 Offering
On February 19, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with a number of institutional investors (the “Purchasers”) pursuant to which the Company agreed to sell to the Purchasers an aggregate of 2,564,000 shares (the “Shares”) of the Company’s common stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,564,000 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “SPA Warrants”), at a combined purchase price of $4.55 per Share and accompanying SPA Warrant (the “Offering”). Aggregate gross proceeds from the Offering were approximately $11.7 million, prior to deducting placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. Net proceeds to the Company from the Offering, after deducting the placement agent fees and offering expenses payable by the Company, were approximately $10.8 million. The Offering closed on February 23, 2021.
Maxim Group LLC (the “Placement Agent”) acted as exclusive placement agent in connection with the Offering pursuant to an Engagement Letter between the Company and the Placement Agent dated January 26, 2021 (as amended on February 18, 2021). Pursuant to the Engagement Letter, the Placement Agent received a commission equal to seven percent (7%) of the aggregate gross proceeds of the Offering, or $816,634.
August 2021 Offering
On August 23, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain purchasers (the “August 2021 Purchasers”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to sell an aggregate of 2,500,000 shares of common stock (the “August 2021 Shares”) and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,500,000 shares of common stock (the “August 2021 PIPE Warrants”), at a combined purchase price of $6.00 per share and August 2021 PIPE Warrant (the “August 2021 Offering”). Aggregate gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $15 million. Net proceeds to the Company from the offering, after deducting the placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company, were approximately $13.9 million. The placement agent fees and offering expenses were accounted for as a reduction of additional paid in capital. The Placement Agent received a commission equal to seven percent (7%) of the aggregate gross proceeds of the Offering, or $1,050,000. The offering closed on August 23, 2021.
In connection with the August 2021 Offering, the Company also entered into a Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of August 23, 2021, with the August 2021 Purchasers (the “August 2021 Registration Rights Agreement”). Pursuant to the August 2021 Registration Rights Agreement, the Company agreed to file a registration statement with the SEC on or prior to September 12, 2021 to register the resale of the August 2021 Shares and the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the August 2021 PIPE Warrants (the “Warrant Shares”), and to cause such registration statement to be declared effective on or prior to October 22, 2021 (or, in the event of a “full review” by the SEC, November 21, 2021). The registration statement was filed with the SEC on August 31, 2021 and the SEC declared it effective on September 9, 2021.
Conversion of Bridge Notes
On March 8, 2021, the holders of the Company’s convertible bridge notes, which were issued on December 27, 2019 and January 3, 2020 to various purchasers, converted an aggregate of $432,383, which included accrued interest of $66,633 owed under such convertible bridge notes, into an aggregate of 158,383 shares of common stock pursuant to the terms of such notes, as amended, at a conversion price of $2.73 per share.
Convertible Debt Conversions
From November 27, 2020 to February 5, 2021, the holders of the Company’s convertible promissory notes converted an aggregate of $4,782,107 owed under such convertible notes into an aggregate of 1,986,751 shares of common stock, pursuant to the terms of such notes, as amended, at conversion prices of between $2.00 and $3.29 per share.
During the third quarter of 2021, certain noteholders elected to convert certain convertible notes payable with an aggregate principal balance of $1,234,334 and an aggregate accrued interest balance of $105,850 into an aggregate of 467,123 shares of the Company’s common stock at conversion prices ranging from $2.45-$3.29 per share. The shares issued upon the conversion of the convertible promissory notes had a fair value at issuance of $1,941,125.
Earlybird Capital Settlement Agreement
On April 23, 2021, the Company settled the amounts due pursuant to a certain finder agreement entered into with EarlyBird Capital, Inc. (“EarlyBird”) on October 17, 2017 (the “Finder Agreement”). The Company’s Board of Directors determined it was in the best interests to settle all claims which had been made or could be made with respect to the Finder Agreement and entered into a settlement agreement (the “Settlement Agreement”). Pursuant to the Settlement Agreement, the Company paid EarlyBird a cash payment of $275,000 and issued 225,000 shares of the Company’s restricted common stock with a grant date value of $1,973,250 to EarlyBird, in full satisfaction of accounts payable in the amount of $1,750,000. The Company recorded a loss of $223,250 in connection with the Settlement Agreement, which is included in (loss) gain on settlement of liabilities in the accompanying condensed consolidated statements of operations.
Alpha Capital Settlement Agreement
On July 31, 2021, the Company reached an agreement to settle the amounts allegedly due pursuant to a certain convertible note agreement entered into with Alpha Capital Anstalt (“Alpha”) on September 8, 2020 (the “Alpha Note”). The Company’s Board of Directors determined it was in the best interest of the Company to settle all claims which had been made or could be made with respect to the Alpha Note and entered into a settlement agreement (“Alpha Settlement Agreement”). Pursuant to the Alpha Settlement Agreement, the Company issued 150,000 shares of common stock and three-year warrants to purchase 25,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $7.07 per share, in exchange for full and complete satisfaction of the Alpha Note.
Exchanges of Related Party Loans and Convertible Notes
On September 30, 2021, Dr. Lawrence Steinman and Sir Marc Feldmann, Ph.D., each of whom serve as Co-Executive Chairmen of the Company’s Board of Directors, agreed with the Company to convert amounts owed under outstanding loans with an aggregate principal balance of $693,371 and an aggregate accrued interest balance of $157,741 into an aggregate of 141,852 shares of the Company’s common stock at the conversion price of $6.00 per share, pursuant to the terms of the agreement, which conversion rate was above the closing consolidated bid price of the Company’s common stock on the date the binding agreement was entered into. (See Note 10 - Loans Payable and Note 11 - Convertible Notes Payable for more information.)
Mintz Levin Settlement
In September 2021, the Company entered into a settlement agreement with Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris, Glovsky and Popeo, P.C. (“Mintz”), whereby the Company agreed to pay $800,000 to Mintz for legal services rendered. Mintz had billed the Company an aggregate of $1,454,240 before factoring any interest charges. The Company recorded a gain of approximately $650,000 after making payment pursuant to the settlement agreement.
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. Litigation Settlement
On October 12, 2021, the Company and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. entered into a settlement agreement, whereby the Company agreed to pay to Cantor $200,000 in return for dismissal of the case against the Company. The Company sent the funds to Cantor on October 13, 2021. As of September 30, 2021, the Company recorded an accrual for the settlement amount as per the agreement.
On October 21, 2021, the Company received a notice of discontinuance and as a result, the matter between the Company and Cantor is settled and closed.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles that are generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of its assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. The Company has identified certain policies and estimates as critical to its business operations and the understanding of its past or present results of operations related to (i) goodwill and (ii) intangible assets and in-process research and development (“IPR&D”). These policies and estimates are considered critical because they had a material impact, or they have the potential to have a material impact, on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and because they require management to make significant judgments, assumptions or estimates. The Company believes that the estimates, judgments and assumptions made when accounting for the items described below were reasonable, based on information available at the time they were made. However, actual results may differ from those estimates, and these differences may be material.
Goodwill/Intangible Assets and In-Process Research and Development (“IPR&D”)
The Company has a significant amount of goodwill, intangible assets and IPR&D assets that are assessed at least annually for impairment. At December 31, 2021, goodwill, intangible assets and IPR&D assets totaled $51.5 million, or 81%, of the Company’s total assets. The impairment analyses of these assets are considered critical because of their significance to the Company. Intangible assets arising from business combinations or acquisitions, such as goodwill, patents and IPR&D assets are initially recorded at estimated fair value. Licensed patents are amortized over the remaining life of the patent. IPR&D assets are considered to be indefinite-lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development projects. Our goodwill was derived from acquisitions where the purchase price exceeded the fair value of the net assets acquired The Company is required to reassign goodwill to reporting units whenever reorganizations of the internal reporting structure change the composition of its reporting units. The Company identified one reporting unit which represents its sole operating segment.
The Company is required to assess goodwill/intangible assets and IPR&D assets at least annually, or more frequently, if an event occurs or circumstances change that indicates it is more likely than not the fair value of the Company’s reporting unit was less than its carrying value. In assessing goodwill/intangible assets and IPR&D assets for impairment, the Company may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of its reporting unit is less than its carrying value. For December 31, 2021, the Company elected to bypass the qualitative analysis and proceeded directly to the two- step test.
The first step of the goodwill/intangible assets and IPR&D assets impairment test used to identify potential impairment compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill/intangible assets and IPR&D assets. The Company determined the fair market value of its single reporting unit as of December 31, 2021 to be its market capitalization of $132,760,680, which represents $3.90 per share (the market close price) multiplied by 34,021,200 shares (consisting of 34,035,925 shares of common stock plus 5,275 special voting shares which are exchangeable into common stock for no additional consideration) on December 31, 2021. The carrying amount of the reporting unit as of December 31, 2021 was $40,207,861 (total assets of $63.5 million less total liabilities of $23.3 million).
Since the fair value of the Company ($132,760,680) exceeded the carrying value of the Company ($40,207,861) as of December 31, 2021, and the carrying value of the Company is greater than zero, management concluded the goodwill/intangible assets and IPR&D assets of the reporting unit was not impaired. The Company will continue to perform goodwill/intangible assets and IPR&D assets impairment testing on an annual basis, or as needed if there are changes to the composition of its reporting unit. For additional information on goodwill/intangible assets and IPR&D assets, see Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Goodwill and Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Intangible Assets and In-Process Research and Development.
Derivative Liabilities
The Company evaluates its debt and equity issuances to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives requiring separate recognition in the Company’s financial statements. At December 31, 2021, derivative liabilities totaled $15.2 million, or 65%, of the Company’s total liabilities. The analyses of these liabilities are considered critical because of their significance to the Company. Entities must consider whether to classify contracts that may be settled in its own stock, such as warrants, as equity of the entity or as an asset or liability. If an event that is not within the entity’s control could require net cash settlement, then the contract should be classified as an asset or a liability rather than as equity.
The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is marked-to-market at each balance sheet date and recorded as a liability and the change in fair value is recorded in other (expense) income, net in the consolidated statements of operations. In circumstances where there are multiple embedded instruments that are required to be bifurcated, the bifurcated derivative instruments are accounted for as a single, compound derivative instrument. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period. Equity instruments that are initially classified as equity that become subject to reclassification are reclassified to liability at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument is expected within twelve months of the balance sheet date.
If the embedded conversion options do not require bifurcation, the Company then evaluates for the existence of a beneficial conversion feature by comparing the fair value of the Company’s underlying stock as of the commitment date to the effective conversion price of the instrument (the intrinsic value).
The Company has computed the fair value of warrants, options, convertible notes and convertible preferred stock issued using the Monte-Carlo and Black-Scholes option pricing models. The expected term used for warrants, convertible notes and convertible preferred stock are the contractual life and the expected term used for options issued is the estimated period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding. The Company utilizes the “simplified” method to develop an estimate of the expected term of “plain vanilla” option grants. The Company is utilizing an expected volatility figure based on a review of the historical volatilities, over a period of time, equivalent to the expected life of the instrument being valued, of similarly positioned public companies within its industry. The risk-free interest rate was determined from the implied yields from U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds with a remaining term consistent with the expected term of the instrument being valued.
The Company evaluated the terms of its AGP warrants (see Note 9 - Derivative Liabilities) when they were originally earned and determined that the AGP Warrants should initially be liability-classified at their fair value at issuance with subsequent remeasurement (mark-to-market) at period ends. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has concluded that its warrants should remain liability-classified as of December 31, 2021due to the presence of the Tender Offer Provision combined with the existence of the Exchangeable Shares that have voting rights consistent with common stockholders. For additional information on derivative liabilities, see Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Derivative Liabilities.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our consolidated financial statements included within this Annual Report for a summary of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.