ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
The information and financial data discussed below is derived from the audited consolidated financial statements of Actinium Pharmaceuticals, Inc. for its fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The consolidated financial statements of Actinium Pharmaceuticals, Inc. were prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The information and financial data discussed below is only a summary and should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and related notes of Actinium Pharmaceuticals, Inc. contained elsewhere in this Report. The financial statements contained elsewhere in this Report fully represent Actinium Pharmaceuticals, Inc.’s financial condition and operations; however, they are not indicative of the Company’s future performance. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above for a discussion of forward-looking statements and the significance of such statements in the context of this Report.
Actinium Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is a clinical-stage, biopharmaceutical company applying its proprietary platform technology and deep understanding of radiobiology to the development of novel targeted radiotherapies for patients with unmet needs. Our targeted radiotherapies combine the cell-killing ability of radiation via a radioisotope payload with a targeting agent, such as a monoclonal antibody, to deliver radiation in a precise manner inside the body to specific, targeted cells, to potentially achieve greater efficacy with lower toxicity than with external beam radiation. They also enable a broader usage of radiation than external beam radiation as they can be used in the treatment of both solid tumors and blood cancers, which generally cannot be treated with external radiation given their diffuse nature. Our clinical pipeline is focused on targeting the antigens CD45 and CD33, both of which are expressed in multiple hematologic cancers, which are known to be highly sensitive to radiation. Our clinical programs are focused on two primary areas: (1) targeted conditioning prior to a bone marrow transplant (“BMT”), adoptive cell therapy (“ACT”) such as CAR-T or gene therapy with Iomab-B and (2) targeted radiotherapy combinations with Actimab-A and other therapeutic agents. Our product development strategy is actively informed by clinical data with Iomab-B and Actimab-Ain approximately 600 patients, including our ongoing Pivotal Phase 3 SIERRA trial, which completed enrollment of 150 patients in the third quarter of 2021 with the last patient receiving their BMT in the fourth quarter of 2021. Our clinical pipeline has emanated from our Antibody Warhead Enabling (“AWE”) technology platform, which is protected by over 170 issued and pending patents, trade secrets and know-how that we are applying to the development of targeted radiotherapies for blood and solid tumor indications independently and with collaborators. . Ongoing collaborations include a research partnership with Astellas Pharma, Inc. (“Astellas”) focused on the development of theranostics for solid tumor indications, a collaboration with EpicentRx, Inc, focused on a novel CD47 immunotherapy targeted radiotherapy combination leveraging EpicentRx’s RRx-01, that is being studied in a Phase 3 trial in non-small cell lung cancer, with our clinical stage Actimab-A in AML models, and a collaboration with AVEO Oncology, focused on developing a HER3 targeting ARC for solid tumors leveraging their clinical stage antibodies. We are also utilizing our AWE technology platform to advance our research objectives focused on developing next-generation targeted radiotherapies with our expanded research and development organization and research laboratories leveraging our drug development experience.
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The global health crisis caused by the novel coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic and its resurgences has and may continue to negatively impact global economic activity, which, despite progress in vaccination efforts, remains uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. In addition, the Omicron variant of COVID-19, which appears to be the most transmissible variant to date, has spread globally. The full impact of the Omicron variant, or any subsequent variant, cannot be predicted at this time, and could depend on numerous factors, including vaccination rates among the population, the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines against the Omicron variant and the response by governmental bodies and regulators. Given the ongoing and dynamic nature of the circumstances, it is difficult to predict the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Many countries around the world have continued to impose quarantines and restrictions on travel and mass gatherings to slow the spread of the virus. Accordingly, our ability to continue to operate our business may also be limited. Such events may result in a period of business, supply and drug product manufacturing disruption, and in reduced operations, any of which could materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. In response to COVID-19, we implemented remote working and thus far have not experienced a significant disruption or delay in our operations as it relates to the clinical development of our drug candidates. Such government-imposed precautionary measures may have been relaxed in certain countries or states, but there is no assurance that more strict measures will be put in place again due to a resurgence in COVID-19 cases, including those involving new variants of the coronavirus, which may be more contagious and deadly than prior strains. Therefore, the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to affect our operation, may further divert the attention and efforts of the medical community to coping with COVID-19 and disrupt the marketplace in which we operate and may have a material adverse effect on our operations.
A continuation or worsening of the levels of market disruption and volatility seen in the recent past could have an adverse effect on our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could materially affect our business and the value of our common stock.
We believe our earlier stage CD33 clinical trials will continue to recruit and enroll patients given the acute nature of relapsed or refractory AML. The continuation of the pandemic could adversely affect our planned clinical trial operations, including our ability to conduct the trials on the expected timelines and recruit and retain patients and principal investigators and site staff who, as healthcare providers, may have heightened exposure to COVID-19 if their geography is impacted by the pandemic. Further, the continuation and/or resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic could result in delays in our clinical trials due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the pandemic, restrictions in travel, potential unwillingness of patients to enroll in trials at this time, or the inability of patients to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines or travel restrictions impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services. In addition, we rely on independent clinical investigators, contract research organizations and other third-party service providers to assist us in managing, monitoring and otherwise carrying out our preclinical studies and clinical trials, and the pandemic may affect their ability to devote sufficient time and resources to our programs or to travel to sites to perform work for us, which may result in delays or hinder our ability to collect data from our clinical trials.
Additionally, COVID-19 may result in delays in receiving approvals from local and foreign regulatory authorities, delays in necessary interactions with IRB’s or Institutional Review Boards, local and foreign regulators, ethics committees and other important agencies and contractors due to limitations in employee resources or forced furlough of government employees.
To date, COVID-19 has not had a financial impact on our company. We continue to monitor the impacts of COVID-19 on the global economy and on our business operations. Although we expect that vaccinations for COVID-19 will continue to improve conditions, the ultimate impact from COVID-19 on our business operations and financial results during 2022 will depend on, among other things, the ultimate severity and scope of the pandemic, including the new variants of the virus, the pace at which governmental and private travel restrictions and public concerns about public gatherings will ease, the rate at which historically large increases in unemployment rates will decrease, if at all, and whether, and the speed with which the economy recovers. We are not able to fully quantify the impact that these factors will have on our financial results during 2022 and beyond.
Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, data derived from our statements of operations:
Revenues
We recorded no commercial revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other revenue
We determined that certain collaborations with a third-party are within the scope of Topic ASC 606, Revenue Recognition from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. The collaboration agreement is made up of multiple modules related to various research activities. While the third party has the option to terminate the agreement at the conclusion of any module, we identified a single performance obligation to provide research services within each module for which we receive monetary consideration. We recognized revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $0.9 million from these collaborations.
The National Institutes of Health awarded us a Small Business Technology Transfer cost reimbursable grant to support a clinical collaboration with Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, or MSK, to study Iomab-ACT, our CD45-targeting Antibody Radio-Conjugate, for targeted conditioning to achieve lymphodepletion prior to administration of a CD19-targeted CAR T-cell therapy developed at MSK. We recognized revenue of $0.2 million from this grant during the year ended December 31, 2021.
We recorded no other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expenses increased by $1.9 million to $18.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to expenses related to our research activities at our laboratory space and government grant program and higher compensation expense resulting from the hiring of additional employees.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $1.8 million to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to higher professional fees and consulting fees including recruitment costs, business taxes and fees, and insurance premiums for director and officer liability.
Other Income
Other income of $0.2 million for both time periods was attributable to interest income - net as a higher average balance of cash and cash equivalents offset a lower average interest rate.
Net Loss
Net loss increased by $2.6 million to $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $22.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses, partially offset by other revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily through sales of our common stock, pre-funded warrants and warrants.
The following tables sets forth selected cash flow information for the periods indicated:
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $20.9 million decreased by $0.7 million from $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the increased net loss of $2.6 million being more than offset by increased liabilities and increased accounts payable due to the timing of payments to vendors.
Net cash used in investing activities of $133 thousand and $253 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, primarily due to the purchase of equipment for our laboratory space.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $35.2 million, primarily from the sale of shares of our common stock. In August 2020 we entered into the Capital on Demand™ Sales Agreement with JonesTrading Institutional Services LLC, or JonesTrading, pursuant to which we may sell, from time to time, through or to JonesTrading, up to an aggregate of $200 million of our common stock. Shares of common stock are offered pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, on August 7, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 2.1 million shares of common stock, resulting in gross proceeds of $22.6 million and net proceeds of $21.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 4.6 million shares of common stock, resulting in gross proceeds of $36.5 million and net proceeds of $35.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly generated by the sale of shares of common stock, pre-funded warrants and warrants. Net cash provided by financing activities was $76.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting $76.6 million in proceeds from the sales of common stock and pre-funded warrants in April and June 2020 and sales of common stock throughout 2020.
On April 24, 2020, we issued and sold 4.3 million shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 2.8 million shares of common stock. The price to the public for each share of common stock sold in the offering was $4.50, and the price to the public for each pre-funded warrant sold in the offering was $4.497. The pre-funded warrants were exercisable at an exercise price of $0.003 per share and were exercisable immediately upon issuance. Gross proceeds from this offering were $31.6 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us. Net proceeds from the offering were approximately $29.1 million.
On June 19, 2020, we issued and sold 1.9 million shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 0.7 million shares of common stock. The price to the public in this offering for each share of common stock was $9.75 and for each pre-funded warrant was $9.747. Each pre-funded warrant had an exercise price of $0.003 per share and were exercisable immediately upon issuance. Gross proceeds from this offering to us were $25.0 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable us. Net proceeds from this offering were approximately $23.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, holders of all 2.8 million pre-funded April 2020 warrants and 0.7 million pre-funded June 2020 warrants exercised their pre-funded warrants at $0.003 per share and received 2.8 million shares of common stock and 0.7 million shares of common stock, respectively.
We will require additional funds to conduct clinical and non-clinical trials, achieve regulatory approvals, and, subject to such approvals, commercially launch our product candidates, and will need to secure additional financing in the future to support our operations. As of the date of filing this report, we expect that our existing resources will be more than sufficient to fund our planned operations for more than 12 months following the date of this report. We base this belief on assumptions that are subject to change, and we may be required to use our available cash and cash equivalent resources sooner than we currently expect. Our actual future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the progress and results of our ongoing clinical trials, the duration and cost of discovery and preclinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our pipeline candidates, the timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates, the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending, and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights, the number and development requirements of other pipeline candidates that we pursue, and the costs of commercialization activities, including product marketing, sales, and distribution.
We expect to continue to operate at a net loss as we continue our research and development efforts, continue to conduct clinical trials and develop manufacturing, sales, marketing and distribution capabilities. There can be no assurance that the products under development by us will be approved for sale in the United States or elsewhere. Our ability to obtain additional capital may depend on prevailing economic conditions and financial, business, and other factors beyond our control. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has caused an unstable economic environment globally. Disruptions in the global financial markets may adversely impact the availability and cost of credit, as well as our ability to raise money in the capital markets. Current economic conditions have been, and continue to be, volatile. Continued instability in these market conditions may limit our ability to access the capital necessary to fund and grow our business.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset, or paid to transfer a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants. A fair value hierarchy has been established for valuation inputs that gives the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration, if any; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue as we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer.
At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess whether the promised goods or services promised within each contract are distinct and, therefore, represent a separate performance obligation. Goods and services that are determined not to be distinct are combined with other promised goods and services until a distinct bundle is identified. In determining whether goods or services are distinct, we evaluate certain criteria, including whether (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (capable of being distinct) and (ii) the good or service is separately identifiable from other goods or services in the contract (distinct in the context of the contract).
ASC 606 requires us to allocate the arrangement consideration on a relative standalone selling price basis for each performance obligation after determining the transaction price of the contract and identifying the performance obligations to which that amount should be allocated. The relative standalone selling price is defined in the new revenue standard as the price at which an entity would sell a promised good or service separately to a customer. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation as each performance obligation is satisfied, either at a point in time or over time, and if over time, recognition is based on the use of an output or input method.
Collaborative Arrangements
We follow the accounting guidance for collaboration agreements, which requires that certain transactions between us and collaborators be recorded in our consolidated statements of operations on either a gross basis or net basis, depending on the characteristics of the collaborative relationship, and requires enhanced disclosure of collaborative relationships. We evaluate our collaboration agreements for proper classification in our consolidated statements of operations based on the nature of the underlying activity. When we conclude that we have a customer relationship with one of our collaborators, we follow the guidance of ASC 606.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. These costs include the costs of manufacturing drug components and final drug product, the costs of clinical trials, costs of employees and associated overhead, and depreciation and amortization costs related to facilities and equipment. Research and development reimbursements are recorded by us as a reduction of research and development costs.
Share-Based Payments
We estimate the fair value of each stock option award at the grant date by using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value determined represents the cost for the award and is recognized over the vesting period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award. We account for forfeitures of stock options as they occur.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method to calculate deferred taxes. Deferred taxes are recognized based on the differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. We review deferred tax assets for a valuation allowance based upon whether it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will be fully realized. A valuation allowance, if necessary, is provided against deferred tax assets, based upon our assessment as to their realization.
We recognize tax when the positions meet a “more-likely-than-not” recognition threshold. There were no tax positions for which it is considered reasonably possible that the total amounts of unrecognized tax benefits will significantly increase or decrease within the next year. We recognize interest related to unrecognized tax benefits in interest expense and penalties in operating expenses.
Accounting Standards Recently Adopted	
In August 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, which, among other things, provides guidance on how to account for contracts on an entity’s own equity. This ASU simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity. Specifically, the ASU eliminated the need for us to assess whether a contract on our own equity (1) permits settlement in unregistered shares, (2) whether counterparty rights rank higher than shareholder’s rights, and (3) whether collateral is required. In addition, the ASU requires incremental disclosure related to contracts on our own equity and clarifies the treatment of certain financial instruments accounted for under this ASU on earnings per share. This ASU may be applied on a full retrospective of modified retrospective basis. This ASU is effective January 1, 2022 and interim periods presented, although early adoption of this ASU was permitted effective January 1, 2021. We early adopted this standard effective January 1, 2021 and the standard did not have a significant impact on our financial statements.
Accounting Standards Recently Issued
In May 2021, FASB issued ASU 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (topic 260), Debt - Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) - Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options, which provides guidance of a modification or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that remains equity classified after modification or exchange as (1) an adjustment to equity and, if so, the related earnings per share (EPS) effects, if any, or (2) an expense and, if so, the manner and pattern of recognition. The amendments in this ASU are effective January 1, 2022, including interim periods. Early adoption is permitted. We will apply the amendments prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after January 1, 2022. We will evaluate the impact of ASU 2017-09 on any future changes to the terms and conditions of its warrants.
In October 2021, FASB issued ASU 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805), Account for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers, which provides guidance on accounting for contract assets and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination in accordance ASC 606. To achieve this, an acquirer may assess how the acquiree applied ASC 606 to determine what to record for the acquired revenue contracts. Generally, this should result in an acquirer recognizing and measuring the acquired contract assets and contract liabilities consistent with how they were recognized and measured in the acquiree’s financial statements. The amendments of ASU 2021-08 are effective January 1, 2023, including interim periods. Early adoption is permitted, including adoption in an interim period. The Company will evaluate the impact of ASU 2021-08 on any future business combinations the Company may enter in the future.
In November 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-10, Government Assistance (Topic 832), Disclosures by Business Entities about Government Assistance, which provides guidance on disclosure requirements to entities other than not-for-profit entities about transaction with a government that are accounted for by applying a grant or contribution accounting model by analogy. ASU 2021-10 requires an entity to make annual disclosures related to (1) the nature of the transactions and the related accounting policy used to account for the government transactions, (2) quantification and disclosure of amounts related to the government transactions included in balance sheet and income statement financial statement line items, and (3) significant terms and conditions of the government transactions, including commitments and contingencies. The amendments of ASU 2021-10 are effective January 1, 2022, including interim periods. The adoption of ASU 2021-10 is not expected to have a significant impact on the Company’s financial statements.