Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Atomera Incorporated should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the accompanying notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report. Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K include forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. Although forward-looking statements in this Annual Report reflect the good faith judgment of our management, such statements can only be based on facts and factors currently known by us. Consequently, forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks, uncertainties, and changes in condition, significance, value and effect, including those risk factors set forth in this Annual Report. Such risks, uncertainties and changes in condition, significance, value and effect could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed herein and in ways not readily foreseeable. Readers are urged not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this Annual Report and are based on information currently and reasonably known to us. We undertake no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements in order to reflect any event or circumstance that may arise after the date of this Annual Report. Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made in this Annual Report, which attempt to advise interested parties of the risks and factors that may affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects.
Overview
We are engaged in the business of developing, commercializing and licensing proprietary processes and technologies for the $550+ billion semiconductor industry. Our lead technology, named Mears Silicon TechnologyTM, or MST®, is a thin film of reengineered silicon, typically 100 to 300 angstroms (or approximately 20 to 60 silicon atomic unit cells) thick. MST can be applied as a transistor channel enhancement to CMOS-type transistors, the most widely used transistor type in the semiconductor industry. MST is our proprietary and patent-protected performance enhancement technology that we believe addresses a number of key engineering challenges facing the semiconductor industry. We believe that by incorporating MST, transistors can be made smaller, with increased speed, reliability and power efficiency. In addition, since MST is an additive and low-cost technology, we believe it can be deployed on an industrial scale, with machines commonly used in semiconductor manufacturing. We believe that MST can be widely incorporated into the most common types of semiconductor products, including analog, logic, optical and memory integrated circuits.
We do not intend to design or manufacture integrated circuits directly. Instead, we develop and license technologies and processes that we believe offer the designers and manufacturers of integrated circuits a low-cost solution to the industry’s need for greater performance and lower power consumption. Our customers and partners include:
· foundries, which manufacture integrated circuits on behalf of fabless manufacturers;
· integrated device manufacturers, or IDMs, which are the fully integrated designers and manufacturers of integrated circuits;
· fabless semiconductor manufacturers, which are designers of integrated circuits that outsource the manufacture of their chips to foundries;
· original equipment manufacturers, or OEMs, that manufacture the epitaxial, or EPI, machines used to deposit semiconductor layers, such as the MST film, onto the silicon wafer; and
· electronic design automation companies, which make tools used throughout the industry to simulate performance of semiconductor products using different materials, design structures and process technologies.
Our commercialization strategy is to generate revenue through licensing arrangements whereby foundries, IDMs and fabless semiconductor manufacturers pay us a license fee for their right to use MST technology in the manufacture of silicon wafers as well as a royalty for each silicon wafer or device that incorporates our MST technology. To date we have generated revenue from (i) licensing agreements with two IDMs, one fabless manufacturer and one foundry, (ii) a joint development agreement, or JDA, with a leading semiconductor provider and (ii) engineering services provided to foundries, IDMs and fabless companies.
We were organized as a Delaware limited liability company under the name Nanovis LLC on November 26, 2001. On March 13, 2007, we converted to a Delaware corporation under the name Mears Technologies, Inc. On January 12, 2016, we changed our name to Atomera Incorporated.
On May 15, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of 2,024,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $5.00 per share, resulting in approximately $9.4 million of net proceeds to us after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering expenses.
Between September 2020 and January 2021,we conducted an at-the-market offering of our common shares through Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, as agent, pursuant to which we sold 2,221,575 shares at an average price per share of approximately $11.25, resulting in approximately $24.2 million of net proceeds to us after deducting commissions and other offering expenses.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues. To date, we have only generated limited revenue from customer engagements for integration engineering services, integration license agreements and a manufacturing license granted under a JDA. In the future, we expect to collect increased fees from license agreements and JDAs as well as royalties from customer sales of products that incorporate our MST technology, subject to our ability to enter into manufacturing and distribution license agreements with our current and future licensees. Our integration services consist of depositing our MST film on semiconductor wafers, delivering such wafers to customers to finalize building devices, and performing tests for customers evaluating MST. The integration license agreements we have entered into to date grant the licensees the right to build products that integrate our MST technology deposited by us onto their semiconductor wafers, but the agreements do not grant the licensees the rights to manufacture on their site or to sell products incorporating MST. Our JDA included the grant of a manufacturing license to our customer and we were paid for such license upon delivery of our IP transfer package which enabled our customer to install MST in a tool in their facility and to use it to manufacture wafers for internal use. For revenue recognition purposes, we have determined that the grant of rights in integration licenses is not distinct from the delivery of integration services, and therefore revenue from both integration licenses and integration services is recognized as the services are provided to the customer. In general, this is proportionate to the delivery of MST processed wafers to the customer, but if the agreements do not specify a time and quantity of wafer delivery, we will record revenue over the period of time of which we anticipate delivering an estimated quantity of wafers. We have also determined that the grant of our manufacturing license under the JDA confers a right to use our technology and accordingly revenue was recognized at the point in time when we delivered our IP transfer package.
Revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $400,000 and $62,000, respectively. Our revenue in 2021 consisted of a manufacturing license fee pursuant to our JDA. Our 2020 revenue was generated from integration services engagements and integration license agreements.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue consists of costs of materials, as well as direct compensation and expenses incurred to provide integration engineering services. Cost of revenue was approximately $0 and $13,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We anticipate that our cost of revenue will vary substantially depending on the mix of license and engineering services revenues we receive and the nature of products and/or services delivered in each customer engagement.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses consist of research and development, general and administrative, and selling and marketing expenses. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 our operating expenses totaled approximately $15.9 million and $15.0 million, respectively.
Research and development expense. To date, our operations have focused on the research, development, patent prosecution, and commercialization of our MST technology and related technologies such as MSTcad. Our research and development costs primarily consist of payroll and benefit costs for our engineering staff and costs of outsourced fabrication (including epi tool leases) and metrology of semiconductor wafers incorporating our MST technology.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred approximately $8.8 million and $8.4 million, respectively, of research and development expense, an increase of approximately $355,000, or 4%. The increase in research and development expense was primarily due to an increase of approximately $632,000 in payroll related costs due to headcount growth. These increases in expenses were partly offset by an approximately $240,000 decrease in stock-based compensation expense.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and benefit costs for administrative personnel, office-related costs and professional fees. General and administrative costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately $6.2 million and $5.6 million, respectively, representing an increase of approximately $540,000, or 10%. The increase in costs was primarily due to increases of approximately $316,000 in insurance costs, approximately $153,000 in stock-based compensation and approximately $137,000 in payroll related expenses, offset in part by a decrease of approximately $122,000 in professional fees.
Selling and marketing expense. Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of salary and benefits for our sales and marketing personnel and business development consulting services. Selling and marketing expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately $986,000 and $921,000, respectively, representing an increase of approximately $65,000, or 7%. The increase in costs is primarily related to increased spending in new marketing initiatives.
Interest income. Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $9,000 and $42,000, respectively. Interest income for each period related to interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents. The decrease in interest income was due to declining interest rates during 2020 and 2021.
Interest expense. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $128,000 and related to the new tool financing lease entered into in August 2021. There was no interest expense recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Provision for income taxes. The provision for income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $66,000 and $0, respectively. Our provision is for income taxes due to a foreign country arising from withholding taxes imposed on payments received for revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $28.7 million and working capital of approximately $26.3 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $15.7 million and used approximately $12.4 million of cash and cash equivalents in operations. Since inception, we have incurred recurring operating losses.
On May 15, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of 2,024,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $5.00 per share, resulting in approximately $9.4 million of net proceeds to us after deducting underwriting commission and other offering expenses.
Between September 2020 and January 2021, we conducted an at-the-market offering of our common shares through Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, as agent, pursuant to which we sold 2,221,575 shares at an average price per share of approximately $11.25, resulting in approximately $24.2 million of net proceeds to us after deducting commissions and other offering expenses.
We believe that our available working capital is sufficient to fund our presently forecasted working capital requirements for, at least, the next 12 months following the date of the filing of this report. However, our future capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to successfully commercialize our MST technology, competing technological and market developments, and the need to enter into collaborations with other companies or acquire technologies to enhance or complement our current offerings. If we are not able to generate sufficient revenue from license fees and royalties in a timeframe that satisfies our cash needs, we will need to raise more capital. In the event we require additional capital, we will endeavor to acquire additional funds through various financing sources, including follow-on equity offerings, debt financing and joint ventures with industry partners. In addition, we will consider alternatives to our current business plan that may enable to us to achieve revenue-producing operations and meaningful commercial success with a smaller amount of capital. If we are unable to secure additional capital, we may be required to curtail our research and development initiatives and take additional measures to reduce costs in order to conserve its cash.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities:
Net cash used in operating activities of approximately $12.4 million for year ended December 31, 2021 resulted primarily from our net loss of approximately $15.7 million adjusted by approximately $3.0 million of stock-based compensation expense.
Net cash used in operating activities of approximately $12.1 million for year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from our net loss of approximately $14.9 million adjusted by approximately $3.0 million of stock-based compensation expense.
Net cash used by investing activities of approximately $109,000 and approximately $131,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, consisted of the purchase of computers, lab tools and leasehold improvements for the remodeled Los
Gatos office space and our new Tempe office space.
Net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the exercise of approximately 571,000 stock options and net proceeds from our at-the-market offering in January 2021. These amounts were offset in part by approximately $470,000 in principal payments on our financing lease.
Net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $35.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the net proceeds from our underwritten public offering of common stock in May 2020 and our at-the-market offering beginning in September 2020 and continuing through the end of 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with those accounting principles requires us to use judgement in making estimates and assumptions based on the relevant information available at the end of each period. These estimates and assumptions have a significant effect on reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities because they result primarily from the need to make estimates and assumptions on matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results could differ from our estimates.
Revenue
We generate revenue from integration engineering services, which we deliver either pursuant to integration license agreements or delivery of engineering services and from the grant of manufacturing licenses to customers to use its technology in the manufacture of semiconductor wafers and/or devices for the customer’s internal use. Revenue is recognized based on the following steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer, (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determination of the transaction price, (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations of the contract, and (v) recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation. Integration services generally consist of depositing our proprietary technology onto the customer’s semiconductor wafers and delivering such wafers back to the customer. Revenue from integration services is recognized as the performance obligations are satisfied, which is upon transfer of control of the wafers to the customer (generally upon shipment). Revenue from manufacturing licenses is recognized as the performance obligations are satisfied, which is upon delivery of the Company’s MST recipe to the customer.
For recognizing integration service revenue from integration license agreements, we assess (i) whether the license grant is distinct from or combined with the transfer of goods or services and (ii) whether the license is a right to access intellectual property or a right to use the intellectual property. For licenses that are not distinct, but combined with other goods or services, the revenue is recognized at a point in time or over time as the obligations to perform the combined services and/or deliver the combined goods are satisfied. Integration license agreements contain a technology grant as well as a performance obligation to deliver wafers with our technology deposited on them. We have determined the grant of rights in these integration license agreements is not distinct from the integration service. Accordingly, revenue from integration license agreements is recognized as the service is provided to the customer. For manufacturing licenses, revenue is recognized at the point in time when we deliver our MST recipe as the license to manufacture using MST technology is a right to use the Company’s technology and not a right to access the technology over time.
Leases
We account for leases in accordance with the authoritative guidance. On January 1, 2019, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). We determine if a contract contains a lease in whole or in part at the inception of the contract. Right-of-use (“ROU”) assets represent its right to use an underlying asset for the lease term while lease liabilities represent its obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. All leases greater than 12 months result in the recognition of a ROU asset and a liability at the lease commencement date based on the present value of the lease payments over the lease term. Lease expenses for operating leases is recognized on a straight-line-basis over the lease term. Lease expenses for financing leases is amortization of the he ROU assets over the life of the lease and interest expense is recognized on the liability.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into off-balance sheet arrangements or issued guarantees to third parties.