ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Dollar and share amounts referenced in this Item 7 are in thousands, except per share amounts.)
Changes from Prior Periodic Reports
In November 2020, the SEC issued Release No. 33-10890, "Management's Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data and Supplementary Financial Information" which became fully effective on August 9, 2021. This release was adopted to modernize, simplify and enhance certain financial disclosure requirements in Regulation S-K. Specifically, the SEC eliminated the requirement for selected financial data, only requiring quarterly disclosure when there are retrospective changes affecting comprehensive income, and amending Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A") to, among other things, eliminate the requirement of the contractual obligations table. Information on our contractual obligations is still disclosed in the narrative within Item 7 of Part II of this report.
These changes are required for any annual period subsequent to the effective date of August 9, 2021. As such, we have adopted these changes in this report.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto contained in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” to provide an understanding of our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those set forth under Item 1A “Risk Factors,” the cautionary statement regarding forward-looking statements at the beginning of Part I and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Overview
We are a leading innovator in treatments for atrial fibrillation (Afib), left atrial appendage (LAA) management and post-operative pain. We believe that we are currently the market leader in the surgical treatment of Afib. Our Isolator® Synergy™ Ablation System is approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of persistent and long-standing persistent Afib concomitant to other open-heart surgical procedures. The EPi-Sense® System is approved by FDA to treat patients with long-standing persistent Afib. All of our other ablation devices are cleared for sale in the United States under FDA 510(k) clearances, including our other radio frequency (RF) and cryoablation products, which are indicated for the ablation of cardiac tissue and/or the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. In addition, certain of our cryoablation probes are cleared for managing pain by temporarily ablating peripheral nerves, or Cryo Nerve Block therapy. Further, certain cryoablation probes are approved for the ablation of the intercostal nerves to temporarily block pain in adolescents aged 12 or older. Our AtriClip® LAA Exclusion System products are 510(k)-cleared with an indication for the exclusion of the LAA, performed under direct visualization and in conjunction with other cardiac surgical procedures. Direct visualization, in this context, requires that the surgeon is able to see the heart directly, with or without assistance from a camera, endoscope or other appropriate viewing technologies. In July 2021, we received 510(k) clearance for the new ENCOMPASS® clamp to ablate cardiac tissue during surgery. The LARIAT® system is cleared under the 510(k) process for soft tissue ligation. Several of our products are currently being studied to expand labeling claims or to support indications specifically for the treatment of Afib. Our Isolator Synergy clamps, Isolator Synergy pens, Coolrail® linear pen, cryoablation devices, cryoSPHERE® probe, certain products of the AtriClip LAA Exclusion System, COBRA Fusion® Ablation System, the EPi-Sense® system and LARIAT Suture Delivery Device bear the CE mark and may be commercially distributed throughout the member states of the European Union and other countries that comply with or mirror the Medical Device Directive. Our Isolator Synergy clamps, Isolator Synergy pens, Coolrail linear pen, cryoablation devices and certain products of the AtriClip LAA Exclusion System are available in select Asia-Pacific countries. We anticipate that substantially all of our revenue for the foreseeable future will relate to products we currently sell or are in the process of developing.
We sell our products to medical centers through our direct sales force in the United States and in certain international markets, such as Germany, France, the United Kingdom and the Benelux region. We also sell our products to distributors who in turn sell our products to medical centers in other international markets. Our business is primarily transacted in U.S.
Dollars with the exception of transactions with our European and United Kingdom customers, which are transacted primarily in the Euro or the British Pound.
Throughout 2020 and periods of 2021, we experienced a significant decrease in demand for our products as non-emergent procedures were being indeterminately deferred in order to preserve resources for COVID-19 patients and caregivers. While we saw many regions stabilize during 2021 with improvements in procedure volumes, there continues to be variability throughout our markets and uncertainty as variants of the virus emerge. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported annual revenues of $274,329, an increase of 32.8% when compared to our prior year. We can make no assurance regarding any future level of demand for our products, and COVID-19 may adversely impact our results of operations and financial condition.
We are continuing to serve our customers while taking every precaution to provide a safe work environment for our employees and customers. Field-based sales and clinical employees continue to support cases, using technology to engage with customers in virtual settings when physical access is restricted. We are maintaining manufacturing and fulfillment operations to continue providing products to our customers. We continue to modify our remote working protocols and evaluate hybrid work models for our office-based employees, and we will take further actions in the best interests of our employees or as required by law.
Despite the challenging environment resulting from the pandemic, we continue to build on our strategic initiatives of product innovation, investing in clinical science and providing superior training and education.
PRODUCT INNOVATION. In July 2021, we received 510(k) clearance for the new ENCOMPASS® clamp, and we have initiated a limited product launch. The ENCOMPASS clamp marks innovation in our core open ablation market, and is expected to drive deeper penetration of cardiac surgery procedures. During 2021, our cryoSPHERE probe for Cryo Nerve Block was approved for CE marking.
CLINICAL SCIENCE. We continue to invest in studies to expand labeling claims, support indications for the treatment of Afib and other arrhythmias and stroke, and gather clinical data regarding our products.
In January 2021, we announced 510(k) clearance of additional labeling claims for Cryo Nerve Block therapy to include the treatment of adolescent patients (12-21 years of age).
In April 2021, we received PMA approval of the EPi-Sense System for treatment of symptomatic, drug-refractory, long-standing persistent atrial fibrillation, when augmented with an endocardial ablation catheter. We believe the Convergent procedure, or Hybrid AF therapy, provides the only compelling treatment option for a large and vastly underpenetrated patient population. The CONVERGE™ trial demonstrated superiority in the hybrid therapy arm compared to endocardial catheter ablation alone. In patients diagnosed with long-standing persistent Afib, the hybrid therapy arm showed a 29% absolute difference in efficacy at 12 months (78% relative improvement) and an absolute difference of 35% at 18 months (110% relative improvement). There was also a 33% absolute difference in Afib burden reduction in favor of the Hybrid AF therapy at 12 months, which increased to 37% at 18 months.
In July 2021, we were informed that data from the aMAZE clinical trial did not achieve statistical superiority. Specifically, while the trial met the safety endpoint, the trial did not meet the primary efficacy endpoint. As a result, we identified indicators of impairment for the related IPR&D asset that represented an estimate of the fair value of the PMA that could have resulted from the aMAZE clinical trial and recorded an impairment charge of $82,300. Additionally, the contingent consideration arrangements arising from the SentreHEART acquisition include success-based milestone payments. We assessed the projected probability of payment during the contractual achievement periods to be remote, resulting in no remaining fair value. The $184,800 change in fair value of the contingent consideration was credited to operating expenses in 2021.
TRAINING. Our professional education and marketing teams have adapted to the pandemic by conducting online and mobile trainings for physicians and our sales team. These adaptations expanded our training methods and ensured invaluable access to continuing education and awareness of our products and related procedures. The recent FDA approval of the EPi-Sense System has enabled us to educate and train physicians on the benefits of Hybrid AF therapy in treating long-standing persistent Afib patients. The first of several training courses were offered beginning in June 2021.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations expressed as dollar amounts and as percentages of total revenue:
Revenue. Total revenue increased 32.8% (32.4% on a constant currency basis) reflecting a recovery of cardiac surgery procedure volumes during 2021 from the significant impact of COVID-19 during 2020 within each franchise and across our key markets globally, as well as further adoption of our products. Revenue from customers in the United States increased $59,887, or 35.4%, across all product categories. Open ablation sales increased $18,496, or 24.5%, primarily as a result of increased adoption of our Cryo Nerve Block therapy as well as volume increases in legacy products. Minimally invasive (MIS) ablation sales increased $13,733, or 53.5%, reflecting the rebound in elective procedures in 2021, as well as Hybrid AF therapy procedure growth from the PMA approval of the EPi-Sense System in late April 2021. Appendage management sales increased $27,587, or 41.2% due to volume growth in the AtriClip Flex·V® and AtriClip Pro·V® devices and other AtriClip products. International revenue increased $7,911, or 21.2% (19.1% on a constant currency basis) throughout our major European and Asia markets. International revenues increased from both ablation and appendage management product sales due to a lessening impact of COVID-19 in 2021.
Revenue reported on a constant currency basis is a non-GAAP measure and is calculated by applying previous period foreign currency (Euro) exchange rates, which are determined by the average daily Euro to Dollar exchange rate, to each of the comparable periods. Revenue is analyzed on a constant currency basis to better measure the comparability of results between periods. Because changes in foreign currency exchange rates have a non-operating impact on revenue, we believe that evaluating growth in revenue on a constant currency basis provides an additional and meaningful assessment of revenue to both management and investors.
Cost of revenue and gross margin. Cost of revenue increased $11,247 primarily reflecting revenue growth. The gross margin improvement of 270 basis points was driven by our return to normal production activity in 2021, leverage from higher revenue and favorable geographic and product mix, offset by inventory management charges related to the LARIAT system.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses increased $5,436, or 12.6%. Personnel costs, including variable compensation, travel and share-based compensation, increased $6,289 as a result of additional headcount as we continued to expand our product development, regulatory and clinical teams throughout 2021. Commencement of amortization of the technology asset related to the PMA resulting from the CONVERGE IDE clinical
trial drove increased depreciation and amortization expenses of $1,221. Offsetting these increases were decreases in product development project costs of $997 and clinical trial costs of $806.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $53,820, or 35.7%. Personnel costs increased $47,161 due to an increase in headcount, variable and share-based compensation, as well as a return in travel expenses. During 2021, quarantine and travel restrictions lifted, allowing for more live events. This, along with additional training activities upon the CONVERGE PMA approval in April 2021, drove an increase in training expenses of $5,754, while tradeshow and marketing activities increased $1,322 as compared to the prior year. Other expense drivers include a $1,769 rise in operating costs, including organization meetings, facility expenses and dues and subscriptions; a $1,776 increase in professional services fees, corporate costs and consulting fees; $1,717 of additional legal expenses and a $958 increase in product samples and demos expense. These increases were offset in part by a decrease of $6,000 recorded in the prior year for the accrual of the value of the legal settlement with the former nContact stockholders. See Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the nContact legal settlement.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration. The credit to operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects a change in the forecasted timing and probability of achievement of the regulatory and reimbursement milestones related to the aMAZE clinical trial. See Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Impairment of intangible assets. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an impairment charge for the IPR&D asset associated with the aMAZE PMA. See Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Other income and expense. Other income and expense consists primarily of net interest expense and foreign currency transaction gains and losses. Net interest expense was $4,452 for 2021 and $3,784 for 2020. Interest expense relates to our term loan and finance lease obligations, as well as the amortization of financing costs. Interest income reflects returns on our investments, including gains and losses on investments sold during the period. The increase in net interest expense was driven by lower interest income from lower investment yields and a lower investment balance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $223,428 and borrowing capacity of approximately $28,750. All cash equivalents and investments and most of our operating cash are held in United States financial institutions. A minor portion of our cash is held in foreign banks to support our international operations. We had net working capital of $139,631 and an accumulated deficit of $280,153 as of December 31, 2021.
Uses of liquidity and capital resources. Our executive officers and Board of Directors review our funding sources and future capital requirements in connection with our annual operating plan. Our future capital requirements depend on a number of factors, including market acceptance of our current and future products; costs to develop and support our products, including professional training; future expenses to expand and support our sales and marketing efforts; operating and filing costs relating to changes in regulatory policies or laws; costs for clinical trials and to secure regulatory approval for new products; business integration costs; costs to prosecute, defend and enforce our intellectual property rights; and possible acquisitions and joint ventures. We continue to evaluate additional measures to maintain financial flexibility, and we will continue to closely monitor our liquidity and capital resources through the recovery from, and any further disruptions caused by COVID-19. Our principal cash requirements include costs of operations, capital expenditures, debt service costs and other contractual obligations.
Credit facility. Our Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), as amended, (Loan Agreement), provides for a $60,000 term loan, with an option to make available an additional $30,000 in term loan borrowings, and a $30,000 revolving line of credit. The Loan Agreement has a five year term, beginning November 1, 2021 and expires November 2026. The term loan accrues interest at the Prime Rate plus 1.25% and is subject to an additional 3.00% fee on the term loan principal amount at maturity. Principal payments are to be made ratably commencing 24 months after the inception of the loan through the loan's maturity date. At the option of the Company, the commencement of term loan principal payments may be extended an additional twelve months. As of December 31, 2021, our outstanding debt was $60,000 and is classified as noncurrent. We had unused borrowing capacity of approximately $28,750 under our revolving credit facility. For additional information on the terms and conditions, as well as applicable interest and fee payments, see Note 9 - Indebtedness.
Our corporate headquarters lease agreement requires a $1,250 letter of credit which renews annually and remains outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Capital Expenditures. As we continue to invest in our growth and our ability to better serve our customers, we recently purchased a building for additional manufacturing capacity. We have committed to funding the renovation and estimate the remaining costs of the construction project to be approximately $3,800 over the next twelve months. We incur other capital expenditures on an ongoing basis.
Other Contractual Obligations. Our future obligations include both current and long-term obligations. We have operating and finance leases for our corporate offices, manufacturing and warehouse facilities, as well as computer equipment. Our finance leases consist of principal and interest payments related to our Mason, Ohio headquarters and computer equipment. As of December 31, 2021, we have current finance lease obligations of $895 and long-term obligations of $10,082. Our operating leases for office and warehouse space includes current obligations of $861 and long-term obligations of $4,068. For additional information, see Note 10 - Leases. We additionally maintain royalty agreements with terms that require royalty payments of 3% to 5% of specified product sales. See Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies for information about the terms. We have contractual obligations for contingent consideration payments related to the SentreHEART acquisition. Subject to the terms and conditions of the SentreHEART merger agreement, such contingent consideration would be paid in AtriCure common stock and cash, up to a specified maximum number of shares. The SentreHEART milestones expire on December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2026. As of December 31, 2021, the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration is $0. See Note 3 - Fair Value.
Sources of liquidity. We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and investments, along with the cash we expect to generate or use for operations or access via our term loan and revolving line of credit, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next twelve months. We have on file with the SEC a shelf registration statement which allows us to sell any combination of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, warrants, depository shares and units in one or more offerings should we choose to do so in the future. We expect to maintain the effectiveness of the shelf registration statement for the foreseeable future.
If our sources of cash are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain a revised or additional credit facility. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities could result in dilution to our stockholders. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of debt securities, these securities would have rights senior to those associated with our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Finally, our term loan agreement and revolving line of credit require compliance with certain financial and other covenants. If we are unable to maintain these financing arrangements, we may be required to reduce the scope of our planned research and development, clinical activities and selling, training, education and marketing efforts.
Historical Cash Flow Activity. The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flow activities:
Cash flows used in operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities decreased $6,089 in 2021 as compared to 2020, largely reflecting recovery from the impact of COVID-19. While customer receivables increased from higher sales volumes, our investment in inventories increased from 2020 and our accounts payable balance grew as a result of increasing operating costs. Finally, based on higher variable compensation and the timing of payment, accrued liabilities increased over 2020.
Cash flows provided by investing activities. Net cash provided by investing activities increased by $179,702 in 2021 as compared to 2020, reflecting a $184,996 increase in net sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities, offset by an increase of $4,494 for the investment in property and equipment to support our new product introductions and construction costs for the renovation of a recently purchased building to expand our manufacturing capabilities.
Cash flows used in financing activities. Net cash from financing activities decreased by $197,034 in 2021 as compared to 2020, driven primarily by $188,958 in net proceeds generated from the May 2020 public stock offering. Net cash used in equity compensation plan activity increased $6,791 primarily due to the increase in shares repurchased for payment of taxes on stock awards and decrease in proceeds from stock option exercises. The remaining increase in cash used in financing activities was a result of an increase in payment of debt fees.
Inflation
Inflation has not had a significant impact on our historical operations, and we do not expect it to have a significant impact on our results of operations or financial condition in the foreseeable future. We have monitored and will continue to monitor the components of cost of revenue and operating expenses for the potential impact of inflation.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. On a periodic basis, we evaluate our estimates, using authoritative pronouncements, historical experience and other assumptions as the basis for making estimates. We have described our significant accounting policies in Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
We believe the following critical accounting policies involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and judgments that are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. We base our judgments and estimates on historical experience, current conditions and other reasonable factors. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition-Revenue is generated primarily from the sale of medical devices. We recognize revenue in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those devices when control of promised devices is transferred to customers. We account for revenue in accordance with FASB ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”. Significant judgments and estimates involved in the Company’s recognition of revenue include the estimation of a provision for returns. We estimate the provision for sales returns and allowances using the expected value method based on historical experience and other factors that we believe could impact our expected returns, including defective or damaged products and invoice adjustments. In the normal course of business, we generally do not accept product returns unless a product is defective as manufactured, and we do not provide customers with the right to a refund.
Inventories-Our inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value based on the first-in, first-out cost method (FIFO) and consist of raw materials, work in process and finished goods. Our industry is characterized by rapid product development and frequent new product introductions. Uncertain timing of product approvals, variability in product launch strategies and variation in product use all impact inventory reserves for excess, obsolete and expired products. An increase to inventory reserves results in a corresponding increase in cost of revenue. Inventories are written off against the reserve when they are physically disposed.
IPR&D Intangible Asset-In Process Research and Development (IPR&D) represents the value of acquired technology which has not yet reached technological feasibility. The primary basis for determining the technological feasibility is obtaining specific regulatory approvals. IPR&D is accounted for as an indefinite-lived intangible asset until completion or abandonment of the IPR&D project. Upon completion of the development project, the IPR&D will be converted to a technology asset and amortized over its estimated useful life. In July 2021, we were informed that data from the aMAZE clinical trial did not achieve statistical superiority. As a result, we identified impairment indicators for the IPR&D asset that represented an estimate of the fair value of the PMA that could result from the aMAZE clinical trial and recorded an impairment charge of $82,300.
Share-Based Employee Compensation-We estimate the fair value of performance share awards with a performance condition based on the closing stock price on the date of grant assuming the performance goal will be achieved. Such performance share awards have specified performance targets based on the compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of our revenue over a three-year performance period. With respect to these performance share awards, the number of shares that vest and are issued to the recipient is based upon revenue performance over the performance period. We may adjust the expense over the performance period based on changes to estimates of performance target achievement. If such goals are not met or service is not rendered for the requisite service period, no compensation cost is recognized, and any recognized compensation cost from prior periods will be reversed.
Contingent Consideration-Contingent consideration arrangements obligate the Company to pay former shareholders of acquired companies certain amounts if specified future events occur or conditions are met, such as the achievement of certain regulatory or reimbursement milestones. We measure such liabilities using unobservable inputs by applying the probability-weighted scenario method. Various key assumptions, such as the probability and timing of achievement of the agreed milestones, are used in the determination of fair value of contingent consideration arrangements
and are not observable in the market. Subsequent revisions to key assumptions, which impact the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities, are reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Income Taxes-Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred income tax assets and liabilities from changes in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date.
Our estimate of the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets requires us to make significant estimates and judgments about our future operating results. Deferred income tax assets are reduced by valuation allowances if, based on the consideration of all available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized. Significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. We evaluate deferred income tax assets on an annual basis to determine if valuation allowances are required by considering all available evidence. Deferred income tax assets are realized by having sufficient future taxable income to allow the related tax benefits to reduce taxes otherwise payable. The sources of taxable income that may be available to realize the benefit of deferred tax assets are future taxable income, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in prior carryback years and tax planning strategies that are both prudent and feasible. In evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, the existence of cumulative losses in recent years is significant objectively verifiable negative evidence that must be overcome by objectively-verifiable positive evidence to avoid the need for a valuation allowance. Our valuation allowance offsets substantially all net deferred income tax assets as it is more-likely-than-not that the benefit of such deferred income tax assets will not be recognized in future periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.