ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
We develop and manufacture products primarily for medical applications. We market components to other equipment manufacturers for incorporation in their products and sell finished devices to physicians, hospitals, clinics, and other treatment centers. Our medical products primarily serve the fluid delivery, cardiovascular, and ophthalmic markets. Our other medical and non-medical products include valves and inflation devices used in marine and aviation safety products. In 2021, approximately 41 percent of our sales were outside the United States.
Our products are used in a wide variety of applications by numerous customers. We encounter competition in all of our markets and compete primarily on the basis of product quality, price, engineering, customer service, and delivery time.
Our business strategy is to provide hospitals, physicians, and other healthcare providers with the tools they need to improve the lives of the patients they serve. To do so, we provide a broad selection of products in the areas of our expertise. We have diverse product lines serving primarily the fluid delivery, cardiovascular, and ophthalmic markets, and this diversity has served us well as we encounter changing market conditions. R&D efforts are focused on improving current products and developing highly-engineered products that meet customer needs and serve niche markets with meaningful sales potential. Proposed new products may be subject to regulatory clearance or approval prior to commercialization and the time period for introducing a new product to the marketplace can be unpredictable. We also focus on controlling costs by investing in modern manufacturing technologies and controlling purchasing processes. We have been successful in consistently generating cash from operations and have used that cash to reduce or eliminate indebtedness, fund capital expenditures, make investments, repurchase stock, and pay dividends.
Our strategic objective is to further enhance our position in our served markets by:
·
Focusing on customer needs;
·
Expanding existing product lines and developing new products;
·
Maintaining a culture of controlling cost; and
·
Preserving and fostering a collaborative, entrepreneurial management structure.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported revenues of $165.0 million, operating income of $36.0 million and net income of $33.1 million.
Results of Operations
Our net income was $33.1 million, or $18.22 per basic and $18.18 per diluted share, in 2021 compared to $32.1 million, or $17.49 per basic and $17.44 per diluted share in 2020. Revenues were $165.0 million in 2021 compared with $147.6 million in 2020.
Annual revenues by product line were as follows (in thousands):
Consolidated revenues of $165.0 million in 2021 were 12 percent higher than revenues in 2020. The increase was primarily related to higher volumes in 2021. All major product lines saw increases in revenue compared to 2020.
Our cost of goods sold was $95.6 million in 2021 compared with $81.4 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 is primarily due to higher sales volumes, but was also impacted by increased costs for labor and materials during 2021.
Gross profit in 2021 was $69.4 million compared with $66.2 million in 2020. Our gross profit was 42 percent of revenues in 2021 compared with 45 percent of revenues in 2020. The decrease in gross profit percentage in 2021 from 2020 was primarily related to an unfavorable product sales mix in 2021. Also impacting the gross profit percentage in 2021 was the increased cost of labor and materials over 2020.
Operating expenses were $33.3 million in 2021 and $30.5 million in 2020. R&D expenses were about even with 2020. R&D expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related expenses of our R&D personnel as well as costs associated with regulatory matters. In 2021, selling expenses increased $541 thousand compared with 2020 primarily as a result of increased travel due to restrictions being lifted as well as increased commissions as a result of increased product sales volume. Selling expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, and other related expenses for sales and marketing personnel, marketing, advertising, and promotional expenses. General and Administrative, or G&A, expenses increased $2.267 million in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily as a result of higher computer hardware and software costs and increased salaries. G&A expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related expenses of administrative, executive and financial personnel, and outside professional fees.
Our operating income for 2021 was $36.0 million compared with $35.7 million in 2020. Operating income was 22 percent of revenues in 2021 and 24 percent of revenues in 2020.
Interest and Dividend income for 2021 was $0.8 million compared with $1.4 million in 2020. The decline in interest and dividend income was largely due to lower interest rates in the 2021 period as compared to the 2020 period.
Other Investment Income was $1.5 million in 2021 compared to $1.4 million in 2020. The improvement from 2020 to 2021 was primarily related to higher unrealized gains on equity investments as a result of an increase in the market value of the investments.
Income tax expense in 2021 totaled $5.4 million compared with $6.4 million in 2020. The effective tax rates were 14.0 percent in 2021 and 16.5 percent in 2020. The lower effective tax rate in 2021 was primarily related to increased tax benefits booked for sales outside the United States under the FDII deduction. We expect our effective tax rate for 2022 to be approximately 17 percent.
For information on the Company’s results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 and a comparison of that information to that for the year ended December 31, 2020, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on March 1, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had a $75.0 million revolving credit facility with a money-center bank pursuant to which the lender is obligated to make advances until February 28, 2024. The credit facility is secured by substantially all of our inventories, equipment, and accounts receivable. The interest rate on borrowings under this credit facility, if drawn, is indexed to the 30-day, 60-day, or 90-day LIBOR, as selected by us. We had no outstanding borrowings under the credit facility at December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020. Our ability to borrow funds under the credit facility is contingent upon meeting certain covenants in the loan agreement, the most restrictive of which is the ratio of total debt to earnings before interest, income tax, depreciation, and amortization. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.
At December 31, 2021, we had a total of $80.7 million in cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and long-term investments, a decrease of $7.2 million from December 31, 2020. The principal contributor to this decrease was purchases of our stock in the open market totaling $17.0 million in 2021.
Cash flows provided by operations of $38.8 million in 2021 were primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash expenses. At December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $123.2 million, including $32.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and $29.1 million in short-term investments. The $24.5 million increase in working capital during 2021 was primarily related to an increase in cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. Working capital items consisted primarily of cash, accounts receivable, short-term investments, inventories, and other current assets minus accounts payable and other current liabilities.
Capital expenditures for property, plant, and equipment totaled $15.8 million in 2021, compared with $21.9 million in 2020. These expenditures were primarily for machinery and equipment. Purchases of investments totaled $23.2 million in 2021, compared to $45.8 million in 2020. Proceeds from maturities of investments totaled $40.2 million in 2021 and $35.9 million in 2020. We expect 2022 capital expenditures for machinery and equipment to be consistent with total average capital expenditure amounts expended during each of the past two years. Additionally, in late 2021, we began the expansion of one of our facilities. We expect this to cost $25.0 million and complete in the first half of 2023.
We paid cash dividends totaling $13.4 million in 2021 and $12.1 in 2020. We expect to fund future dividend payments with cash flows from operations. We purchased $17.0 million of treasury stock during 2021 and $18.8 million during 2020.
Our current contractual obligations are normal for our line of business and mainly consist of purchase orders for raw materials. These obligations will be funded through funds generated through operations and require no additional funding. We have initiated the expansion of one of our facilities which will require funds in an amount estimated at $25.0 million. We believe this expansion is required to support our anticipated increases in capacity in the coming years. We believe our cash, cash equivalents, short-term and long-term investments, cash flows from operations, and available borrowings of up to $75.0 million under our credit facility will be sufficient to fund our cash requirements for at least the foreseeable future. We believe our strong financial position would allow us to access equity or debt financing should that be necessary.
COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in travel and other restrictions to reduce the spread of the disease, including governmental orders across the globe, which, among other things, directed individuals to shelter at their places of residence, directed businesses and governmental agencies to cease non-essential operations at physical locations, prohibited certain non-essential gatherings, maintain social distancing, and order cessation of non-essential travel. As a result of these developments, we implemented work-from-home policies for certain of our employees. In addition, many of our customers implemented and are continuing similar measures in their facilities, which have delayed, and may continue to delay, the timing of some orders and deliveries. The effects of shelter-in-place and social distancing orders, government-imposed quarantines, and work-from-home policies may continue negatively impacting productivity and supply chains, disrupting our business, and delaying our development timelines beyond the delays we have already experienced and disclosed, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the restrictions and other limitations on our ability to conduct our business in the ordinary course. Such restrictions and limitations may also continue negatively impacting our access to regulatory authorities (which are affected, among other things, by applicable travel restrictions and may be delayed in responding to inquiries, reviewing filings, and conducting inspections); our ability to perform regularly scheduled quality checks and maintenance; and our ability to obtain services from third-party specialty vendors and other providers or to access their expertise as fully and timely as needed. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted and may continue resulting in the loss of some of our key personnel, either temporarily or permanently. In addition, our sales and marketing efforts have been negatively impacted and may be further negatively impacted by postponement or cancellation of face-to-face meetings and restrictions on access by non-essential personnel to hospitals or clinics to the extent such measures slow down adoption or further commercialization of our products. The demand for our products has been and may continue to be adversely impacted by the restrictions and limitations adopted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly to the extent they affect patients' ability or willingness to undergo elective surgeries. As a result, some of our inventory may become obsolete and may need to be written off, impacting our operating results. These and similar, and perhaps more severe, disruptions in our operations may materially adversely impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
The global COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve as progress in fighting the pandemic is being made in the United States and some other countries with greater percentages of the populations being vaccinated. However, the ultimate impact of the pandemic remains highly uncertain and subject to change. Accordingly, we do not yet know the full impact that the pandemic will have on our business, healthcare systems, or the global economy.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Impact of Inflation
We experience the effects of inflation primarily in the prices we pay for labor, materials and services. Over the last three years, we have experienced the effects of inflation in these costs, and in the last 12 months have seen this increase significantly. At times, we have been able to offset a portion of these increased costs by increasing the sales prices of our products. However, competitive pressures have not allowed for full recovery of these cost increases.
New Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time new accounting pronouncements applicable to us are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), or other standards setting bodies, which we will adopt as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, we believe the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. In the preparation of these financial statements, we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We believe the following discussion addresses our most significant accounting policies and estimates, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require management's most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
We are required to estimate our provision for income taxes and uncertain tax positions in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating our actual current tax exposure, including assessing the risks associated with tax audits, together with assessing temporary differences resulting from the different treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included within the balance sheet. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe that recovery is more likely than not, do not establish a valuation allowance. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates, the provision for income taxes could be materially impacted.
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, none of our significant accounting estimates required material adjustments.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risks
Foreign Exchange Risk
We are not exposed to material fluctuations in currency exchange rates that would result in realized gains or losses being reflected in the consolidated statements of income because the payments from our international customers are received primarily in United States dollars.
However, fluctuations in exchange rates may affect the prices that our international customers are willing to pay and may put us at a price disadvantage compared to other competitors. Increases in the value of the United States dollar relative to foreign currencies could make our products less competitive or less affordable and therefore adversely affect our sales in international markets.
Market Risk and Credit Risk
Our cash deposits are held in accounts with financial institutions that we believe are creditworthy. Certain of these accounts at times may exceed federally-insured limits. We have not experienced any credit losses in those accounts and do not believe we are exposed to any significant credit risk on these funds.
We have investments in money market funds, bonds, and commercial paper. As a result, we are exposed to potential loss from market risks that may occur as a result of changes in interest rates, changes in credit quality of the issuer, and otherwise. These securities have a higher degree of, and a greater exposure to, credit or default risk and may be less liquid in times of economic weakness or market disruptions as compared with cash deposits. We have also invested a portion of our available funds in equity securities and mutual funds. The value of these securities fluctuates due to changes in the equity and credit markets along with other factors. In times of economic weakness, the market value and liquidity of these assets may decline and may negatively impact our financial condition.
Forward-looking Statements
Statements in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis and elsewhere in this Form 10-K that are forward looking are based upon current expectations, and actual results or future events may differ materially. Therefore, the inclusion of such forward-looking information should not be regarded as a representation by us that our objectives or plans will be achieved. Such statements include, but are not limited to, our effective tax rate for 2022, our 2022 capital expenditures, the costs of expanding one of our facilities, funding future dividend payments with cash flows from operations, availability of equity and debt financing, our ability to meet our cash requirements for the foreseeable future, the impact on our consolidated financial statement of recently issued accounting standards when we adopt those standards, and the effect that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our business and operations. Words such as “expects,” “believes,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “should,” “plans,” and variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements contained herein involve numerous risks and uncertainties, and there are a number of factors that could cause actual results or future events to differ materially, including, but not limited to, the following: the risk that the COVID-19 pandemic continues to lead to material delays and cancellations of, or reduced demand for, procedures in which our products are utilized; curtailed or delayed capital spending by hospitals and other healthcare providers; disruption to our supply chain; closures of our facilities; delays in training; delays in gathering clinical evidence; diversion of management and other resources to respond to the COVID-19 outbreak; the impact of global and regional economic and credit market conditions on healthcare spending; the risk that the COVID-19 virus continues to disrupt local economies and causes economies in our key markets to enter prolonged recessions; changing economic, market and business conditions; acts of war or terrorism; the effects of governmental regulation; the impact of competition and new technologies; slower-than-anticipated introduction of new products or implementation of marketing strategies; implementation of new manufacturing processes or implementation of new information systems; our ability to protect our intellectual property; changes in the prices of raw materials; changes in product mix; intellectual property and product liability claims and product recalls; the ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; and the loss of, or any material reduction in sales to any significant customers. In addition, assumptions relating to budgeting, marketing, product development and other management decisions are subjective in many respects and thus susceptible to interpretations and periodic review which may cause us to alter our marketing, capital expenditures or other budgets, which in turn may affect our results of operations and financial condition. The forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K are made as of the date hereof, and we do not undertake any obligation, and disclaim any duty, to supplement, update or revise such statements, whether as a result of subsequent events, changed expectations or otherwise, except as required by applicable law.