ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
Astronics Corporation, through its subsidiaries, is a leading supplier of advanced technologies and products to the global aerospace and defense industries. Our products and services include advanced, high-performance electrical power generation and distribution systems, seat motion solutions, lighting and safety systems, avionics products, aircraft structures, systems certification, and automated test systems.
We have two reportable segments, Aerospace and Test Systems. Our Aerospace segment has principal operating facilities in the United States, Canada and France. Our Test Systems segment has principal operating facilities in the United States and the United Kingdom. We have engineering offices in the Ukraine and India.
Our Aerospace segment designs and manufactures products for the global aerospace industry. Product lines include lighting and safety systems, electrical power generation, distribution and seat motions systems, aircraft structures, avionics products, systems certification, and other products. Our primary Aerospace customers are the airframe manufacturers (“OEM”) that build aircraft for the commercial, military and general aviation markets, suppliers to those OEM’s, aircraft operators such as airlines, suppliers to the aircraft operators, and branches of the U.S. Department of Defense (“USDOD”). Our Test Systems segment designs, develops, manufactures and maintains automated test systems that support the aerospace and defense, communications and mass transit industries as well as training and simulation devices for both commercial and military applications. In the Test Systems segment, Astronics’ products are sold to a global customer base including OEM's and prime government contractors for both electronics and military products.
Our strategy is to increase our value by developing technologies and capabilities, either internally or through acquisition, and using those capabilities to provide innovative solutions to our targeted markets where our technology can be beneficial.
Important factors affecting our growth and profitability are the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the timing and extent of recovery (as discussed more fully below), supply chain pressures, the rate at which new aircraft are produced, government funding of military programs, our ability to have our products designed into new aircraft and the rates at which aircraft owners, including commercial airlines, refurbish or install upgrades to their aircraft. New aircraft build rates and aircraft owners spending on upgrades and refurbishments is cyclical and dependent on the strength of the global economy. Once designed into a new aircraft, the spare parts business is frequently retained by the Company. Future growth and profitability of the Test Systems business is dependent on developing and procuring new and follow-on business. The nature of our Test Systems business is such that it pursues large, often multi-year, projects. There can be significant periods of time between orders in this business which may result in large fluctuations of sales and profit levels and backlog from period to period. Test Systems segment customers include the USDOD, prime contractors to the USDOD, mass transit operators and prime contractors to mass transit operators.
Each of the markets that we serve presents opportunities that we expect will provide growth for the Company over the long-term. We continue to look for opportunities in all of our markets to capitalize on our core competencies to expand our existing business and to grow through strategic acquisitions.
Challenges which continue to face us include the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its continued impact on the aerospace industry and improving shareholder value through increasing profitability. Increasing profitability is dependent on many things, primarily sales growth, both acquired and organic, and the Company’s ability to control operating expenses and to identify means of creating improved productivity. Sales are driven by increased build rates for existing aircraft, market acceptance and economic success of new aircraft and our products, continued government funding of defense programs, the Company’s ability to obtain production contracts for parts we currently supply or have been selected to design and develop for new aircraft platforms and continually identifying and winning new business for our Test Systems segment.
Reduced aircraft build rates driven by a weak economy, aircraft groundings, tight credit markets, reduced air passenger travel and an increasing supply of used aircraft on the market would likely result in reduced demand for our products, which will result in lower profits. Reduction of defense spending may result in fewer opportunities for us to compete, which could result in lower profits in the future. Many of our newer development programs are based on new and unproven technology and at the same time we are challenged to develop the technology on a schedule that is consistent with specific programs. Delays in delivery schedules and incremental costs resulting from supply chain pressures can also result in lower profits. We will
continue to address these challenges by working to improve operating efficiencies and focusing on executing on the growth opportunities currently in front of us.
In September 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with the U.S. Department of Transportation (“USDOT”) under the Aviation Manufacturing Jobs Protection Program (“AMJP”) for a grant of up to $14.7 million. The Company received $7.4 million under the grant in 2021. The Company expects to receive a second installment of approximately $5.2 million in the first quarter of 2022 and a final installment in the second or third quarter of 2022 upon final confirmation from the USDOT of the Company meeting its grant commitments. The receipt of the full award is primarily conditioned upon the Company committing to not furlough, lay off or reduce the compensation levels of a defined group of employees during the six-month period of performance between September 2021 and March 2022. The grant benefit will be recognized ratably over the six-month performance period as a reduction to cost of products sold in proportion to the compensation expense that the award is intended to defray. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $8.7 million of the award and expects to recognize the remaining $6.0 million in the first quarter of 2022.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused a significant impact on our sales and net income for fiscal 2021 and 2020. The pandemic adversely impacted customer demand for all market channels, with commercial transport (both OEM and aftermarket channels) being the most adversely impacted due to the pandemic's impact on air travel worldwide. As a result, the Company executed restructuring activities in the form of workforce reduction to better align capacity with expected demand. Restructuring charges in severance expense totaling $0.6 million, associated primarily with the Aerospace segment, were recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $4.9 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, in an effort to reduce the significant operating losses at our AeroSat business, we initiated a restructuring plan to reduce costs and minimize losses of our AeroSat antenna business. The plan focused the initiatives for the AeroSat business on near-term opportunities pertaining to business jet connectivity. The plan resulted in a downsized manufacturing operation remaining in New Hampshire, with significantly reduced personnel and operating expenses. Impairments and restructuring charges recorded in 2019 as a result of the restructuring plan amounted to $28.8 million, all of which is included in the Aerospace segment. The Company incurred an impairment charge to right-of-use assets of approximately $0.7 million and $0.4 million in restructuring charges associated with severance at AeroSat during the year ended December 31, 2020.
ACQUISITIONS
On July 1, 2019, the Company acquired all of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Freedom Communication Technologies, Inc. (“Freedom”). Freedom, located in Kilgore, Texas, is a leader in wireless communication testing, primarily for the civil land mobile radio market. Freedom is included in our Test Systems segment. The total consideration for the transaction was $21.8 million, net of $0.6 million in cash acquired.
On October 4, 2019, the Company acquired the stock of the primary operating subsidiaries as well as certain other assets from mass transit and defense market test solution provider, Diagnosys Test Systems Limited, for $7.0 million in cash, plus earnouts estimated at a fair value of $2.5 million at acquisition. Diagnosys Inc. and its affiliates (“Diagnosys”) is included in our Test Systems segment. Diagnosys is a developer and manufacturer of comprehensive automated test equipment providing test, support, and repair of high value electronics, electro-mechanical, pneumatic and printed circuit boards focused on the global mass transit and defense markets. The acquired business has operations in Westford, Massachusetts as well as Ferndown, England, and an engineering center of excellence in Bangalore, India. The terms of the acquisition allowed for a potential earnout of up to an additional $13.0 million over the three years post-acquisition based on achievement of new order levels of over $72.0 million during that period. Based on actual and forecasted new orders, the fair value of the earnout was reduced to zero in the 2021 second quarter.
DIVESTITURES
On February 13, 2019, the Company completed a divestiture of its semiconductor test business within the Test Systems segment. The total proceeds of the divestiture amounted to $103.8 million plus certain contingent purchase consideration (“earnout”).
The transaction included two elements of contingent earnouts. In the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company agreed to an earnout payment of $10.7 million for the calendar 2020 earnout, which was recorded in 2021 as a separate line item below operating loss and was received by the Company in early January 2022. On February 14, 2022, the Company was notified by the purchaser that they had calculated $11.2 million as being payable for the calendar 2021 earnout. We are in the process of reviewing the calculation, and expect to record the additional gain on the sale, and receive the payment, in the first quarter of 2022. See further information in Note 22 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data in this report.
On July 12, 2019, the Company sold intellectual property and certain assets associated with its Airfield Lighting product line for $1.0 million in cash. The Airfield Lighting product line, part of the Aerospace segment, was not core to the business and represented less than 1% of revenue. The Company recorded a pre-tax loss on the sale of approximately $1.3 million.
On October 6, 2021, as part of a planned consolidation effort, the Company sold one of its Aerospace facilities for $9.2 million. Net cash proceeds were approximately $8.8 million. A gain on sale of approximately $5.0 million was recorded in 2021. The business of that facility will be relocated to one of the Company’s other operations.
MARKETS
Commercial Transport Market
The commercial transport market is our largest end market with sales driven by new aircraft production and aftermarket airline retrofit programs. In the commercial transport market, while many of our key long-term fundamentals remain intact, we continue to see near-term market pressure due to COVID-19. Despite solid progress on the vaccine front, 2022 will remain very challenging for our commercial transport products with improvement expected throughout 2022 driven by the planned increased production rate of the 737 MAX and an expectation of improved activity with our airline customers. Aircraft build rates are expected to improve modestly during 2022 from current levels as production of the 737 MAX and A-320 picks up, and the aftermarket is expected to strengthen over the course of the year as aircraft utilization and load factors increase. On the other hand, wide-body production rates and usage are expected to remain depressed throughout 2022 and possibly for several years due to low international travel demand caused by the pandemic.
Sales to the commercial transport market include sales of lighting and safety systems, electrical power generation, distribution and motions systems, aircraft structures, avionics products and systems certification. Sales to this market totaled approximately $202.0 million or 45.4% of our consolidated sales in 2021. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse impact on air travel worldwide, the commercial aerospace industry has been significantly disrupted.
Maintaining and growing sales to the commercial transport market will depend not only on market recovery from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, but also on airlines’ capital spending budgets for cabin upgrades as well as the purchase of new aircraft by global airlines. This spending by the airlines is impacted by their profits, cash flow and available financing as well as competitive pressures between the airlines to improve the travel experience for their passengers. We expect that new aircraft will be equipped with more passenger and aircraft connectivity and in-seat power than previous generation aircraft which drives demand for our avionics and power products. This market has historically experienced strong growth from airlines installing in-seat passenger power systems on their existing and newly delivered aircraft. Our ability to maintain and grow sales to this market depends on our ability to maintain our technological advantages over our competitors and maintain our relationships with major in-flight entertainment suppliers and global airlines.
Military Aerospace Market
Sales to the military aerospace market include sales of lighting & safety products, avionics products, electrical power & motion products and structures products. Sales to this market totaled approximately 15.8% of our consolidated sales and amounted to $70.3 million in 2021.
The military market is dependent on governmental funding which can change from year to year. Risks are that overall spending may be reduced in the future, specific programs may be eliminated or that we fail to win new business through the competitive bid process. Astronics does not have significant reliance on any one program such that cancellation of a particular program will cause material financial loss. We believe that we will continue to have opportunities similar to past years regarding this market.
Business Jet Market
The business jet market has also been impacted by the pandemic with new aircraft build rates significantly lower than pre-pandemic levels. Most of our sales in this market are line-fit products driven by aircraft build rates although there are some aftermarket sales as well. We expect improvement in 2022 as build rates are expected to increase.
Sales to the business jet market include sales of lighting & safety products, avionics products, and electrical power & motion products. Sales to this market totaled approximately 12.7% of our consolidated sales in 2021 and amounted to $56.7 million.
Sales to the business jet market are driven by our ship set content on new aircraft and build rates of new aircraft. Business jet OEM build rates are impacted by global wealth creation and corporate profitability. We continue to see opportunities on new aircraft currently in the design phase to employ our lighting & safety, electrical power and avionics technologies in this market. There is risk involved in the development of any new aircraft including the risk that the aircraft will not ultimately be produced
or that it will be produced in lower quantities than originally expected and thus impacting our return on our engineering and development efforts.
Tests Systems Products
Sales by our Test Systems segment accounted for approximately 17.9% of our consolidated sales in 2021 and amounted to $79.7 million. This segment designs, develops, manufactures and maintains automated test systems that support the aerospace and defense, communications and mass transit industries as well as training and simulation devices for both commercial and military applications. Sales to the aerospace & defense market were approximately $62.9 million in 2021. Sales to the mass transit market were approximately $16.8 million.
Sales to the military market are subject to fluctuations resulting from changes in governmental spending, elimination of certain programs, or failure to win new business through the competitive bid process. Consistent with the Aerospace segment, the Test Systems segment does not significantly rely on any one program such that cancellation of a particular program will cause material financial loss, and we believe that we will continue to have opportunities similar to past years regarding this market.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of the Company’s financial statements requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are affected by management’s application of accounting policies, which are discussed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report. The critical accounting policies have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
Astronics recognizes revenue when it transfers control of a promised good or service to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for the good or service. Our performance obligations are satisfied and control is transferred either at a point-in-time or over-time. The majority of our revenue is recognized at a point-in-time when control is transferred, which is generally evidenced by the shipment or delivery of the product to the customer, a transfer of title, a transfer of the significant risks and rewards of ownership, and customer acceptance. For certain contracts under which we produce products with no alternative use and for which we have an enforceable right to recover costs incurred plus a reasonable profit margin for work completed to date and for certain other contracts under which we create or enhance a customer-owned asset while performing repair and overhaul services, control is transferred to the customer over-time. The Company recognizes revenue using an over-time recognition model for these types of contracts.
We utilize the cost-to-cost method as a measure of progress for performance obligations that are satisfied over-time as we believe this input method best represents the transfer of control to the customer. Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of progress toward completion is measured based on the proportion of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. These projections require management to make numerous assumptions and estimates relating to items such as the complexity of design and related development costs, performance of subcontractors, availability and cost of materials, labor productivity and cost, overhead, capital costs, and manufacturing efficiency. We review our cost estimates on a periodic basis, or when circumstances change and warrant a modification to a previous estimate. Cost estimates are largely based on negotiated or estimated purchase contract terms, historical performance trends and other economic projections.
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report for a further description of revenue recognition under ASC 606.
Reviews for Impairment of Goodwill
Our goodwill is the result of the excess of purchase price over net assets acquired from acquisitions. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had approximately $58.3 million of goodwill.
We identify our reporting units by assessing whether the components of our operating segments constitute businesses for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results of those components. The Test Systems operating segment is its own reporting unit while the other reporting units are one level below our Aerospace operating segment.
The Company tests goodwill at the reporting unit level on an annual basis or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
We use the discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of each of our reporting units. The discounted cash flow method incorporates various assumptions, the most significant being projected sales growth rates, operating profit margins and cash flows, the terminal growth rate and the discount rate. Management projects sales growth rates, operating margins and cash flows based on each reporting unit’s current business, expected developments and operational strategies. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill is considered impaired and the impairment loss is recorded for the amount by which a reporting unit's carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying value of goodwill.
The Company’s four reporting units remaining with goodwill as of the first day of our fourth quarter were subject to the annual goodwill impairment test. Based on our quantitative assessments of our reporting units, we concluded that goodwill was not impaired in 2021.
As a result of the qualitative factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic that surfaced during the first quarter of 2020, we performed interim quantitative assessments for the eight reporting units which had goodwill as of March 28, 2020, and an additional quantitative assessment for our PECO reporting unit as of June 27, 2020 driven by reductions from previously forecasted aircraft build rates. Based on our quantitative assessments, the Company recorded goodwill impairment charges associated with four Aerospace reporting units, totaling $86.3 million in the December 31, 2020 Consolidated Statements of Operations. No additional goodwill impairment charges were incurred as a result of the annual goodwill impairment test in 2020.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, PERFORMANCE AND OUTLOOK
A discussion by segment can be found at “Segment Results of Operations and Outlook” in this MD&A.
CONSOLIDATED OVERVIEW OF OPERATIONS
2021 Compared With 2020
Consolidated sales were down $57.7 million to $444.9 million compared to the prior year. Aerospace sales were down $52.8 million and continue to be negatively affected by the continued impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, while the prior-year period was inclusive of the pre-pandemic levels during the first quarter. Test System sales decreased $4.9 million.
Consolidated cost of products sold were down $26.2 million to $379.5 million in 2021 from $405.7 million in the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to lower volume related to the continued impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global aerospace industry. The current year period benefited from $8.7 million recognized as an offset to cost of products sold related to the AMJP award, but was negatively impacted by higher warranty expenses of $3.9 million.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses were $99.1 million compared with $110.5 million for the prior year period. The decrease in 2021 was due to the cost control measures implemented at the onset of the pandemic late in the first quarter of 2020 which resulted in lower labor costs and discretionary spending. The Company incurred $0.6 million in restructuring-related severance charges in the current year and $5.3 million in the prior year, primarily in the Aerospace segment. SG&A in the current year also benefited from a $2.2 million non-cash reduction of the fair value of a contingent consideration liability. However, in January 2022, the Company was notified of an adverse ruling in its long-running intellectual property dispute with Lufthansa Technik, which has been in litigation since 2010 in the U.S., France, Germany and the United Kingdom. Most recently, the U.K. Court has ruled that the subject patent is valid and that the Company has been infringing the expired patent. Based on the information currently available, the Company accrued $8.4 million relative to the U.K. matter in 2021, although the actual amount of damages will not be known until the damages trial is completed, which is expected to occur sometime in 2023. This amount was recorded within SG&A in the fourth quarter of 2021.
On October 6, 2021, the Company sold one of its Aerospace facilities for $9.2 million. Net cash proceeds were approximately $8.8 million. A gain on sale of approximately $5.0 million was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Non-cash goodwill and long-lived asset impairment charges of $87.0 million in the Aerospace segment were recognized in 2020 due to reduced expectations of future operating results caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
In 2021, the Company recorded a gain of $10.7 million as additional gain on the sale of the Company’s former semiconductor business resulting from the contingent earnout for the 2020 calendar year.
Other Expense, Net of Other Income decreased $2.8 million when compared to 2020. The prior year included a $3.5 million impairment of an equity investment.
The effective tax rate for 2021 was 5.1%, compared with (3.0)% in 2020. The tax rate in 2021 was impacted by State and Foreign income taxes as well as changes in the valuation allowance previously recorded against U.S. Federal and most State deferred tax assets. The effective tax rate in 2020 was impacted by a $21.5 million valuation allowance against federal deferred tax assets as well as permanently non-deductible goodwill impairments. See Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 8 of this report for additional information regarding the valuation allowance recorded in 2020.
Consolidated net loss was $(25.6) million, or $(0.82) per diluted share, compared with net loss of $(115.8) million, or $(3.76) per diluted share in the prior year. The after-tax impact of the impairment loss in 2020 was $(2.64) per diluted share.
2020 Compared With 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were 5.1% and (3.0)%, respectively. In addition to state income taxes, the following items had the most significant impact on the difference between our statutory U.S. federal income tax rate (21% in 2021 and 2020) and our effective tax rate:
2021:
•Recognition of approximately $6.8 million of valuation allowance against federal deferred tax assets. See Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 8 of this report for additional information.
•Recognition of approximately $2.6 million of 2021 U.S. R&D tax credits which were offset by the federal valuation allowance recognized during the year.
2020:
•Recognition of approximately $21.5 million of valuation allowance against federal deferred tax assets. See Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 8 of this report for additional information.
•Permanently non-deductible goodwill impairment.
•Recognition of approximately $1.8 million of 2020 U.S. R&D tax credits.
COVID-19 Impacts on Our Business
In early 2020, we implemented workforce reduction activities to align capacity with expected demand. We also implemented significant cost conservation measures, and we continue to closely monitor spending priorities. As economic activity recovers, we continue to monitor the situation, to assess further possible implications on our operations, supply chain, liquidity, cash flow
and customer orders, and to take actions in an effort to mitigate adverse consequences. While the industry is seeing some improvement on rising vaccination rates and easing travel restrictions, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business results of operations, financial condition and cash flows is dependent on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic, vaccination rates and efficacy and the related length of impact on the global economy, supply chain and the aerospace industry, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. We believe that our existing financial arrangements are sufficient to meet our operating needs, and have adequate borrowings availability under our Credit Agreement that could provide additional relief if necessary.
See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for an additional discussion of risk related to supply chain disruptions and the recent government vaccine mandates.
2022 Outlook
In 2021, we experienced an increase in bookings, however we have also been impacted by supply chain pressures that we expect will continue to impact delivery schedules and costs, limiting the Company’s ability to respond to accelerated or quick-turn delivery requests from customers and delaying shipments that otherwise would have been made in 2021. We estimate that we had backlog at the end of the year of $15 million to $17 million that would have shipped if our supply chain had been functioning normally. Our initial expectation is that 2022 revenue will be in the range of $550 million to $600 million for the year, which includes what we consider reasonable allowances for continued supply chain and labor disruptions. We expect the first quarter to show a modest volume increase over the fourth quarter, with a stronger ramp in the latter half of the year, though supply chain and the tight labor market are risk items.
Based on current estimates, we expect the AMJP to contribute approximately $6.0 million to gross profit to be recorded in the first quarter of 2022. The six-month period of performance over which the grant is recognized will conclude in March 2022. We also expect a benefit in the first quarter of 2022 of approximately $11.2 million related with the calendar 2021 earnout from the sale of the semiconductor business based on the earnout statement provided to us in February 2022.
Given our forecast expectations, and the structure of our credit agreement, combined with AMJP proceeds, tax refunds and the earnouts from the sale of the semiconductor business, we expect to have sufficient liquidity to operate through the COVID-19 pandemic and its economic impacts. We expect to remain compliant with our debt covenants for the duration of the agreement based on our current financial projections, and expect the Company to generate cash in 2022, which will be used to reduce debt.
At December 31, 2021, our consolidated backlog was $415.7 million. At December 31, 2020, our backlog was $283.4 million. Backlog in the Aerospace segment was $334.7 million at December 31, 2021, of which $299 million is expected to be recognized as revenue in 2022. Backlog in the Test Systems segment was $81.0 million at December 31, 2021. The Test Systems segment expects to recognize $41 million of backlog as revenue in 2022.
Cash taxes related to 2022 are expected to be in the range of $0.5 million to $1.0 million.
Capital equipment spending in 2022 is expected to be in the range of $15 million to $20 million, up from $6.0 million in 2021, due to investments in customer programs.
While core aerospace markets have strengthened as vaccination rates rise and passenger traffic accelerated, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows is dependent on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic, virus variants, vaccination rates and efficacy and the related length of impact on the global economy, supply chain and specifically on the markets we are active in, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND OUTLOOK
Operating profit, as presented below, is sales less cost of products sold and other operating expenses, excluding interest expense, other corporate expenses and other non-operating sales and expenses. Cost of products sold and other operating expenses are directly identifiable to the respective segment. Operating loss is reconciled to loss before income taxes in Note 20 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this report.
AEROSPACE SEGMENT
2021 Compared With 2020
Aerospace segment sales decreased $52.8 million, or 12.6%, to $365.2 million. In particular, commercial aerospace sales remained below pre-pandemic levels, declining $60.6 million, or 23.1%. While improving domestic travel, increased production rates including the 737 MAX and higher fleet utilization drove increased demand for commercial aerospace products in the second half of 2021, sales continued to be negatively affected by supply chain pressures resulting in delays in fulfilling orders. General Aviation sales were down $3.8 million, or 6.2%, due to lower VVIP activity, offset by improvements in the business jet market. The Company expects the strong demand being realized in the business jet industry to translate into higher demand for its products as production levels begin to increase in 2022. Military Aircraft sales increased $2.4 million, or 3.5%. Other revenues increased $9.3 million, driven by higher contract manufacturing programs. The prior-year period was inclusive of the pre-pandemic levels during the first quarter of the year.
Electrical Power & Motion sales decreased $37.5 million compared with the prior-year period. Additionally, Lighting & Safety sales decreased $15.2 million and Avionics sales decreased by $11.2 million.
Aerospace segment operating loss was $8.6 million compared with operating loss of $89.8 million in the same period last year. 2021 results benefited from $8.7 million related to the AMJP grant and a $5.0 million gain related to the sale of a facility. These benefits were offset by accruals related to the Lufthansa dispute totaling $8.4 million and increased warranty charges of $4.0 million in the Aerospace segment. Leverage lost on reduced commercial aircraft sales combined with supply chain pressures and costs significantly impacted operating results. Aerospace operating loss in the prior-year period was impacted by impairment charges of $87.0 million, of which $86.3 million was related to goodwill, and restructuring-related severance charges of $5.3 million.
2020 Compared With 2019
For a comparison of Aerospace segment results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
2022 Outlook for Aerospace
The Aerospace segment’s backlog at December 31, 2021 was $334.7 million, compared to $191.1 million at December 31, 2020. Approximately $299 million of the December 31, 2021 backlog is expected to be recognized as revenue over the next 12 months.
TEST SYSTEMS SEGMENT
2021 Compared With 2020
Test Systems segment sales were $79.7 million, down $4.9 million compared with the prior year. Aerospace & Defense sales decreased $1.4 million. Sales from the divested semiconductor business contributed $3.5 million in the prior year.
Test Systems operating loss was $3.8 million, or 4.7% of sales, compared with operating profit of $5.5 million, or 6.6% of sales, in 2020. Operating results in 2021 was negatively affected by COVID-related delays and low volume and $3.3 million in legal fees related to infringement claims and contractual disputes. Operating results in 2020 benefited from $3.5 million in semiconductor warranty revenue.
In 2021, the Company reached an agreement with the buyer of its former semiconductor test business, which was sold in 2019, related to earnout payments. For its calendar 2020 earnout payment, the Company agreed to an earnout amount of $10.7 million, which was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021 and was paid to the Company in early January.
2020 Compared With 2019
For a comparison of Test Systems segment results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
2022 Outlook for Test Systems
Backlog in the Test Systems segment was $81.0 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $92.3 million at December 31, 2019. The Test Systems segment expects to recognize $41 million of backlog as revenue in 2022.
We do not have material off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material future effect on our results of operations or financial condition.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND OTHER COMMITMENTS
For further information on our contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2021 and estimated timing thereof, see the notes referenced below, of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this report.
Long-term Debt and Interest Payments - Refer to Note 8, Long-Term Debt in this report. Future current and long-term interest payments of $6.0 million and $0.7 million, respectively, have been calculated using the applicable interest rate of each debt facility based on actual borrowings as of December 31, 2021. Actual future borrowings and rates may differ from these estimates. The current credit facility expires on May 30, 2023.
Purchase Obligations - Purchase obligations are comprised of the Company’s commitments for goods and services in the normal course of business and amount to approximately $134.0 million payable in the coming year.
Supplemental Retirement Plan and Post Retirement Obligations - Anticipated payments related with the Company’s defined benefit plans are detailed in Note 13, Retirement Plans and Related Post Retirement Benefits.
Lease Obligations - Refer to Note 10, Leases, for details on obligations and timing of expected future lease payments, including a five-year maturity schedule. In January 2022, the Company entered into a lease which is expected to become effective in December 2022 and will require annual payments of approximately $1.5 million through 2031.
Legal Reserves - Refer to Note 19, Legal Proceedings, for management’s estimate of damages to be paid related to our ongoing litigation with Lufthansa Technik and timing thereof.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
(1) Working capital is calculated as the difference between Current Assets and Current Liabilities.
Our cash flow from operations and available borrowing capacity provide us with the financial resources needed to run our operations and reinvest in our business.
Our ability to maintain sufficient liquidity is highly dependent upon achieving expected operating results. Failure to achieve expected operating results could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity, our ability to obtain financing, and our operations in the future.
Operating Activities
Cash used for operating activities totaled $5.5 million in 2021, as compared with $37.3 million cash provided by operating activities in 2020. Cash flow from operating activities decreased compared with the 2020 due to lower net income adjusted for non-cash or non-operating expense or income items, coupled with changes in net operating assets, primarily increases in accounts receivable and inventories. Non-cash items in 2021 include the $10.7 million earnout from the sale of the semiconductor business, the $5.0 million net gain on the sale of facilities within the Aerospace segment, as well as the $8.4 million incremental reserve for estimated impacts of the intellectual property dispute with Lufthansa Technik.
Our cash flows from operations are primarily dependent on our net income adjusted for non-cash expenses and the timing of collections of receivables, level of inventory and payments to suppliers and employees. Sales and operating results of our Aerospace segment are influenced by the impact in 2021 and 2020 of the COVID-19 pandemic on the aerospace industry, in particular, build rates of new aircraft, which are subject to general economic conditions, airline passenger travel and spending
for government and military programs. Our Test Systems segment sales depends in part on capital expenditures of the aerospace & defense industry which, in turn, depend on current and future demand for those products. A reduction in demand for our customers’ products would adversely affect our operating results and cash flows.
We expect cash flows from operations in 2022 to continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and continued supply chain pressures, particularly in the first half of the year. We expect to receive a second installment of approximately $5.2 million associated with the AMJP grant in the first quarter of 2022, with a final installment of approximately $2.1 million anticipated in the second or third quarter of 2022 upon final confirmation from the USDOT of the Company meeting its grant commitments. The Company also expects to receive approximately $9.0 million in tax refunds in early 2022. We will continue to maintain a credit facility sufficient to fund our short and long-term capital requirements including working capital, acquisitions and share repurchase efforts.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities in 2021 was $3.2 million, primarily the result of $9.2 million in proceeds from the sale of assets within the Aerospace segment, offset by purchases of property, plant and equipment (“PP&E”) of $6.0 million.
Cash used for investing activities in 2020 was $5.8 million, primarily the result of PP&E of $7.5 million, partially offset by proceeds from sales of PP&E.
Our expectation for 2022 is that we will invest between $15 million and $20 million for PP&E. Future requirements for PP&E depend on numerous factors, including expansion of existing product lines and introduction of new products. Management believes that our cash flow from operations and current borrowing arrangements will provide for these capital expenditures. We expect to continue to evaluate acquisition opportunities in the future. Investing cash flows in 2022 will be positively impacted by the receipt of $10.7 million related with the calendar 2020 earnout from the sale of the semiconductor business and approximately $11.2 million related with the calendar 2021 earnout, which is expected to be received in the first quarter of 2022.
Financing Activities
Cash used for financing activities totaled $7.5 million for 2021, as compared with $24.6 million for 2020. The Company made net repayments towards our senior credit facility of $10.0 million in 2021 compared with net repayments of $15.0 million in 2020. Cash used in 2020 also included $7.7 million of share repurchases before the 10b-5 plan associated with the share repurchase program was terminated.
The Company's Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Agreement”) was amended in May 2020 (the “Amended Facility”) and reduced the revolving credit line from $500 million to $375 million. The Amended Facility suspended the application of the leverage ratio up through and including the second quarter of 2021 (the “suspension period”). The maximum net leverage ratio, which represents the ratio of funded debt, net of cash to adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the Agreement) was set at 6.00 to 1 for the third quarter of 2021, 5.50 to 1 for the fourth quarter of 2021, 4.50 to 1 for the first quarter of 2022, and returns to 3.75 to 1 for each quarter thereafter. Through the second quarter of 2021, the Company was also required to maintain a minimum interest coverage ratio. As noted above, the maximum net leverage ratio was set at 5.50 to 1 for the quarter ended December 31, 2021. During the suspension period, the Company paid interest on the unpaid principal amount of the Amended Facility at a rate of 3.25% and a commitment fee of 0.35% on the undrawn portion of the Amended Facility. After the suspension period, the Company pays interest on the unpaid principal amount of the Amended Facility at LIBOR (of at least 1.00%) plus between 1.00% to 2.25% and a commitment fee of 0.10% to 0.35% on the undrawn portion of the Amended Facility, both based upon the Company’s leverage ratio. The Amended Facility provided for the payment of a consent fee of 15 basis points of the commitment for each consenting lender.
At December 31, 2021, there was $163.0 million outstanding on the revolving credit facility and there remained $210.9 million available subject to the minimum liquidity covenant discussed below, net of outstanding letters of credit. The credit facility allocates up to $20 million of the $375 million revolving credit line for the issuance of letters of credit, including certain existing letters of credit. At December 31, 2021, outstanding letters of credit totaled $1.1 million.
On March 1, 2022, the Company executed an amendment to the Amended Facility, which reduced the revolving credit line from $375 million to $225 million and extended the maturity date of the loans under the facility from February 16, 2023 to May 30, 2023. Interest will be payable on the unpaid principal amount of the facility at a rate equal to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”, which shall be at least 1.00%), plus between 1.50% to 3.25% based upon the Company’s leverage ratio. The Company will also pay a commitment fee to the lenders in an amount equal to 0.10% to 0.40% on the undrawn portion of the Amended Facility, based upon the Company’s leverage ratio. The amendment provided for the payment of a consent fee of 10 basis points of the commitment for each consenting lender.
The amendment will require the Company to maintain minimum liquidity, defined as unrestricted cash plus the unused revolving credit commitments, of $35 million. The maximum net leverage ratio is set at 4.75 to 1 for the first and second quarters of 2022 and 3.75 to 1 thereafter, and the definition of Adjusted EBITDA has been modified to exclude income from earnout payments and asset sales. The Company was in compliance with its financial covenants at December 31, 2021.
The Amended Facility continues the temporary restrictions on certain activities, including dividend payments, acquisitions and share repurchases, through the third quarter of 2022. The Company’s obligations under the Amended Facility are jointly and severally guaranteed by each domestic subsidiary of the Company other than non-material subsidiaries. The obligations are secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of the Company’s and the guarantors’ assets.
In the event of voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy of the Company or any subsidiary, all unpaid principal and other amounts owing under the Amended Facility automatically become due and payable. Other events of default, such as failure to make payments as they become due and breach of financial and other covenants, change of control, judgments over a certain amount, and cross default under other agreements give the agent the option to declare all such amounts immediately due and payable.
Refer to Note 8 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, Financial Statement and Supplementary Data, of this report for additional information regarding our credit facility.
We intend to refinance the amended agreement with a new long-term financing facility in the coming months.
DIVIDENDS
Management believes that it should retain the capital generated from operating activities for investment in advancing technologies, acquisitions and debt retirement. Accordingly, there are no plans to institute a cash dividend program.
BACKLOG
At December 31, 2021, our consolidated backlog was $415.7 million. At December 31, 2020, our backlog was $283.4 million. Backlog in the Aerospace segment was $334.7 million at December 31, 2021, of which $299.4 million is expected to be recognized as revenue in 2022. Backlog in the Test Systems segment was $81.0 million at December 31, 2021, of which $40.5 million is expected to be recognized as revenue of in 2022.
RELATED-PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Information regarding certain relationships and related transactions is incorporated herein by reference to the information included in the Company’s 2022 Proxy Statement which will be filed with the Commission within 120 days after the end of the Company’s 2021 fiscal year.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 8 of this report.