Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Business Overview
Activision Blizzard, Inc. is a leading global developer and publisher of interactive entertainment content and services. We develop and distribute content and services on video game consoles, PCs, and mobile devices. We also operate esports leagues and offer digital advertising within some of our content. The terms “Activision Blizzard,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” are used to refer collectively to Activision Blizzard, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Merger Agreement
On January 18, 2022, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Microsoft and Merger Sub, in which we agreed to be acquired for $95.00 in cash per Share. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, our acquisition will be accomplished through the merger of Merger Sub with and into the Company, with the Company surviving the Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of Microsoft.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, at the Effective Time, each Share (other than Shares (1) held by the Company as treasury stock (excluding certain Shares held by a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, which shares will remain outstanding and unaffected by the Merger), (2) owned by Microsoft or Merger Sub, (3) owned by any direct or indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Microsoft or Merger Sub or (4) held by stockholders who have neither voted in favor of adoption of the Merger Agreement nor consented thereto in writing and who have properly and validly exercised their statutory rights of appraisal in respect of such Shares in accordance with Section 262 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, in each case, immediately prior to the Effective Time) issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will be cancelled and automatically converted into the right to receive $95.00 in cash, without interest.
If the Merger Agreement is terminated under certain specified circumstances, we or Microsoft will be required to pay a termination fee. We will be required to pay Microsoft a termination fee of approximately $2.27 billion under specified circumstances, including termination of the Merger Agreement in connection with our entry into an agreement with respect to a Superior Proposal (as defined in the Merger Agreement) prior to us receiving stockholder approval of the Merger, or termination by Microsoft upon a Company Board Recommendation Change (as defined in the Merger Agreement), in each case, if certain other conditions are met. Microsoft will be required to pay us a reverse termination fee under specified circumstances, including termination of the Merger Agreement due to a permanent injunction arising from Antitrust Laws (as defined in the Merger Agreement) when we are not then in material breach of any provision of the Merger Agreement and if certain other conditions are met, in an amount equal to (1) $2.0 billion if the termination notice is provided prior to January 18, 2023, (2) $2.5 billion if the termination notice is provided after January 18, 2023, and prior to April 18, 2023, or (3) $3.0 billion if the termination notice is provided at any time after April 18, 2023.
The consummation of the Merger is subject to customary closing conditions, including, among others, (1) the approval and adoption of the Merger Agreement by our stockholders, (2) the absence of any court order or law prohibiting (or seeking to prohibit) the consummation of the Merger, (3) the termination or expiration of any applicable waiting period or periods under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 (as amended) and specified approvals under certain other antitrust and foreign investment laws, subject to certain limitations, (4) compliance by us and Microsoft in all material respects with our respective obligations under the Merger Agreement, and (5) subject to specified exceptions and qualifications for materiality, the accuracy of representations and warranties made by us and Microsoft, respectively, as of the signing date and the closing date.
Employment Matters
We are subject to legal proceedings regarding our workplace and are experiencing adverse effects related to these proceedings and to concerns raised about our workplace. For information about these matters, see Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” and Note 22 to the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Segments
Based upon our organizational structure, we conduct our business through three reportable segments, each of which is a leading global developer and publisher of interactive entertainment content and services based primarily on our internally-developed intellectual properties.
(i) Activision Publishing, Inc.
Activision delivers content through both premium and free-to-play offerings and primarily generates revenue from full-game and in-game sales, as well as by licensing software to third-party or related-party companies that distribute Activision products. Activision’s key product franchise is Call of Duty, a first-person action franchise. Activision also includes the activities of the Call of Duty League, a global professional esports league with city-based teams.
(ii) Blizzard Entertainment, Inc.
Blizzard delivers content through both premium and free-to-play offerings and primarily generates revenue from full-game and in-game sales, subscriptions, and by licensing software to third-party or related-party companies that distribute Blizzard products. Blizzard also maintains a proprietary online gaming platform, Battle.net, which facilitates digital distribution of Blizzard content and selected Activision content, online social connectivity, and the creation of user-generated content. Blizzard’s key product franchises include: Warcraft, which includes World of Warcraft, a subscription-based massive multi-player online role-playing game and Hearthstone, an online collectible card game based in the Warcraft universe; Diablo, an action role-playing franchise; and Overwatch, a team-based first-person action franchise. Blizzard also includes the activities of the Overwatch League, a global professional esports league with city-based teams.
(iii) King Digital Entertainment
King delivers content through free-to-play offerings and primarily generates revenue from in-game sales and in-game advertising on mobile platforms. King’s key product franchise is Candy Crush™, a “match three” franchise.
Other
We also engage in other businesses that do not represent reportable segments, including our Distribution business, which consists of operations in Europe that provide warehousing, logistics, and sales distribution services to third-party publishers of interactive entertainment software, our own publishing operations, and manufacturers of interactive entertainment hardware.
Business Results and Highlights
Financial Results
2021 financial highlights included:
•consolidated net revenues increased 9% to $8.8 billion and consolidated operating income increased 19% to $3.3 billion, as compared to consolidated net revenues of $8.1 billion and consolidated operating income of $2.7 billion in 2020;
•diluted earnings per common share increased 22% to $3.44, as compared to $2.82 in 2020; and
•cash flows from operating activities were approximately $2.4 billion, an increase of 7%, as compared to $2.3 billion in 2020.
Since certain of our games are hosted online or include significant online functionality that represents a separate performance obligation, we defer the transaction price allocable to the online functionality from the sale of these games and recognize the attributable revenues over the relevant estimated service periods, which are generally less than a year. Net revenues and operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021, include a net effect of $449 million and $347 million, respectively, from the recognition of deferred net revenues and related cost of revenues.
The percentage of our consolidated net revenues that are recognized from revenue sources that are recognized at a “point-in-time” and from sources that are recognized “over-time and other” were as follows:
(1)Revenue recognized at a “point-in-time” is primarily comprised of the portion of revenue from software products that is recognized when the customer takes control of the product (i.e., upon delivery of the software product) and revenues from our Distribution business.
(2)Revenue recognized “over-time and other revenue” is primarily comprised of revenue associated with the online functionality of our games, in-game purchases, and subscriptions.
2021 Content Release and Event Highlights
Throughout the year we regularly release new content through seasonal and live services updates within our franchises, including Call of Duty, Candy Crush, and Warcraft. In addition to these updates, notable game releases during 2021 included:
•Activision’s Call of Duty: Vanguard;
•Activision’s Call of Duty: Warzone Pacific;
•Blizzard’s World of Warcraft: Burning Crusade Classic™;
•Blizzard’s Hearthstone: Mercenaries; and
•Blizzard’s Diablo II: Resurrected™, a remastered version of the original action role-playing game title Diablo II.
Summary of Title Release Dates
Below is a summary of release dates for titles that are discussed throughout our analysis for our operating metrics, our consolidated results, and operating segment results.
International Sales
International sales are a fundamental part of our business. An important element of our international strategy is to develop content that is specifically directed toward local cultures and customs. Net revenues from international sales accounted for approximately 51%, 52%, and 54% of our total consolidated net revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The majority of our net revenues from foreign countries are generated by consumers in Australia, Canada, China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, South Korea, and the U.K. Our international business is subject to risks typical of an international business, including, but not limited to, foreign currency exchange rate volatility and changes in local economies. Accordingly, our future results could be materially and adversely affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in local economies.
Operating Metrics
The following operating metrics are key performance indicators that we use to evaluate our business. The key drivers of changes in our operating metrics are presented in the order of significance.
Net bookings and in-game net bookings
We monitor net bookings and in-game net bookings as key operating metrics in evaluating the performance of our business because they enable an analysis of performance based on the timing of actual transactions with our customers and provide a more timely indication of trends in our operating results. Net bookings is the net amount of products and services sold digitally or sold-in physically in the period and includes license fees, merchandise, and publisher incentives, among others. Net bookings is equal to net revenues excluding the impact from deferrals. In-game net bookings primarily includes the net amount of microtransactions and downloadable content sold during the period and is equal to in-game net revenues excluding the impact from deferrals.
Net bookings and in-game net bookings were as follows (amounts in millions):
Net bookings
The decrease in net bookings for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to:
•a $464 million decrease in Activision net bookings, driven by lower net bookings from (1) Call of Duty: Vanguard as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, (2) Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, (3) Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2, and (4) Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time, partially offset by higher net bookings from Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4 and Call of Duty: Mobile; and
•a $78 million decrease in Blizzard net bookings, driven by lower net bookings from World of Warcraft, partially offset by higher net bookings from Diablo II: Resurrected.
The decrease in net bookings was partially offset by a $416 million increase in King net bookings, driven by higher net bookings from in-game player purchases and advertising, primarily in the Candy Crush franchise.
In-game net bookings
The increase in in-game net bookings for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a $265 million increase in King in-game net bookings, driven by the Candy Crush franchise.
This increase was partially offset by a $18 million decrease in Activision in-game net bookings, with lower in-game net bookings from (1) Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, and (2) Call of Duty: Vanguard, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, being largely offset by higher in-game net bookings from Call of Duty: Mobile and Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4.
Monthly Active Users
We monitor monthly active users (“MAUs”) as a key measure of the overall size of our user base. MAUs are the number of individuals who accessed a particular game in a given month. We calculate average MAUs in a period by adding the total number of MAUs in each of the months in a given period and dividing that total by the number of months in the period. An individual who accesses two of our games would be counted as two users. In addition, due to technical limitations, for Activision and King, an individual who accesses the same game on two platforms or devices in the relevant period would be counted as two users. For Blizzard, an individual who accesses the same game on two platforms or devices in the relevant period would generally be counted as a single user. In certain instances, we rely on third parties to publish our games. In these instances, MAU data is based on information provided to us by those third parties or, if final data is not available, reasonable estimates of MAUs for these third-party published games.
The number of MAUs for a given period can be significantly impacted by the timing of new content releases, since new releases may cause a temporary surge in MAUs. Accordingly, although we believe that overall trends in the number of MAUs can be a meaningful performance metric, period-to-period fluctuations may not be indicative of longer-term trends. The following table details our average MAUs on a sequential quarterly basis for each of our reportable segments (amounts in millions):
Average MAUs decreased by 19 million, or 5%, for the three months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the three months ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to lower average MAUs for Activision, primarily driven by the Call of Duty franchise.
Average MAUs decreased by 26 million or 7% for the three months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the three months ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower average MAUs for Activision, primarily driven by the Call of Duty franchise.
Management’s Overview of Business Trends
Impacts of the Global COVID-19 Pandemic
Refer to the “Impacts of the Global COVID-19 Pandemic” section under Part I, Item 1 “Business” for discussion on the impacts of COVID-19 on our business.
Interactive Entertainment Growth
Our business participates in the global interactive entertainment industry. Games have become an increasingly popular form of entertainment, and we estimate, based on consumer spending, that the total industry has grown, on average, 10% annually from 2018 to 2021. The industry continues to benefit from additional players entering the market as interactive entertainment becomes more commonplace across age groups and as more developing regions gain access to this form of entertainment.
Mobile Gaming and Free-to-Play Games
Wide adoption of smartphones globally and the free-to-play business model on mobile platforms have increased the total addressable audience for gaming significantly by introducing gaming to new age groups and new regions and allowing gaming to occur more widely outside the home. Mobile gaming is estimated to be larger than console and PC gaming, and continues to grow at a significant rate. King is a leading developer of mobile and free-to-play games, and our other business units have mobile efforts underway that present the opportunity for us to expand the reach of, and drive additional player investment in, our franchises. The 2019 launch of Call of Duty: Mobile is an example of these efforts.
In addition, the free-to-play business model, which allows players to try a new game with no upfront cost, has begun to receive broader acceptance on PC and console platforms. This provides opportunities for us to increase the reach of our franchises through free-to-play offerings, which, in turn, provides opportunities to further drive player investment, as was seen with our Call of Duty: Warzone release in March 2020, and continuous content updates including the release of a completely new map with the launch of Call of Duty: Warzone Pacific.
Concentration of Sales Among the Most Popular Franchises
The top titles in the industry are also becoming more consistent as players and revenues concentrate more heavily in established franchises.
A significant portion of our revenues historically has been derived from video games based on a few popular franchises, and these video games have also been responsible for a disproportionately higher percentage of our profits. For example, in 2021, the Call of Duty, Candy Crush, and Warcraft franchises, collectively, accounted for 82% of our consolidated net revenues-and a significantly higher percentage of our operating income.
In addition to investing in new content for our top franchises, with the aim of releasing such content more frequently, we are continually exploring additional ways to expand those franchises, such as our release of Activision’s Call of Duty: Warzone. Additionally, we have been increasing our development efforts to focus on expanding our franchises to mobile platforms, as demonstrated by the release of Call of Duty: Mobile and our recent release of Crash Bandicoot: On the Run! in March 2021, as well as our plans for Diablo Immortal™ , which is currently in development.
Overall, we expect that a limited number of popular franchises will continue to produce a disproportionately high percentage of our, and the industry’s, revenues and profits in the near future. Accordingly, our ability to maintain our top franchises and our ability to successfully compete against our competitors’ top franchises can significantly impact our performance.
Recurring Revenue Business Models
Increased consumer online connectivity has allowed us to offer players new investment opportunities and to shift our business further towards a more consistently recurring and year-round model. While our business does continue to experience some periods of “seasonality” driven primarily by the timing of our releases of new premium full games, our in-game content and free-to-play offerings allow our players to access and invest in new content throughout the year. This incremental content not only provides additional high-margin revenues, but it can also increase player engagement.
Opportunities to Expand Franchises Outside of Games
Our fans spend significant time engaging in our franchises and investing through purchases of our game content, including full games and in-game content. Given the passion our players have for our franchises, we believe there are emerging opportunities to drive additional engagement and investment in our franchises through adding non-gaming experiences within games or by adding ways to engage outside of games, such as with our Overwatch and Call of Duty esports leagues. Our efforts to build these adjacent opportunities are still relatively nascent and have experienced negative impacts from COVID-19 on their growth.
Increased Competition for Talent
We believe that our continued success and growth is directly related to our ability to attract, retain, and develop top talent. We have seen increased competition in the market for talent and expect the competitive environment to continue at least in the short term. We have experienced challenges in both the retention of our existing talent and attraction of new talent, with our average voluntary turnover rates being higher in the current year as compared to the prior year in many parts of our Company. This competition, voluntary turnover and recruiting difficulty, has negatively impacted our ability to deliver future game releases, and if they persist, could continue to negatively impact our ability to deliver content in a cadence that will be optimal for our business.
Additionally, refer to the “Our People” section under Part I, Item 1 “Business” for discussion on Activision Blizzard’s initiatives and focus on our employees, including anticipated future investments to achieve our diversity aspirations. See also Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” and Note 22 to the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent employment matters affecting the Company.
Upcoming Content Releases
As previously announced, we are now planning for a later launch for our Overwatch 2 and Diablo IV titles than originally expected in order to provide the development teams the extra time they need to deliver the experiences that their communities deserve, and to set the franchises up for success over a multi-year period. As a result, we will not have the financial uplift that we had expected in 2022 from the release of these two titles. Additionally, as previously announced, Blizzard’s mobile title based on the Diablo franchise, Diablo Immortal, is now anticipated to release in 2022 and recently completed public testing in February 2022. In the second half of 2022, we also plan to release the next premium title in our Call of Duty franchise. In addition, throughout the year we expect to deliver ongoing content for our various franchises, including continued in-game content for Call of Duty: Vanguard, which includes seasonal content updates for Call of Duty: Warzone, seasonal content updates for Call of Duty: Mobile, substantial new content for key Blizzard franchises, and continued releases of content, features, and services across King’s portfolio with an ongoing focus on the Candy Crush franchise. We will also continue to invest in opportunities that we think have the potential to drive our growth over the long-term, including continuing to build on our advertising initiatives and investments in mobile titles.
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
The following table sets forth consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated (amounts in millions) and as a percentage of total net revenues, except for cost of revenues, which are presented as a percentage of associated revenues:
(1) Represents the loss on extinguishment of debt we recognized in connection with our debt financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Consolidated Net Revenues
The key drivers of changes in our consolidated results, operating segment results, and sources of liquidity are presented in the order of significance.
The following table summarizes our consolidated net revenues and in-game net revenues (amounts in millions):
(1) In-game net revenues primarily includes the net amount of revenues recognized for microtransactions and downloadable content during the period.
Consolidated net revenues
The increase in consolidated net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by an increase in revenues of $1.3 billion due to higher revenues from:
•the Candy Crush franchise;
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4;
•Call of Duty: Mobile;
•Diablo II: Resurrected; and
•World of Warcraft, which includes the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands and World of Warcraft: Burning Crusade Classic.
This increase was partially offset by a decrease in revenues of $331 million due to lower revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare;
•Call of Duty: Vanguard as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War;
•Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2; and
•Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time.
The remaining net decrease in revenues of $288 million was driven by various other franchises and titles.
In-game net revenues
The increase in in-game net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by an increase in in-game net revenues of $924 million due to higher in-game net revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4;
•the Candy Crush franchise;
•Call of Duty: Mobile; and
•World of Warcraft.
This increase was partially offset by a decrease in in-game net revenues of $120 million due to lower in-game net revenues from Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare.
The remaining net decrease in in-game net revenues of $109 million was driven by various other franchises and titles.
Operating Segment Results
We have three reportable segments-Activision, Blizzard, and King. Our operating segments are consistent with the manner in which our operations are reviewed and managed by our Chief Executive Officer, who is our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”). The CODM reviews segment performance exclusive of: the impact of the change in deferred revenues and related cost of revenues with respect to certain of our online-enabled games; share-based compensation expense (including liability awards accounted for under ASC 718); amortization of intangible assets as a result of purchase price accounting; fees and other expenses (including legal fees, expenses, and accruals) related to acquisitions, associated integration activities, and financings; certain restructuring and related costs; and certain other non-cash charges. The CODM does not review any information regarding total assets on an operating segment basis, and accordingly, no disclosure is made with respect thereto.
The Company has been reviewing its overall compensation structure and philosophy and began implementing changes to its compensation payments for 2021, primarily to enhance equity ownership for employees and bring our employee equity compensation more in line with the current industry practice. As an aspect of this change, the Company determined to settle amounts not yet paid as of December 31, 2021 under its annual performance plans in stock as opposed to cash and further to provide such incentives, to eligible employees, at no less than target performance without regard to whether target performance was achieved, resulting in a year-end share-based compensation liability of $194 million. The changes during the three months ended December 31, 2021 resulted in $160 million of expense related to achievement against 2021 performance targets that would have otherwise been included in our reportable segment operating income to instead be excluded from our 2021 operating income as it is now part of share-based compensation, accounted for as a liability under ASC 718. The changes increased our Activision, Blizzard, King and non-reportable segment operating income by $43 million, $25 million, $65 million, and $27 million, respectively, for the three months and year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, going forward, to the extent certain of our previously cash-based bonus programs are instead issued as time-based equity or settled via equity, such amounts will be recorded as share-based compensation and will be excluded from segment operating income.
Our operating segments are also consistent with our internal organizational structure, the way we assess operating performance and allocate resources, and the availability of separate financial information. We do not aggregate operating segments.
Information on the reportable segment net revenues and segment operating income is presented below (amounts in millions):
(1)Intersegment revenues reflect licensing and service fees charged between segments.
Reconciliations of total segment net revenues and total segment operating income to consolidated net revenues and consolidated income before income tax expense are presented in the table below (amounts in millions):
(1)Includes other income and expenses outside of our reportable segments, including our Distribution business and unallocated corporate income and expenses.
(2)Reflects the net effect from recognition (deferral) of deferred net revenues, along with related cost of revenues, on certain of our online-enabled products.
(3)Intersegment revenues reflect licensing and service fees charged between segments.
(4)Expenses related to share-based compensation, including liability awards accounted for under ASC 718. Refer to Note 16.
Segment Results
Activision
The decrease in Activision’s segment net revenues and operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to lower revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Vanguard as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War;
•Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare;
•Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2; and
•Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time.
This decrease in segment net revenues was partially offset by higher revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4; and
•Call of Duty: Mobile.
The decrease in Activision’s segment operating income, driven by the overall decrease in segment net revenues, was partially offset by:
•lower cost of revenues, driven by lower software amortization and royalties for Call of Duty: Vanguard, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, as well as for Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2 and Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time;
•lower sales and marketing costs, primarily for the Call of Duty franchise and Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time; and
•lower product development costs driven by lower personnel costs due to changes made to our compensation payments for 2021, as previously noted above, resulting in the costs for certain 2021 personnel bonuses being excluded from 2021 operating income, as they are now part of share-based compensation.
Blizzard
The decrease in Blizzard’s segment net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to lower revenues from World of Warcraft; partially offset by higher revenues from Diablo II: Resurrected.
Blizzard’s segment operating income was comparable to 2020, as the impact of lower segment net revenues and higher product development costs to support game development efforts were offset by:
•lower cost of revenues, driven by lower software amortization and royalties for World of Warcraft: Shadowlands, partially offset by higher software amortization and royalties for Diablo II: Resurrected;
•lower marketing costs, driven by lower marketing costs for World of Warcraft and Hearthstone, partially offset by higher marketing costs for Diablo II: Resurrected; and
•lower personnel costs due to changes made to our compensation payments for 2021, as previously noted above, resulting in the costs for certain 2021 personnel bonuses being excluded from 2021 operating income, as they are now part of share-based compensation.
King
The increase in King’s segment net revenues and operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to higher revenues from in-game player purchases and advertising, primarily in the Candy Crush franchise.
In addition, the increase in King’s segment operating income was driven by:
•lower personnel costs due to changes made to our compensation payments for 2021, as previously noted above, resulting in the costs for certain 2021 personnel bonuses being excluded from 2021 operating income, as they are now part of share-based compensation; and
•higher insurance claim proceeds primarily relating to a network outage which occurred in 2018 from changes made by a third-party partner which inadvertently impacted some users’ ability to play and spend money in King games.
These increases in King’s segment operating income were partially offset by:
•higher sales and marketing costs, primarily for the Candy Crush franchise; and
•higher service provider fees, primarily digital storefront fees, driven by the higher revenues from in-game player purchases.
Foreign Exchange Impact
Changes in foreign exchange rates had a positive impact of $100 million and $61 million on Activision Blizzard’s segment net revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, in each case as compared to the previous year. The changes are primarily due to changes in the value of the U.S. dollar relative to the euro and the British pound.
Consolidated Results
Net Revenues by Distribution Channel
The following table details our consolidated net revenues by distribution channel (amounts in millions):
(1)Net revenues from “Digital online channels” include revenues from digitally-distributed downloadable content, microtransactions, subscriptions, and products, as well as licensing royalties.
(2)Net revenues from “Other” primarily includes revenues from our Distribution business, the Overwatch League, and the Call of Duty League.
Digital Online Channel Net Revenues
The increase in net revenues from digital online channels for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to higher revenues from:
•in-game player purchases and advertising in the Candy Crush franchise;
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4;
•Call of Duty: Mobile;
•Diablo II: Resurrected; and
•World of Warcraft, which includes the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands and World of Warcraft: Burning Crusade Classic.
Retail Channel Net Revenues
The decrease in net revenues from retail channels for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to lower revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare;
•Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time;
•Crash Team Racing Nitro-Fueled; and
•Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2.
Net Revenues by Platform
The following tables detail our net revenues by platform (amounts in millions):
(1)Net revenues from “Mobile and ancillary” include revenues from mobile devices, as well as non-platform-specific game-related revenues, such as standalone sales of toys and accessories.
(2)Net revenues from “Other” primarily includes revenues from our Distribution business, the Overwatch League, and the Call of Duty League.
Console
The decrease in net revenues from the console platform for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to lower revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare;
•Call of Duty: Vanguard as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War;
•Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2; and
•Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time.
The decrease was partially offset by higher revenues from Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4.
PC
The increase in net revenues from the PC platform for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to higher revenues from:
•World of Warcraft, which includes the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands and World of Warcraft: Burning Crusade Classic;
•Diablo II: Resurrected; and
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4.
Mobile and Ancillary
The increase in net revenues from mobile and ancillary for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to higher revenues from:
•in-game player purchases and advertising in the Candy Crush franchise; and
•Call of Duty: Mobile.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenues
The following tables detail the components of cost of revenues in dollars (amounts in millions) and as a percentage of associated net revenues:
Cost of Revenues-Product Sales:
The decrease in product costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was driven by a $51 million decrease in product costs from Activision, as a result of lower retail channel revenues.
The increase in software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses related to product sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a $123 million increase in software amortization and royalties from Blizzard, driven by higher software amortization and royalties from (1) World of Warcraft, following the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands, with no comparable amortization in the prior year, and (2) Diablo II: Resurrected.
This increase was partially offset by a $46 million decrease in software amortization and royalties from Activision, driven by lower software amortization and royalties from (1) Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2, (2) Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time, and (3) Call of Duty: Vanguard as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, partially offset by higher software amortization and royalties from Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare.
Cost of Revenues-In-game, Subscription, and Other Revenues:
The increase in game operations and distribution costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a $114 million increase in service provider fees, such as digital storefront fees (e.g., fees retained by Apple and Google for our sales on their platforms) and payment processor fees, as a result of higher revenues.
The decrease in software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses related to in-game, subscription, and other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a decrease of $61 million in amortization of internally-developed franchise and developed software intangible assets acquired as part of our 2016 acquisition of King. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in software amortization and royalties from Activision of $23 million, driven by Call of Duty: Mobile.
Product Development (amounts in millions)
The increase in product development costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to higher development spending of $275 million, driven by increased personnel costs and outside developer fees to support our franchises. The increase was partially offset by an $89 million increase in capitalization of development costs driven by the timing of Activision’s game development cycles.
Sales and Marketing (amounts in millions)
The decrease in sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a decrease of $24 million in costs for marketing personnel and support services. Marketing spending for the year ended December 31, 2021 was comparable to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to lower spending for the Call of Duty franchise being offset by higher spending for the Candy Crush franchise.
General and Administrative (amounts in millions)
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were comparable to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Restructuring and related costs (amounts in millions)
During 2019, we began implementing a plan aimed at refocusing our resources on our largest opportunities and removing unnecessary levels of complexity and duplication from certain parts of our business. Since then, we have been focusing on these goals as we execute against our plan for which, at the end of 2021, we had substantially completed the actions contemplated under our plan. The restructuring and related costs incurred during 2021 relate primarily to severance costs. We do not expect to realize significant net savings in our total operating expenses as a result of our plan, as cost reductions in our selling, general and administrative activities are expected to be offset by increased investment in product development. Refer to Note 17 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
Interest and Other Expense (Income), Net (amounts in millions)
Interest and other expense (income), net, for the year ended December 31, 2021, was comparable to the year ended December 31, 2020 with a $24 million increase in gains on equity investments being offset by a $16 million decrease in interest income as a result of lower interest rates.
Income Tax Expense (amounts in millions)
The income tax expense of $465 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects an effective tax rate of 15%, which is lower than the effective tax rate of 16% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a benefit resulting from deferred tax asset remeasurements.
The effective tax rate of 15% for the year ended December 31, 2021, is lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to foreign earnings taxed at lower rates, research and development credits and a benefit resulting from a deferred tax asset remeasurement.
The overall effective income tax rate in future periods will depend on a variety of factors, such as changes in pre-tax income or loss by jurisdiction, applicable accounting rules, applicable tax laws and regulations, and rulings and interpretations thereof, developments in tax audits and other matters, and variations in the estimated and actual level of annual pre-tax income or loss.
Further analysis of the differences between the U.S. federal statutory rate and the consolidated effective tax rate, as well as other information about our income taxes, is provided in Note 19 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Foreign Exchange Impact
Changes in foreign exchange rates had a positive impact of $107 million and $62 million on our consolidated net revenues in 2021 and 2020, respectively, as compared to the same periods in the previous year.
Changes in foreign exchange rates had a positive impact of $30 million and $35 million on our consolidated operating income in 2021 and 2020, respectively, as compared to the same periods in the previous year.
Comparison of 2020 to 2019
For the comparison of 2020 to 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe our ability to generate cash flows from operating activities is one of our fundamental financial strengths. Despite the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy, in the near term, we expect our business and financial condition to remain strong and to continue to generate significant operating cash flows, which, we believe, in combination with our existing balance of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $10.6 billion, our access to debt and equity capital, and the availability of our $1.5 billion revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to finance our operational and financing requirements for the next 12 months and beyond. Our primary sources of liquidity include our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash flows provided by operating activities. Our material cash requirements include operating expenses, potential dividend payments and share repurchases, scheduled debt maturities (the next of which is in 2026), capital expenditures and other commitments, as discussed below.
As of December 31, 2021, the amount of cash and cash equivalents held outside of the U.S. by our foreign subsidiaries was $3.9 billion, as compared to $2.5 billion as of December 31, 2020. These cash balances are generally available for use in the U.S., subject in some cases to certain restrictions.
Our cash provided from operating activities is somewhat impacted by seasonality. Working capital needs are impacted by sales, which are generally highest in the fourth quarter due to seasonal and holiday-related sales patterns. We consider, on a continuing basis, various transactions to increase shareholder value and enhance our business results, including acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures, dividends, share repurchases, and other structural changes, with certain of the foregoing actions, if we were to move forward with them, requiring Microsoft's approval under the Merger Agreement (which may not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed), subject to certain exceptions. These transactions may result in future cash proceeds or payments.
Sources of Liquidity (amounts in millions)
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
The primary driver of net cash flows associated with our operating activities is the income generated from the sale of our products and services. This is partially offset by: working capital requirements used in the development, sale, and support of our products; payments for interest on our debt; payments for tax liabilities; and payments to our workforce.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $2.4 billion, as compared to $2.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher net income and lower tax payments in the current year, as the prior-year period included payments for a tax settlement in France with no comparable activity in 2021, partially offset by changes in our working capital resulting from the timing of collections and payments.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
The primary drivers of net cash flows associated with investing activities typically include capital expenditures, purchases and sales of investments, changes in restricted cash balances, and cash used for acquisitions.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $59 million, as compared to $178 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to net proceeds from the sale and maturities of available-for-sale investments of $32 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to net purchases of available-for-sale investments of $100 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
The primary drivers of net cash flows associated with financing activities typically include the proceeds from, and repayments of, our long-term debt and transactions involving our common stock, including the issuance of shares of common stock to employees upon the exercise of stock options, as well as the payment of dividends.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $521 million, as compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $711 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to:
•net debt proceeds of $896 million received for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from the issuance of an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion of new notes and the early redemption of $1.05 billion of our previously outstanding notes, with no comparable activity for the year ended December 31, 2021;
•higher tax payments made for net share settlements on restricted stock units, driven by a higher volume of share releases, at higher market values, resulting in $246 million of payments during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $39 million during the year ended December 31, 2020; and
•lower proceeds on issuance of stock to employees, with $90 million received during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $170 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Effect of Foreign Exchange Rate Changes
Changes in foreign exchange rates had a negative impact of $48 million and a positive impact of $69 million on our cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The change was primarily due to changes in the value of the U.S. dollar relative to the euro and the British pound.
Debt
At both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, our total gross unsecured senior notes outstanding was $3.7 billion, bearing interest at a weighted average rate of 2.87%.
A summary of our outstanding debt is as follows (amounts in millions):
Refer to Note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further disclosures regarding our debt obligations.
Dividends
On February 3, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.47 per common share, payable on May 6, 2022, to shareholders of record at the close of business on April 15, 2022.
On February 4, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.47 per common share. On May 6, 2021, we made an aggregate cash dividend payment of $365 million to shareholders of record at the close of business on April 15, 2021.
Capital Expenditures
We made capital expenditures of $80 million in 2021, as compared to $78 million in 2020. In 2022, we anticipate total capital expenditures of approximately $100 million, primarily for computer hardware, leasehold improvements, and software purchases.
Commitments
Refer to Note 22 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for disclosures regarding our commitments, including a table showing contractual obligations.
Comparison of 2020 to 2019
For the comparison of 2020 to 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, under the subheading “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
At each of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, Activision Blizzard had no significant relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial parties, often referred to as “structured finance” or “special purpose” entities, established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions. The impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. The policies, estimates, and assumptions discussed below are considered by management to be critical because they are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and because their application places the most significant demands on management’s judgment, with financial reporting results relying on estimates and assumptions about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Specific risks for these critical accounting policies, estimates, and assumptions are described in the following paragraphs.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily through the sale of our interactive entertainment content and services, principally for the console, PC, and mobile platforms, as well as through the licensing of our intellectual property. Our products span various genres, including first- and third-person action/adventure, role-playing, strategy, and “match three.” We primarily offer the following products and services:
•premium full games, which typically provide access to main game content after purchase;
•free-to-play offerings, which allow players to download the game and engage with the associated content for free;
•in-game content for purchase to enhance gameplay (i.e., microtransactions and downloadable content) available within both our premium full-game and free-to-play offerings; and
•subscriptions to players in World of Warcraft, which provide ongoing access to the game content.
When control of the promised products and services is transferred to our customers, we recognize revenue in the amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for these products and services.
We determine revenue recognition by:
•identifying the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identifying the performance obligations in each contract;
•determining the transaction price;
•allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in each contract; and
•recognizing revenue when, or as, we satisfy performance obligations by transferring the promised goods or services.
Certain products are sold to customers with a “street date” (which is the earliest date these products may be sold by retailers). For these products, we recognize revenues on the later of the street date and the date the product is sold to our customer. For digital full-game downloads sold to customers, we recognize revenue when it is available for download or is activated for gameplay. Revenues are recorded net of taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed at the time of the specific revenue-producing transaction between us and our customer, such as sales and value-added taxes.
Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type, although terms generally include a requirement of payment immediately upon purchase or within 30 to 90 days. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, we do not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component when we expect, at contract inception, that the period between our transfer of a promised product or service to our customer and payment for that product or service will be one year or less.
Product Sales
Product sales consist of sales of our games, including digital full-game downloads and physical products. We recognize revenues from the sale of our products after both (1) control of the products has been transferred to our customers and (2) the underlying performance obligations have been satisfied. Such revenues, which include our software products with significant online functionality and our online hosted software arrangements, are recognized in "Product sales" on our consolidated statement of operations.
Revenues from product sales are recognized after deducting the estimated allowance for returns and price protection, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize. Returns and price protection are estimated at contract inception and updated at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available.
Sales incentives and other consideration given by us to our customers, such as rebates and product placement fees, are considered adjustments of the transaction price of our products and are reflected as reductions to revenues. Sales incentives and other consideration that represent costs incurred by us for distinct goods or services received, such as the appearance of our products in a customer’s national circular advertisement, are recorded as “Sales and marketing” expense when the benefit from the sales incentive is separable from sales to the same customer and we can reasonably estimate the fair value of the good or service.
Products with Online Functionality
For our software products that include both offline functionality (i.e., do not require an Internet connection to access) and significant online functionality, such as most of our titles from the Call of Duty franchise, we evaluate whether the license of our intellectual property and the online functionality each represent separate and distinct performance obligations. In such instances, we typically have two performance obligations: (1) a license to the game software that is accessible without an Internet connection (predominantly the offline single player campaign or game mode) and (2) ongoing activities associated with the online components of the game, such as content updates, hosting of online content and gameplay, and online matchmaking (the “online functionality”). The online functionality generally operates to support the additional features and functionalities of the game that are only available online, not the offline license. This evaluation is performed for each software product or product add-on, including downloadable content. When we determine that our software products contain a license of intellectual property (i.e., the offline software license) that is separate and distinct from the online functionality, we consider market conditions and other observable inputs to estimate the standalone selling price for the performance obligations, since we do not generally sell the software license on a standalone basis. These products may be sold in a bundle with other products and services, which often results in the recognition of additional performance obligations.
For arrangements that include both a license to the game software that is accessible offline and separate online functionality, we recognize revenue when control of the license transfers to our customers for the portion of the transaction price allocable to the offline software license and ratably over the estimated service period for the portion of the transaction price allocable to the online functionality. Similarly, we defer a portion of the cost of revenues on these arrangements and recognize the costs as the related revenues are recognized. The cost of revenues that are deferred include product costs, distribution costs, software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses, and excludes intangible asset amortization.
Online Hosted Software Arrangements
For our online hosted software arrangements, such as titles for the Overwatch, Warcraft, and Candy Crush franchises, substantially all gameplay and functionality are obtained through our continuous hosting of the game content for the player. In these instances, we typically have a single performance obligation related to our ongoing activities in the hosted arrangement, including content updates, hosting of the gameplay, online matchmaking, and access to the game content. Similar to our software products with online functionality, these arrangements may include other products and services, which often results in the recognition of additional performance obligations. Revenues related to online hosted software arrangements are generally recognized ratably over the estimated service period.
In-game, Subscription, and Other Revenues
In-game Revenues
In-game revenues primarily includes revenue from microtransactions and downloadable content. Microtransaction revenues are derived from the sale of virtual currencies and goods to our players to enhance their gameplay experience. Proceeds from these sales of virtual currencies and goods are initially recorded in deferred revenue. Proceeds from the sales of virtual currencies are recognized as revenues when a player uses the virtual goods purchased with a virtual currency. Proceeds from the direct sales of virtual goods are similarly recognized as revenues when a player uses the virtual goods. We categorize our virtual goods as either “consumable” or “durable.” Consumable virtual goods represent goods that can be consumed by a specific player action; accordingly, we recognize revenues from the sale of consumable virtual goods as the goods are consumed and our performance obligation is satisfied. Durable virtual goods represent goods that are accessible to the player over an extended period of time; accordingly, we recognize revenues from the sale of durable virtual goods ratably over the estimated service period.
Subscription Revenues
Subscription revenue arrangements are mostly derived from World of Warcraft, which is only playable online and is generally sold on a subscription-only basis. Revenues associated with the sales of subscriptions are deferred until the subscription service is activated by the consumer and are then recognized ratably over the subscription period as the performance obligations are satisfied.
Revenues attributable to the purchase of World of Warcraft software by our customers, including expansion packs, are classified as “Product sales,” whereas revenues attributable to subscriptions and other in-game revenues are classified as “In-game, subscription, and other revenues.
Other Revenues
Other revenues primarily include revenues from software licensing, licensing of intellectual property other than software, and advertising in our games. These revenues are recognized in "In-game, subscription, and other revenues" on our consolidated statement of operations.
In certain countries we have software licensing arrangements where we utilize third-party licensees to distribute and host our games in accordance with license agreements, for which the licensees typically pay us a fixed minimum guarantee and sales-based royalties. These arrangements typically include multiple performance obligations, such as an upfront license of intellectual property and rights to specified or unspecified future updates. Our estimate of the selling price is comprised of several factors including, but not limited to, prior selling prices, prices charged separately by other third-party vendors for similar service offerings, and a cost-plus-margin approach. Based on the allocated transaction price, we recognize revenue associated with the minimum guarantee (1) when we transfer control of the upfront license of intellectual property, (2) upon transfer of control of future specified updates, and/or (3) ratably over the contractual term in which we provide the customer with unspecified future updates. Royalty payments in excess of the minimum guarantee are generally recognized when the licensed product is sold by the licensee.
Revenues from the licensing of intellectual property other than software primarily include the licensing of our (1) brand, logo, or franchise to customers and (2) media content. Fixed fee payments from customers for the license of our brand or franchise are generally recognized over the license term. Fixed fee payments from customers for the license of our media content are generally recognized when control has transferred to the customer, which may be upfront or over time.
Revenues from advertising arise primarily from contractual relationships with advertising networks, agencies, advertising brokers and directly with advertisers to display advertisements in our games. For all advertising arrangements, we are the principal and our performance obligation is to provide the inventory for advertisements to be displayed in our games. Our advertising arrangements are primarily impression-based and we recognize revenue from these in the contracted period in which the impressions are delivered. Impressions are considered delivered when an advertisement is displayed to users. The pricing and terms for all our advertising arrangements are governed by either a master contract or insertion order. The transaction price in advertising arrangements governed by a master contract is generally based on a revenue share percentage stated in the contract. The transaction price in advertising arrangements governed by an insertion order is generally the product of the number of advertising units delivered (e.g., impressions, videos viewed) and the contractually agreed upon price per advertising unit.
Significant Judgment around Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. Certain of our games, such as titles in the Call of Duty franchise, may contain a license of our intellectual property to play the game offline, but may also depend on a significant level of integration and interdependency with the online functionality. In these cases, significant judgment is required to determine whether this license of our intellectual property should be considered distinct and accounted for separately, or not distinct and accounted for together with the online functionality provided and recognized over time. Generally, for titles in which the software license is functional without the online functionality and a significant component of gameplay is available offline, we believe we have separate performance obligations for the license of the intellectual property and the online functionality.
Significant judgment is also required to determine the standalone selling price for each distinct performance obligation and to determine whether there is a discount that needs to be allocated based on the relative standalone selling price of the various products and services. To estimate the standalone selling price we generally consider market data, including our pricing strategies for the product being evaluated and other similar products we may offer, competitor pricing to the extent data is available, and the replayability design of both the offline and online components of our games. In limited instances, we may also utilize an expected cost approach to determine whether the estimated selling price yields an appropriate profit margin.
Estimated Service Period
We consider a variety of data points when determining the estimated service period for players of our games, including the weighted average number of days between players’ unique purchase or first day played online, and the time at which players become inactive and cease engaging with our content for a period of time. We also consider known online trends such as the cadence of content delivery in our games, the service periods of our previously released games, and, to the extent publicly available, the service periods of our competitors’ games that are similar in nature to ours. We believe this provides a reasonable depiction of the transfer of services to our customers, as it is the best representation of the time period during which our customers play our games. Determining the estimated service period is subjective and requires significant management judgment. The estimated service periods for players of our current games are less than 12 months.
Historically, we have not observed significant variability in our estimated service period as the online content for our games has generally been comparable to previously released titles resulting in similar usage patterns. Future usage patterns could change from historical patterns as a result of various factors, including but not limited to, changes in our online content, frequency of content delivery, competitor’s offerings, and other changes that impact player’s engagement that we may not be able to reasonable predict at the time of deriving our estimate. If future usage patterns were to change significantly from historical patterns, in the future our estimated service period could change and materially impact our future consolidated net revenues and operating income.
Principal Agent Considerations
We evaluate sales of our products and content via third-party digital storefronts, such as Microsoft’s Xbox Games Store, Sony’s PSN, the Apple App Store, and the Google Play Store, to determine whether our revenues should be reported gross or net of fees retained by the storefront. Key indicators that we evaluate in determining whether we are the principal in the sale (gross reporting) or an agent (net reporting) include, but are not limited to:
•which party is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified good or service; and
•which party has discretion in establishing the price for the specified good or service.
Based on our evaluation of the above indicators, we report revenues on a gross basis for sales arrangements via the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store, and we report revenues on a net basis (i.e., net of fees retained by the digital storefront) for sales arrangements via Microsoft’s Xbox Games Store and Sony’s PSN.
Income Taxes
We record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities due to a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. We evaluate deferred tax assets each period for recoverability. For those assets that do not meet the threshold of “more likely than not” that they will be realized in the future, a valuation allowance is recorded.
Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. In the event that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are determined not to be realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to tax expense in the period such determination is made.
The calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of ASC Topic 740 and complex tax laws. The accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes applies to all income tax positions, including the potential recovery of previously paid taxes. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on our business and results of operations in an interim period in which the uncertainties are ultimately resolved.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
We are also subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and are regularly subject to audit by other tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition. For the year ended December 31, 2021, one percentage point increase in our effective tax rate would have resulted in an increase in our income tax expense of approximately $32 million.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which also created a new minimum tax that applies to certain foreign earnings (“GILTI”). We have elected to recognize deferred taxes for temporary basis differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years.
Software Development Costs
Software development costs include direct costs incurred for internally developed products, as well as payments made to independent software developers under development agreements. Software development costs are capitalized once the technological feasibility of a product is established and such costs are determined to be recoverable. Technological feasibility of a product requires both technical design documentation and game design documentation, or the completed and tested product design and a working model. For products where proven technology exists, this may occur early in the development cycle. Software development costs related to online hosted revenue arrangements are capitalized after the preliminary project phase is complete and it is probable that the project will be completed and the software will be used to perform the function intended. Significant management judgments and estimates are applied in assessing when capitalization commences for software development costs and the evaluation is performed on a product-by-product basis. Prior to a product’s release, if and when we believe capitalized costs are not recoverable, we expense the amounts as part of “Cost of revenues-software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses.” Capitalized costs for products that are canceled or are expected to be abandoned are charged to “Product development” in the period of cancellation. Amounts related to software development which are not capitalized are charged immediately to “Product development.”
Commencing upon a product’s release, capitalized software development costs are amortized to “Cost of revenues-software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses” based on the ratio of current revenues to total projected revenues for the specific product, generally resulting in an amortization period of six months to approximately two years.
We evaluate the future recoverability of capitalized software development costs on a quarterly basis. For products that have been released, the primary evaluation criterion is the actual performance of the title to which the costs relate. For products that are scheduled to be released in future periods, recoverability is evaluated based on the expected performance of the specific products to which the costs relate or in which the licensed trademark or copyright is to be used. Additionally, criteria used to evaluate expected product performance may include, as appropriate: historical performance of comparable products developed with comparable technology; market performance of comparable titles; orders for the product prior to its release; general market conditions; and, for any sequel product, estimated performance based on the performance of the product on which the sequel is based.
Significant management judgments and estimates are utilized in assessing the recoverability of capitalized costs. In evaluating the recoverability of capitalized costs, the assessment of expected product performance utilizes forecasted sales amounts and estimates of additional costs to be incurred. Historically, our forecasted and actual product sales have been more than enough to recover capitalized software costs. If revised forecasted or actual product sales are less than the originally forecasted amounts utilized in the initial recoverability analysis, the net realizable value may be lower than originally estimated in any given quarter, which could result in an impairment charge. Material differences may result in the amount and timing of expenses for any period if matters resolve in a manner that is inconsistent with management’s expectations.
For a detailed discussion of the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a detailed discussion of all relevant recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 3 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.