Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. This section provides additional information regarding our businesses, current developments, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition, contractual commitments and critical accounting policies and estimates that require significant judgement and have the most potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. This discussion and analysis is intended to better allow investors to view the Company from the management’s perspective.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of novel therapeutics. Our mission is to bring hope with life-changing therapies to patients and families that are affected by rare and niche allergic and immunological diseases. Our lead product candidate is STAR-0215 (formerly known as QLS-215), a potential best-in-class monoclonal antibody inhibitor of plasma kallikrein in preclinical development for the treatment of hereditary angioedema, or HAE, a rare, debilitating and potentially life-threatening disease. STAR-0215 has the potential to be the most patient-friendly chronic treatment option, based on the data generated to date and the existing HAE treatment landscape.
In January 2021 we acquired Quellis Biosciences, Inc., or Quellis, including the STAR-0215 program, and announced a private placement that, upon closing in February 2021, resulted in gross proceeds to us of approximately $110.0 million before deducting placement agent and other offering expenses. In November 2020, after we stopped the development of our edasalonexent program as a potential treatment for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, or DMD, we decided to explore and evaluate strategic options. The acquisition of Quellis was the result of our evaluation of strategic options.
In September 2021, we formally changed our name to Astria Therapeutics, Inc. from Catabasis Pharmaceuticals, Inc. The name “Astria” originates from the Greek word for star, demonstrating our commitment to patients who serve as our guiding stars.
HAE is a rare, debilitating and potentially life-threatening disease. The treatment options for patients with HAE have improved, however, there is remaining unmet medical need and the global market for HAE therapy is strong and growing. The vision for our lead program, STAR-0215, is to develop a best-in-class monoclonal antibody inhibitor of plasma kallikrein able to provide long-acting, effective attack prevention for HAE with dosing once every three months or longer. Targeted plasma kallikrein inhibition can prevent HAE attacks by suppressing the pathway that generates bradykinin and causes excessive swelling. STAR-0215 is currently in preclinical development and we expect to submit an Investigational New Drug application, or IND, for STAR-0215 in mid-2022 and plan to initiate a Phase 1a clinical trial shortly thereafter with initial results anticipated by year end 2022. We believe that this clinical trial has the opportunity to establish proof of concept for the differentiated profile of STAR-0215. We expect the Phase 1a clinical trial to be conducted in healthy volunteers and evaluate several single escalating dose cohorts with subcutaneous administration. Our goals for this trial with STAR-0215 are to demonstrate safety and tolerability, establish prolonged half-life, demonstrate the duration of inhibition of plasma kallikrein activity and to refine dose and dosing regimen for studies in HAE patients. Assuming positive data from the Phase 1a trial, we plan to initiate a Phase 1b/2 trial in patients with HAE in 2023. We expect the Phase 1b/2 trial will be a randomized, placebo-controlled, global multi-center trial. The primary goals for this trial in HAE patients are to demonstrate safety and tolerability, establish prolonged half-life, demonstrate inhibition of plasma kallikrein activity, and provide an initial assessment of the impact of STAR-0215 on HAE attack rate.
Our vision for STAR-0215 is supported by preclinical data showing potent inhibition of the production of bradykinin by plasma kallikrein and a long plasma half-life that could potentially enable patients to dose less frequently. Multiple experiments have confirmed that STAR-0215 is approximately 10-fold more potent than lanadelumab, a monoclonal antibody inhibitor of plasma kallikrein commercialized under the name TAKHZYRO and an approved preventative treatment for HAE, in inhibiting bradykinin production. In cynomolgus monkey studies, lanadelumab was observed to have a half-life of approximately 10 days, which is consistent with what has been reported in United States Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, review documents and publications for lanadelumab in non-human primates. STAR-0215 was administered at the same dose as lanadelumab and the observed half-life was approximately 34 days, which is about a three to four-fold longer half-life than observed for lanadelumab. We believe this could translate to a half-life of several
months for STAR-0215 in humans. If this longer half-life is demonstrated in clinical trials, it has the potential to enable dosing once every three months or longer.
January 2021 Quellis Acquisition and February 2021 Financing
In January 2021, we acquired Quellis pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger, or the Merger Agreement, by and among us, Cabo Merger Sub I, Inc., a Delaware corporation and our wholly owned subsidiary, or the First Merger Sub, Cabo Merger Sub II, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and our wholly owned subsidiary, or the Second Merger Sub, and Quellis, or the Quellis Acquisition. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the First Merger Sub merged with and into Quellis, pursuant to which Quellis was the surviving entity and became a wholly owned subsidiary of ours, or the First Merger. Immediately following the First Merger, Quellis merged with and into the Second Merger Sub, pursuant to which the Second Merger Sub was the surviving entity, or the Second Merger and, together with the First Merger, the Merger. Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the closing of the Merger, we issued to the Quellis stockholders 555,444 shares of our common stock, and 50,504 shares of newly designated Series X Preferred Stock (as described below). In addition, we assumed outstanding Quellis stock options, which became options for 55,414 shares of our common stock, and assumed a warrant exercisable for Quellis common stock, which became a warrant to purchase 2,805 shares of Series X Preferred Stock at an exercise price of $341.70 per share, and a warrant to purchase 30,856 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $2.10 per share. Upon stockholder approval of the Conversion Proposal (as defined below) on June 2, 2021, the warrant to purchase Series X Preferred Stock was converted into the right to purchase 467,500 shares of our common stock, at a per share exercise price of $2.10 per share.
We concluded that the Quellis Acquisition was not the acquisition of a business, as substantially all of the fair value of the non-monetary assets acquired was concentrated in a single identifiable asset, STAR-0215.
We determined that the cost to acquire the Quellis assets was $170.7 million, based on the fair value of the equity consideration issued and including direct costs of the acquisition of $1.8 million. The net assets acquired in connection with the Quellis Acquisition were recorded at their estimated fair values as of January 28, 2021, which is the date the Quellis Acquisition was completed.
In the estimation of fair value of the asset purchase consideration, we used the carrying value of the cash and cash equivalents, prepaid expenses, accounts payable and accrued liabilities as the most reliable indicator of fair value based on the associated short-term nature of the balances. The remaining fair value was attributable to the acquired in-process research and development, or IPR&D. As STAR-0215 had not, at the time of the Quellis Acquisition, received regulatory approval in any territory, the cost attributable to the IPR&D was expensed in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, as the acquired IPR&D had no alternative future use, as determined by us in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP.
In January 2021, we also entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with certain institutional and accredited investors pursuant to which, we sold an aggregate of 35,573 shares of Series X Preferred Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $110.0 million, or the February 2021 Financing. Our stockholders approved the conversion of the Series X Preferred Stock into shares of common stock in accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(a), or the Conversion Proposal, at our annual stockholders meeting on June 2, 2021. On the fourth business day after the approval of the Conversion Proposal, each share of Series X Preferred Stock automatically converted into 166.67 shares of common stock, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations, including that a holder of Series X Preferred Stock is prohibited from converting shares of Series X Preferred Stock into shares of common stock if, as a result of such conversion, such holder, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own more than a specified percentage (as of December 31, 2021, these percentages are set at 4.99% to 9.99% and can be adjusted by the holder to a number between 4.99% and 19.99%) of the total number of shares of common stock issued and outstanding immediately after giving effect to such conversion. Shares of Series X Preferred Stock not converted automatically are thereafter subject to conversion at the option of the holder, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations. As of December 31, 2021, 54,622 shares of Series X Preferred Stock were converted into 9,103,664 shares of common stock and 31,455 shares of Series X Preferred Stock remained outstanding. Each share of Series X Preferred Stock is convertible into 166.67 shares of common stock and therefore the number of shares of underlying common stock issuable upon conversion of the outstanding shares Series X Preferred Stock is 5,242,501. Outstanding shares of Series X Preferred Stock are subject to conversion at the option of the holder.
Reverse Stock Split
On August 4, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a reverse stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock at a ratio of one-for-six (1:6). The reverse stock split became effective on August 19, 2021. The reverse stock split was approved by our stockholders at our Annual Meeting of Stockholders on June 2, 2021. All share and per share amounts of the common stock included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, have been retrospectively adjusted to give effect to the reverse stock split for all periods presented, including reclassifying an amount equal to the reduction in par value to additional paid-in capital.
Financial Overview
Our business is almost entirely dependent on the success of STAR-0215, which is in the preclinical stage of development, and has only produced results in preclinical and nonclinical settings. Our net losses were $194.9 million (including $164.6 million of in-process research and development expenses) and $37.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $455.8 million. We have financed our operations to date primarily through private placements of preferred stock before we became a public company and our private placement of preferred stock in the February 2021 Financing, registered offerings of our common stock and our at-the-market programs, and have devoted substantially all of our financial resources and efforts to research and development, including preclinical studies and clinical development programs. As of December 31, 2021, we had $125.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. We expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments are sufficient to support our operating expenses through 2023. Advancing the development of STAR-0215 or any future product candidates will require a significant amount of capital. Our existing cash and cash equivalents will not be sufficient to fund STAR-0215 or any future product candidates through regulatory approval. We will need to obtain substantial additional funding to complete the development and commercialization of STAR-0215 or any future product candidates, support our continuing operations, future clinical trials and expansion of our pipeline. Furthermore, our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional financing to fund our long-term operations sooner than planned. See the section titled “Liquidity, Capital Resources and Capital Requirements” below for additional information.
Revenue
As of December 31, 2021, we have not generated any revenue from product sales.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
● employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations, or CROs, that conduct clinical trials and research and development and preclinical activities on our behalf;
● the cost of consultants;
● the cost of lab supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing study materials; and
● facilities and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
We typically use our employee, consultant and infrastructure resources across our development programs. We track outsourced development costs by product candidate or development program, but we do not allocate personnel costs, other internal costs or external
consultant costs to specific product candidates or development programs. We record our research and development expenses net of any research and development tax incentives we are entitled to receive from government authorities.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by program (in thousands). All of the programs with respect to which we incurred research and development expenses during the years ended December 31, 2020 have been discontinued.
Based on the results of the Phase 3 PolarisDMD trial of edasalonexent for the treatment of DMD, in October 2020 we stopped all activities related to the development of edasalonexent, including the ongoing GalaxyDMD open-label extension trial, and wound down substantially all activities related to edasalonexent by mid-2021.
We expect to incur significant research and development expenses in the year ending December 31, 2022, and in future periods in connection with the preclinical and clinical activities related to the development of STAR-0215. Because of this, we expect that our research and development expenses over the next several quarters will be higher than the prior year periods. Development of STAR-0215 and any future product candidates is highly uncertain and we cannot reasonably estimate at this time the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that would be necessary to complete the development of any such product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows would commence from STAR-0215 or any other product candidates. This is due to the fact that we would need to raise substantial additional capital to fund the clinical development of any such product candidates and the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing and commercializing product candidates, including the uncertainties of:
● establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling toxicology studies;
● successful enrollment in, and completion of clinical trials;
● changes in the FDA and foreign regulatory approval processes or perspectives that may delay or prevent the approval of new products;
● receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity;
● launching commercial sales, if we are able to obtain marketing approval, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
● a continued acceptable safety profile following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of STAR-0215 or any future product candidate would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, commercial, business development, legal and human resources functions. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that in the near term our general and administrative expenses will remain relatively consistent with their current levels, although as we continue to develop STAR-0215 and potentially expand our pipeline to include other product candidates, our general and administrative expenses may increase.
Acquired In-process Research and Development Expense
Acquired IPR&D expense resulted from the Quellis Acquisition in January 2021. The acquisition cost allocated to acquire IPR&D with no alternative future use was recorded as expense at the acquisition date and no additional IPR&D expense relating to the Quellis Acquisition is expected to be reported in future periods.
Reduction in Workforce
In December 2020, following the decision to stop development of edasalonexent, we announced that we were reducing our workforce during the quarter ended December 31, 2020. The reduction of workforce resulted in total expenses for employee severance and employee benefits of $0.6 million, of which $0.2 million was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, all severance related to the reduction of workforce has been paid.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense), net consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and net amortization expense on short-term investments, and gains and losses related to foreign currency fluctuations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We believe that several accounting policies are important to understanding our historical and future performance. We refer to these policies as critical because these specific areas generally require us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain at the time we make the estimate, and different estimates-which also would have been reasonable-could have been used. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policy is the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Quellis Acquisition
In January 2021, we acquired Quellis pursuant to the Merger Agreement. We concluded that the Quellis Acquisition was not the acquisition of a business, as substantially all of the fair value of the non-monetary assets acquired was concentrated in a single identifiable asset, STAR-0215.
We determined that the cost to acquire the Quellis assets was $170.7 million, based on the fair value of the equity consideration issued and including direct costs of the acquisition of $1.8 million. The net assets acquired in connection with the Quellis Acquisition were recorded at their estimated fair values as of January 28, 2021, which is the date the Quellis Acquisition was completed.
In the estimation of fair value of the asset purchase consideration, we used the carrying value of the cash and cash equivalents, prepaid expenses, accounts payable and accrued liabilities as the most reliable indicator of fair value based on the associated short-term nature of the balances. The remaining fair value was attributable to the acquired in-process research and development, or IPR&D. As STAR-0215 had not, at the time of the Quellis Acquisition, received regulatory approval in any territory, the cost attributable to the IPR&D was expensed in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, as the acquired IPR&D had no alternative future use, as determined by the Company in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The estimate of accrued research and development expense is dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs and other third-party service providers. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by CROs in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to CROs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with CROs that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our CROs will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of subjects and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting expense amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the dollar change in those items (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $10.0 million to $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $25.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 39%. The decrease in research and development expenses was attributable
to stopping all development activities associated with our edasalonexent program, partially offset by costs to support our preclinical development of the STAR-0215 program. The $10.0 million decrease in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to a $16.7 million decrease in costs to support our edasalonexent program, a $1.6 million decrease in employee related expenses, a $0.3 million decrease in consulting expense, and a $0.5 million decrease in the research and development portion of facilities and other office expenses. These decreases were partially offset by a $8.2 million increase in costs to support preclinical development of the STAR-0215 program, and a $0.9 million increase in other research and platform programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.0 million to $14.8 million for year ended December 31, 2021 from $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 25%. The increase in general and administrative expenses was attributable to a $2.5 million increase in employee expenses, $1.4 million of which was specifically related to stock compensation, a $0.7 million increase in recruiting expense, a $0.4 million increase in insurance expense, a $0.1 million increase in the general and administrative portion of facilities and general office expenses and a $0.1 million increase in our Delaware franchise fee, partially offset by a decrease in professional services of $0.8 million largely related to a decrease in activities related to preparation for commercialization of edasalonexent.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net decreased by $71 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which was attributable to a decrease in interest and investment income due to lower interest rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From our inception through December 31, 2021, we raised an aggregate of $426.0 million through private placements of preferred stock before we became a public company and our private placement of preferred stock in the February 2021 Financing, registered offerings of our common stock and our at-the-market programs. As of December 31, 2021, we had $125.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. We expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments are sufficient to support our operating expenses through 2023. Advancing the development of STAR-0215 and other product candidates will require a significant amount of capital. Our existing cash and cash equivalents will not be sufficient to fund any of our product candidates through regulatory approval. Furthermore, our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional financing to fund our long-term operations sooner than planned.
We will need to obtain substantial additional funding to complete the development and commercialization of STAR-0215 or any future product candidates, support our continuing operations, future clinical trials and expansion of our pipeline. In addition, STAR-0215 or any future product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of product candidates that we do not expect to be commercially available for years, if at all. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. The terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or the rights of our stockholders. Market volatility, inflation, interest rate fluctuations and concerns related to the COVID-19 pandemic may have a significant impact on the availability of funding sources and the terms on which any funding may be available. If we fail to raise capital as, and when, needed, we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to modify our business strategies and reduce or terminate our operations. Although we will continue to pursue these plans, there is no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining sufficient funding on terms acceptable to us to fund continuing operations when needed or at all.
February 2021 Financing
On January 28, 2021, we entered into the Purchase Agreement and sold an aggregate of 35,573 shares of Series X Preferred Stock on the February 1, 2021 closing date for gross proceeds of approximately $110.0 million, and net proceeds of $104.3 million.
January 2020 Financing
On January 30, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. relating to an underwritten public offering, or the January 2020 Financing, of 881,666 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $30.00 per share, including
115,000 shares issued upon the exercise in full by Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. of its overallotment option. This resulted in gross proceeds of $26.5 million, and net proceeds of $24.6 million.
At-the-Market Offerings
We have entered into various sales agreements with Cowen and Company LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we could issue and sell shares of common stock, under at-the-market offering programs. On May 20, 2021, we terminated our sales agreement with Cowen. On June 30, 2021, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM with Jefferies LLC, or Jefferies, pursuant to which we can issue and sell shares of common stock, of up to $25.0 million under at-the-market offering programs (collectively, with the Cowen at-the-market offering program, the ATM Programs). We pay the sales agent commissions of 3% of the gross proceeds from any common stock sold through the ATM Programs. As of December 31, 2021, we have not sold any shares of common stock pursuant to the Jefferies agreement and $25.0 million of common stock remains available for sale under the Jefferies agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 392,288 shares of common stock pursuant to our ATM Programs, at an average offering price of $42.76 per share, for gross proceeds of $16.8 million, resulting in net proceeds of $16.3 million after deducting sales commissions and offering expenses. There was no activity from the ATM Programs during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Funding Requirements
Our primary uses of capital are for compensation and related expenses, manufacturing costs for preclinical and clinical materials, third party preclinical research and development services, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $455.8 million. We have been primarily involved with research and development activities and have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception.
As of December 31, 2021, we had available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $125.5 million. We expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments are sufficient to support our operating expenses through 2023.
Our estimate as to how long we expect our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments to be able to fund our operations is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of biotechnology products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Further, changing circumstances, some of which may be beyond our control, could cause us to consume capital significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to seek additional funds sooner than planned. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials of, and research and preclinical development efforts for, STAR-0215 and any future product candidates, including potential future clinical trials;
● our ability to enter into and the terms and timing of any additional collaborations, licensing or other arrangements that we may establish;
● the number and characteristics of future product candidates that we pursue and their development requirements;
● the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
● the costs of commercialization activities for any of our product candidates that receive marketing approval to the extent such costs are not the responsibility of any future collaborators, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, market access, distribution, supply chain and manufacturing capabilities, and scaling up the manufacturing of drug substance and drug product to clinical and commercial scale, securing all raw materials necessary to conduct such scale-up and successfully completing all other activities related thereto;
● if we obtain marketing approval of any of our product candidates, revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates;
● if we obtain marketing approval of any of our product candidates, our ability to successfully compete against other approved products that are approved or used as treatments for the indications for which our products are approved, including with respect to STAR-0215 in HAE;
● our headcount growth and associated costs;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against intellectual property related claims;
● the progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials of, and research and preclinical development efforts for, STAR-0215 and any future product candidates, including potential future clinical trials;
● the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, business and prospects; and
● the costs of operating as a public company.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical testing and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, STAR-0215 or any future product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of medicines that we do not expect to be commercially available for years, if at all. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. Debt financing, if available, would result in periodic payment obligations and may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business.
If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $30.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $194.9 million adjusted for the non-cash portion of acquired IPR&D of $164.6 million, stock-based compensation expense of $3.4 million, and a net increase in net assets of $3.3 million, which resulted primarily from a decrease in accounts payable of $2.0 million, and a decrease in accrued expenses of $1.3 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $32.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $37.3 million adjusted for non-cash items of $1.4 million, and a net decrease in operating assets of $3.4 million, which resulted primarily from a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1.3 million and a decrease in the right of use asset of $0.2 million as well as increases in accrued expenses and accounts payable of $1.9 million.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted of purchases of short-term investments of $78.0 million, partially offset by proceeds from maturities of short-term investments of $59.0 million and cash acquired in the Quellis Acquisition of $6.4 million. Net cash provided by investing activities was $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of proceeds from maturities of short-term investments of $69.1 million, which were partially offset by purchases of short-term investments of $62.8 million.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $104.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, which was attributable to net proceeds of $104.3 million from the February 2021 Financing. Net cash provided by financing activities was $40.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to net proceeds of $24.6 million from the January 2020 Financing and net proceeds of $16.3 million from our ATM Programs.
Material Cash Requirements from Known Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of payment due date by period at December 31, 2021:
(1)Represents future minimum lease payments under our non-cancelable operating lease. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
(2)Represents future milestone payments under vendor agreements if certain clinical milestones related to the planned Phase 1a clinical trials of the STAR-0215 program are met.
As of December 31, 2021, our only material contractual obligations were our facility lease pursuant to which we will make payments of $0.4 million until it’s expiration in June of 2022 and to certain vendors to which we will make payments of $0.8 million if certain clinical milestones related to the planned Phase 1a clinical trials of STAR-0215 are met. In January 2022, we entered into a sublease as described in Item 2. Properties, to which we will make payments of $1.4 million from May 2022 through June 2024.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with vendors for preclinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes. We have not included these payments in the table of contractual obligations above since the contracts are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 60 days’ prior written notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.