ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Forward-Looking Statements and Associated Risks.
This Form 10-K contains certain statements that are forward-looking within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. For this purpose, any statements contained in this Form 10-K that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the foregoing, words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” or “continue,” or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements by their nature involve substantial risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially depending on a variety of factors, many of which are not within our control. These factors include but are not limited to economic conditions generally and in the industries in which we may participate; competition within our chosen industry, including competition from much larger competitors; technological advances and failure to successfully develop business relationships.
Based on our financial history since inception, our auditor has expressed substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit totaling $30,958,321. This raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Plan of Operation
Our plan of operation is to obtain debt or equity finance to meet our ongoing operating expenses and attempt to relist our shares of common stock on the Pink Sheets and then merge with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create value for our shareholders. There can be no assurance that any of the events can be successfully completed, that our shares of common stock will be relisted on the Pink Sheets, any such business will be identified or that any stockholder will realize any return on their shares after such a transaction has been completed. In particular, there is no assurance that any such business will be located or that any stockholder will realize any return on their shares after such a transaction. Any merger or acquisition completed by us can be expected to have a significant dilutive effect on the percentage of shares held by our current stockholders
As of December 31, 2021, we had no cash on hand and committed resources of debt or equity to fund these losses. We will be reliant, potentially, on advances from our principal shareholders or our directors and officers. There can be no guarantee that we will be able to obtain sufficient funding these sources.
Our principal shareholder has indicated his intention to provide such funds as may be required for the Company to become, and remain, a fully reporting public company while seeking to create value for shareholders by merging with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of its common stock. Such intentions do not represent a binding commitment by the principal shareholder and there is no guarantee that our two principal shareholders will be able to provide the funding necessary to achieve this objective.
We currently believe that our principal shareholder will be able to provide us with the funding necessary to effect our business plan to merge with another entity. However, while our principal shareholder has indicated his intention to provide us with sufficient funding to achieve this objective, there is no guarantee that he will be able to provide funding necessary to enable us to merge with another entity.
If we are unable to obtain the necessary funding from our principal shareholder, we anticipate facing major challenges in raising the necessary funding to effect our business plan to merge with another entity. Raising debt or equity funding for small publicly quoted, penny stock, shell companies is always extremely challenging.
We may face a number of obstacles in our attempt to raise funding to achieve our objective of merging with a yet to be identified company or group. One of those is Rule 419, under the Securities Act of 1933.
Rule 419 defines a "blank check company" as a company that: i. Is a development stage company that has no specific business plan or purpose or has indicated that its business plan is to engage in a merger or acquisition with an unidentified company or companies, or other entity or person; and ii. Is issuing "penny stock," as defined in Rule 3a51-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
We are a “blank check company” and therefore, in order to raise public or private funds before we have any business, we must comply with the requirements of Rule 419 which includes restrictive escrow and other provisions. These provisions will make it difficult, if not impossible, for us to raise funds for the company.
Therefore, because of these difficulties in raising funding in penny stock or shell companies, if our principal shareholder is unable to provide us with the funding required to merge with another entity, it is very likely that we will be unable to implement our business plan to merge with another entity to create value for all of our shareholders”.
We believe we are an insignificant participant among the firms which engage in the acquisition of business opportunities. There are many established venture capital and financial concerns that have significantly greater financial and personnel resources and technical expertise than we have. In view of our limited financial resources and limited management availability, we will continue to be at a significant competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors.
We intend to seek, investigate and, if such investigation warrants, acquire an interest in business opportunities presented to us by persons or firms which desire to seek the advantages of an issuer who has complied with the Securities Act of 1934 (the “1934 Act”). We will not restrict our search to any specific business, industry or geographical location, and we may participate in business ventures of virtually any nature. This discussion of our proposed business is purposefully general and is not meant to be restrictive of our virtually unlimited discretion to search for and enter into potential business opportunities. We anticipate that we may be able to participate in only one potential business venture because of our lack of financial resources.
We may seek a business opportunity with entities which have recently commenced operations, or that desire to utilize the public marketplace in order to raise additional capital in order to expand into new products or markets, to develop a new product or service, or for other corporate purposes. We may acquire assets and establish wholly owned subsidiaries in various businesses or acquire existing businesses as subsidiaries.
We expect that the selection of a business opportunity will be complex and risky. Due to general economic conditions, rapid technological advances being made in some industries and shortages of available capital, we believe that there are numerous firms seeking the benefits of an issuer who has complied with the 1934 Act. Such benefits may include facilitating or improving the terms on which additional equity financing may be sought, providing liquidity for incentive stock options or similar benefits to key employees, providing liquidity (subject to
restrictions of applicable statutes) for all stockholders and other factors. Potentially, available business opportunities may occur in many different industries and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex. We have, and will continue to have, essentially no assets to provide the owners of business opportunities. However, we will be able to offer owners of acquisition candidates the opportunity to acquire a controlling ownership interest in an issuer who has complied with the 1934 Act without incurring the cost and time required to conduct an initial public offering.
The analysis of new business opportunities will be undertaken by, or under the supervision of, our sole director. We intend to concentrate on identifying preliminary prospective business opportunities which may be brought to our attention through present associations of our director, professional advisors or by our stockholders. In analyzing prospective business opportunities, we will consider such matters as (i) available technical, financial and managerial resources; (ii) working capital and other financial requirements; (iii) history of operations, if any, and prospects for the future; (iv) nature of present and expected competition; (v) quality, experience and depth of management services; (vi) potential for further research, development or exploration; (vii) specific risk factors not now foreseeable but that may be anticipated to impact the proposed activities of the company; (viii) potential for growth or expansion; (ix) potential for profit; (x) public recognition and acceptance of products, services or trades; (xi) name identification; and (xii) other factors that we consider relevant. As part of our investigation of the business opportunity, we expect to meet personally with management and key personnel. To the extent possible, we intend to utilize written reports and personal investigation to evaluate the above factors.
We will not acquire or merge with any company for which audited financial statements cannot be obtained within a reasonable period of time after closing of the proposed transaction.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
We are a SEC reporting shell company. Shares of our common stock can only be traded in the expert market as of the date of this report. We believe this is due to there being no broker dealers willing to quote our stock. We intend to seek approval for our shares of common stock to be traded on the Pink Sheets again. Once relisted on the Pink Sheets, we will then seek to merge with an entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create values for our shareholders. There is no guarantee that we will be successful in becoming relisted on the Pink Sheets and no potential merger candidate has been identified at this time.
Revenue
We recognized no revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020 as we had no revenue generating activities during these periods.
General and Administrative Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred general and administrative expenses of $115,272 comprising officers’ compensation of $89,900 and, accounting, auditing, legal, share transfer agent fand other fees totaling $25,372. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred general and administrative expenses of $36,600 comprising officers’ compensation of $36,000 and $600 in share transfer agent fees.
The $78,672 increase in general and administrative expenses between the two years reflected the increase activity as we brought our financial accounting up to date and became a fully reporting SEC company.
Gain on Partial Settlement of Liabilities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a gain of $4,270 on a partial payment we made to one of our creditors. The creditor reduced the remaining balance owed by us on receipt of the partial payment.
We recognized no such gain during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Loss
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred an operating loss of $111,002 due to the factors discussed above compared to an operating loss of $36,600 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss before Income Tax
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss before income taxes of $111,002 due to the factors discussed above compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, during which we incurred a loss of $36,600.
Provision for Income Tax
No provision for income taxes was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as we incurred taxable losses in both years.
Net Loss
During the period ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $111,002 due to the factors discussed above, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, during which we incurred a loss of $36,600.
CASH FLOW
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any revenue generating activities or other sources of income and we had total liabilities of $153,739 and a shareholders deficit of ($152,572).
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $111,002 of which $39,900 related to non-cash, equity compensation and $4,270 to a non-cash gain on settlement of certain liabilities, resulting in a net loss on a cash basis of $66,832. At the same time, our accruals - related parties increased by $42,000, our accounts payable by $1,100 and our prepaid expenses by $1,167, resulting in net cash of $35,639 being used in operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of $36,600 which was funded by a $36,000 increase in accruals - related parties and a $600 increase in accounts payable resulting in no cash being used in operations.
Investing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no investing activities.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $35,639 by way of an advance under notes payable - related party resulting in a total of $35,639 being generated from financing operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had no financing activity.
We are dependent upon the receipt of capital investment or other financing to fund our ongoing operations and to execute our business plan to become a profitable real estate development company seeking to develop or redevelop residential, commercial or mixed used properties. In addition, we are dependent upon our controlling shareholder to provide continued funding and capital resources. If continued funding and capital resources are unavailable at reasonable terms, we may not be able to implement our plan of operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
All companies are required to include a discussion of critical accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of their financial statements. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 3 of our Financial Statements on page. These policies were selected because they represent the more significant accounting policies and methods that are broadly applied in the preparation of our financial statements.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not and will not have a material effect on our operations in the immediate future.
Management will continue to monitor inflation and evaluate the possible future effects of inflation on our business and operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Per SEC regulations, we are required to disclose our off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, such as changes in financial condition, revenues, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to investors. As of June 20, 2021, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Share-based Compensation
The cost of equity instruments issued to employees and non-employees in return for goods and services is measured by the grant date fair value of the equity instruments issued in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. The related expense is recognized as services are rendered or vesting periods elapse.
.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on our financial statements.