Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
As used in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation,” except where the context otherwise requires, the term “we,” “us,” “our,” or “the Company,” refers to the business of Ipsidy Inc.
Overview
Ipsidy Inc. dba authID.ai (together with its subsidiaries, the “Company”, “authID.ai”, “we” or “our”) is a leading provider of secure, mobile, biometric identity verification software products delivered by an easy to integrate Identity as a Service (IDaaS) platform. Our mission is ultimately to eliminate all passwords and to be the preferred global platform for biometric identity authentication. Our vision is to enable every organization to “Recognise Your Customer” instantly, without friction or loss of privacy, powered by the most sophisticated biometric and artificial intelligence technologies.
The explosive growth in online and mobile commerce, telemedicine, remote working and digital activities of all descriptions is self-evident to everyone who lived through the Covid 19 since 2020. Identity theft, phishing attacks, spear-phishing, password vulnerabilities, account takeovers, benefits fraud - it seems like these words have entered our daily lexicon overnight. These are significant impediments to the operations and growth of any business or organization, and dealing with the risks and consequences of these criminal activities has created significant friction in both time, cost and lost opportunity. Consider all the outdated methods that organizations have implemented in order to prevent fraud. The requests to receive and enter one-time passwords, that can be easily hijacked. The vulnerable security questions you get asked - whether on-line or when reaching out to a call center - what was your first pet’s name? who was your best friend in high school? These steps all add up to friction, making it difficult for consumers to login, transact and execute daily tasks, with little added protection from fraud. Surely there is a better way to address these challenges? authID.ai believes there is.
authID.ai provides secure, facial biometric, identity verification, and strong customer authentication. We maintain a global, cloud-based IDaaS platform for our enterprise customers to enable their users to easily verify and authenticate their identity through a mobile device or desktop (with camera) of their choosing (without requiring dedicated hardware, or authentication apps). We can help our customers establish a proven identity, creating a root of trust that ensures the highest level of assurance for our passwordless login and step-up verification products. Our system enables participants to consent to transactions using their biometric information with a digitally signed authentication response, embedding the underlying transaction data and each user’s identity attributes within every electronic transaction message processed through our platform.
Digital transformation across all market segments requires trusted identity. Our identity platform offers innovative solutions that are flexible, fast and easy to integrate and offer seamless user experiences. authID’s products help advance digital transformation efforts without the fear of identity fraud, while delivering frictionless user experiences. We believe that it is also essential that electronic transactions have an audit trail, proving that the identity of the individual was duly authenticated. Our platform provides biometric and multi-factor identity software, which are intended to establish, authenticate and verify identity across a wide range of use cases and electronic transactions.
authID’s products focus on the broad requirement for enabling frictionless commerce by allowing an entity to instantly “Recognise their Customer”. Organizations of all descriptions require cost-effective and secure means of growing their business while mitigating identity fraud. We aim to offer our enterprise customers products that can be integrated easily into each of their business and organizational operations, in order to facilitate their adoption and enhance the end user customer experience.
Our management believes that some of the advantages of our IDaaS Platform approach are the ability to leverage the platform to support a variety of vertical markets and the adaptability of the platform to the requirements of new markets and new products requiring cost-effective, secure, and configurable mobile solutions. Our target markets include banking, fintech and other disrupters of traditional commerce, small and medium sized businesses, and system integrators working with government and Fortune 1000 enterprises. At its core, the Company’s offering, combining its proprietary and acquired biometric and artificial intelligence technologies (or AI), is intended to facilitate frictionless commerce, whether in the physical or digital world. The Company intends to increase its investment in developing, patenting and acquiring the various elements necessary to enhance the platform, which are intended to allow us to achieve our goals. One of the principal intended areas of investment is to enhance and expand our use of artificial intelligence in proprietary software, that we believe will increase our value to enterprise customers and stockholders alike.
authid.ai is dedicated to developing advanced methods of protecting consumer privacy and deploying ethical and socially responsible AI. authID is developing a culture that proactively encourages and rewards our employees for considering the ethical implications of our products. We believe that a proactive commitment to ethical AI presents a strong business opportunity for authID and will enable us to bring more accurate products to market more quickly and with less risk to better serve our global user base. Our methods to achieve ethical AI include engaging the users of our products with informed consent, prioritizing the security of our user’s personal information, considering and avoiding potential bias in our algorithms, and monitoring of algorithm performance in our applications.
The Company also owns an entity in South Africa Cards Plus which manufactures secure plastic identity credentials and loyalty card products.
Ipsidy Inc. (formerly ID Global Solutions Corporation) (formerly IIM Global Corporation) (formerly Silverwood Acquisition Corporation) was incorporated on September 21, 2011, under the laws of the State of Delaware to engage in any lawful corporate undertaking, including, but not limited to, selected mergers and acquisitions. In order to better align the branding of our Company with our future focus and goals on June 14, 2021, we changed our business name to “authID.ai”. Ipsidy has been in the developmental stage since inception.
The Company’s headquarters are in Long Beach, New York.
Key Trends
We believe that our financial results will be impacted by several market trends in the identity verification and authentication markets, as well as expanding digital transformation efforts across a wide range of market segments. These trends include growing concerns over identity theft and fraud, in part resulting from the impact of the Coronavirus pandemic on the acceleration of digital transformation, for example online shopping and remote working; the growth in the sharing economy; and the increase in electronic payments and alternative money transfer solutions provided by both bank and non-bank entities. The key drivers for these alternative payment methods are consumer demands for safe, convenient payment transactions, with less friction. Our results are also impacted by the changes in levels of spending on identity verification, management and security methods, and thus, negative trends in the global economy and other factors which negatively impact such spending may negatively impact the growth our revenue from those products. The global economy has been undergoing a period of political and economic uncertainty and stock markets are experiencing high levels of volatility, and it is difficult to predict how long this uncertainty and volatility will continue.
We plan to grow our business by increasing the use of our services by our existing customers, by adding new customers through our channel partners and by expanding into new markets and innovation. If we are successful in these efforts, we would expect our revenue to continue to grow. In addition, based on the positive trends in the international payment processing industry noted above, we anticipate that as and when more payments are made using electronic and mobile methods, such as those that we offer, our revenue would also increase.
Going Concern
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) assuming the Company will continue as a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to meet its obligations and continue its operations for the next year following the issuance date of these financial statements.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $115.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company earned revenue of approximately $2.3 million, used $8.8 million to fund its operations, and incurred a net loss of approximately $17.7 million.
The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon financial support from the Company’s current shareholders, the ability of the Company to obtain additional debt or equity financing to continue operations, the Company’s ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations, successfully locating and negotiating with other business entities for potential acquisition and /or acquiring new clients to generate revenues and cash flows.
As discussed in the subsequent event below, the Company has secured additional financing which provide adequate funding for its operations as it continues to invest in its product, people, and technology. The Company projects that the investments will lead to revenue expansion thereby reducing liquidity needs. The Company may need additional capital in the future but currently it believes it has the required funds to operate its business through a period no less than one year from the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements.
Subsequent Event
On March 21, 2022, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) with certain accredited investors, including certain directors of the Company or their affiliates (the “Note Investors”), and, pursuant to the SPA, sold to the Note Investors Senior Secured Convertible Notes (the “Convertible Notes”) with an aggregate initial principal amount of approximately $9.2 million and an initial conversion price of $3.70 per share. Also on March 21, 2022, the Company entered into a Facility Agreement the (“Facility Agreement") with Stephen J. Garchik, who is both a current shareholder of the Company and a Note Investor (“Garchik”), pursuant to which Garchik agreed to provide to the Company a $10.0 million unsecured standby line of credit facility that will rank behind the Convertible Notes and may be drawn down in several tranches, subject to certain conditions described in the Facility Agreement. Pursuant to the Facility Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Garchik a facility commitment fee of 100,000 shares of our common stock upon the effective date of the Facility Agreement. On March 18 and March 21, 2022, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with an accredited investor and certain members of authID.ai’s management team (the “PIPE Investors”), and, pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, sold to the PIPE Investors a total of 1,063,514 shares of our common stock (the “Other Stock”) at prices of $3.03 per share for an outside investor and $3.70 per share for the management investors (the “PIPE”). The aggregate gross proceeds from the PIPE are approximately $3.3 million before expenses. The Company expects to use the net proceeds from the Notes Private Placement, the PIPE and cash drawn under the Facility Agreement to fund operating expenses and for general working capital, fees and expenses. As of March 21, 2022 The Company has received approximately $11,659,000 and is expecting to receive another $625,000 in cash from the sale of the Convertible Notes and the PIPE.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Those material accounting estimates that we believe are the most critical to an investor’s understanding of our financial results and condition are discussed immediately below and are particularly important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates.
Use of Estimates
In preparing these consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Below is the Company’s revenue recognition policy determined by revenue stream for its significant revenue generating activities.
Cards Plus - The Company recognizes revenue for the design and production of cards at the point in time when products are shipped, or services have been performed due to the short-term nature of the contracts.
Payment Processing - The Company recognizes revenue for variable fees generated for payment processing solutions that are earned on a usage fee over time based on monthly transaction volumes or on a monthly flat fee rate. Additionally, the Company also sells certain equipment from time to time for which revenue is recognized at a point in time the equipment is delivered to the customer.
Identity Solutions Software - The Company recognizes revenue based on the identified performance obligations over the performance period for fixed consideration and /or variable fees generated that are earned on a usage fee based over time based on monthly user or transaction volumes or on a monthly flat fee rate. We allocate the selling price in the contract to one customer which has multiple performance obligations based on the contract selling price that we believe represents a fair market price for the service rendered based on estimated standalone selling price.
All contracts are reviewed for their respective performance obligations and related revenue and expense recognition implications. Certain of the revenues are derived from the identity services could include multiple performance obligations. A performance obligation under the revenue standard is defined as a promise to provide a “distinct” good or service to a customer. The Company has determined that one possible treatment under the standard is that these services will represent a stand-ready series of distinct daily services that are substantially the same, with the same pattern of transfer to the customer. Further, the Company has determined that the performance obligation to provide account access and facilitate transactions may meet the criteria for the “as invoiced” practical expedient, in that the Company has a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value to the customer of the Company’s performance completed to date. As a result, the Company anticipates it may recognize revenue in the amount to which the Company has a right to invoice, based on completed performance at the relevant date. Additionally, the contracts could include implementation services, or support on an “as needed” basis and we will review each contract and determine whether such performance obligations are separate and distinct and apply the standard accordingly to the revenue and expense derived from or related to each such service. During both 2021 and 2020, the Company provided annual software maintenance support services relating to previously licensed software on a stand-ready basis. These fees were billed in advance and recognized ratably over the requisite service period as revenue.
Additionally, the Company capitalizes the incremental costs of acquiring and fulfilling a contract with a customer if the Company expects to recover those costs. The incremental costs of acquiring and fulfilling a contract are those that the Company incurs to acquire and fulfill a contract with a customer that it would not have incurred if the contract had not been acquired (for example, a sales commission or specific incremental costs associated with the contract).
Financing revenue related to direct financing leases is recognized over the term of the lease using the effective interest rate method.
Accounts Receivable
All customers are granted credit on a short-term basis and related credit risks are considered minimal. The Company routinely reviews its trade receivables and makes provisions for probable doubtful accounts; however, those provisions are estimates and actual results could differ from those estimates and those differences may be material. Trade receivables are deemed uncollectible and removed from accounts receivable and the allowance for doubtful accounts when collection efforts have been exhausted. On December 31, 2021, the Company had an allowance for doubtful accounts of $7,500 and on December 31, 2020 no allowance for doubtful accounts was necessary.
Inventories
Inventory of plastic/ID cards, digital printing material, which are held by Cards Plus Pty Ltd., are at the lower of cost (using the average method) or market. The Plastic/ID cards and digital printing material are used to provide plastic loyal ID and other types of cards
Inventories as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, consist solely of cards inventory. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an inventory valuation allowance of approximately $20,000 and $18,000, respectively, to reflect net realizable value of the cards inventory.
Any adjustments to reduce the cost of inventories to their net realizable value are recognized in earnings in the current period.
Other Assets - Software Development Costs
Other assets includes when applicable, costs associated with software development of new product offerings and enhancements to existing applications. Research & development costs are expensed as incurred. Development costs of computer software to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning when a product’s technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is available for general release to customers. As of December 31, 2021, all assets have been placed into service. As of December 31, 2020, a portion of the software was still under development and had not been placed in service. Upon completion, the amounts were transferred to the appropriate asset category and expensed over their estimated useful lives. In 2021 and 2020, approximately $0 million and $0.4 million respectively of software development costs were placed into service and classified as internally developed software.
Goodwill
Goodwill is recorded when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the fair value of net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The Company performs an annual impairment test of goodwill and further periodic tests to the extent indicators of impairment develop between annual impairment tests. The Company’s impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting unit to it carrying value, including the goodwill related to the reporting unit utilizing qualitative considerations. To determine the fair value of the reporting unit, the Company may use various approaches including an asset or cost approach, market approach or income approach or any combination thereof. These approaches may require the Company to make certain estimates and assumptions including future cash flows, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are reviewed each time the Company tests goodwill for impairment and are typically developed as part of the Company’s routine business planning and forecasting process. While the Company believes its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, variations from those estimates could produce materially different results.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s projection and assessment did not indicate that an impairment charge was required as its fair value was in excess of carrying value.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company updated our projections associated with our reporting units and it indicated that the carrying value may not be recovered as revenue assumptions were not met. The goodwill impairment loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $1.0 at one of its reporting units.
The fair value of the reporting unit in both years was determined using discounted cash flow as well as future realizable value.
Intangible Assets
Excluding goodwill, acquired intangible assets and internally developed software are amortized over their estimated useful lives which is currently five to ten years. Acquired amortizing intangible assets are carried at cost, less accumulated amortization. Internally developed software costs are capitalized upon reaching technological feasibility.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset.
If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its undiscounted estimated future cash flows, an impairment review is performed. An impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Generally fair value is determined using valuations techniques such as expected discounted cash flows or appraisals, as appropriate. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell and are no longer depreciated. The assets and liabilities of a disposed group classified as held for sale would be presented separately in the appropriate asset and liability sections of the balance sheet. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company determined that certain intangibles assets would not be recovered and an impairment expense of approximately $831,000 was recognized. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company impaired intangible assets of approximately $297,000 at one of the reporting units as the carrying amount was in excess its recoverable amount.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs consist of expenditures for the research and development of new products and technology. These costs are primarily expenses to vendors contracted to perform research projects and develop technology for the Company’s products. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Stock-based compensation
The Company has accounted for stock-based compensation under the provisions of FASB ASC 718 - “Stock Compensation” which requires the use of the fair-value based method to determine compensation for all arrangements under which employees and others receive shares of stock or equity instruments (stock options and common stock purchase warrants). For both employee and non-employee awards, the fair value of each stock option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model that uses assumptions for expected volatility, expected dividends, expected term, and the risk-free interest rate. . Expected volatilities are based on historical volatility of peer companies and other factors estimated over the expected term of the stock options. For employee awards, the expected term of options granted is derived using the “simplified method” which computes expected term as the average of the sum of the vesting term plus the contract term. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for the period of the expected term.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2017, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-04, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other: Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment” (ASU 2017-04). The standard simplifies the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. Under the amendments of ASU 2017-04, an entity should perform its goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with it carrying amount. An entity will recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, but the loss cannot exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. The Company adopted ASU 2017-04 for the calendar year ending December 31, 2021, the effective date for adoption. The adoption of this standard did not have a have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Adjusted EBITDA.
This discussion includes information about Adjusted EBITDA that is not prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by U.S. GAAP and is not necessarily comparable to similar measures presented by other companies. A reconciliation of this non-GAAP measure is included below.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents U.S. GAAP net income (loss) adjusted to exclude (1) interest expense, (2) interest income, (3) provision for income taxes, (4) depreciation and amortization, (5) stock-based compensation expense (stock options and restricted stock) and (6) certain other items management believes affect the comparability of operating results. Other items included the following:
● Severance cost of $0.3 million in 2021 and $0.4 million in 2020
● Impairment loss of $1.3 million in 2020
● Gain on extinguishment of debt of $1.0 million in 2021 and loss of $1.0 million on extinguishment of debt in 2020.
● Warrant inducement expense of $0.4 million in 2020.
Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA, when viewed with our results under U.S. GAAP and the accompanying reconciliations, provides useful information about our period-over-period results. Adjusted EBITDA is presented because management believes it provides additional information with respect to the performance of our fundamental business activities and is also frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of comparable companies. We also rely on Adjusted EBITDA as a primary measure to review and assess the operating performance of our company and our management, and it will be a focus as we invest in and grow the business.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation from, or as a substitute for, analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not include the impact of certain charges or gains resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations.
Because of these limitations, adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only as a supplement to our U.S. GAAP results.
Reconciliation of Net Loss to Adjusted EBITDA
The increase in Adjusted EBITDA loss in 2021 compared to 2020 is principally due to the investment in people, technology and marketing associated with the rebranding of the Company and the improvement of its core products as well as recording a reserve for $0.5 million at its Colombia operations principally for receivables.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 as Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s revenue increased to $2.3 million from $2.1 million, or $0.2 million. The increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 is principally due to the increase in revenue from 2020 at Cards Plus due to the impact of Covid-19 pandemic. 2021 Identity and Colombian revenue were on par with 2020, respectively.
Cost of sales
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, cost of sales was $0.7 million in both periods. Costs of sales as a percentage of revenue was slightly higher in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 due to lower margin revenue at Cards Plus.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by approximately $9.2 million compared to the same period in 2020 due to increased compensation, marketing and technology costs in addition to higher non-cash stock compensation charges. Stock compensation charges were $6.7 million in 2021 compared to $0.8 million in 2020. Additionally, the Company incurred higher expenses as it invested in people, technology and marketing as it rebranded the Company and continues to improve and focus its core products as well as recording a reserve for $0.5 million at its Colombia operations principally for receivables.
Research and development
During the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses increased by approximately $0.5 million as the Company focused resources on key product initiatives.
Impairment loss
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an impairment loss of approximately $831,000 related to a customer list and certain intellectual property from our 2016 acquisition due to the loss of the major customer as they decommissioned the product.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment loss of approximately $1.0 million, associated with goodwill at a reporting unit based in Africa. Additionally, in the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment on intangible assets of approximately $0.3 million at a reporting unit in Latin America as the carrying value was in excess of its estimated recoverable value. As a result of the pandemic and its potential impact on future results, the Company updated its reporting unit projections and these indicated impairments for either goodwill or intangible assets were required as the carrying value may not be recovered as revenue assumptions and related revenue were revised downward. The fair value of the reporting unit was determined using discounted cash flow.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense was approximately the same during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as the Company received conversion notices from the majority of convertible noteholders in June 2021 and converted the majority of the Company’s outstanding indebtedness into common shares, thereby reducing its interest obligation.
Other Income (Expense)
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a gain on the extinguishment of debt for two Paycheck Protection Program loans as the Company met the applicable requirements.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a charge of approximately $986,000 related to the amendment of a promissory note which was treated as an extinguishment of a note payable and a charge of $367,000 in connection with the inducement to certain warrant holders to exercise their outstanding warrants.
Ukraine
The war in the Ukraine may impact the Company and its operations in a number of different ways, which are yet to be fully assessed and are therefore uncertain. The Company’s principal concern is for the safety of the personnel who support us from that region. The Company works with third party sub-contractors for outsourced services, including software engineering and development, some of whom are based in Eastern Europe, including Russia and Ukraine. The Company also works with outsourced engineers and developers and third-party providers in other parts of the world, including the United States, Europe, India, South Africa and South America. While the continuing impact of this conflict and the response of the United States and other countries to it by means of trade and economic sanctions, or other actions is still unknown, it could disrupt our ability to work with certain contractors The Company has taken steps to diversify its sub-contractor base, which may in the short term give rise to additional costs and delays in delivering software and product upgrades.
The uncertainty impacting and potential interruption in energy and other supply chains resulting from military hostilities in Europe and the response of the United States and other countries to it by means of trade and economic sanctions, or other actions, may give rise to increases in costs of goods and services generally and may impact the market for our products as prospective customers reconsider additional capital expenditure, or other investment plans until the situation becomes clearer. On the other hand, the threat of increased cyber-attacks from Russia or other countries may prompt enterprises to adopt additional security measures such as those offered by the Company.
For so long as the hostilities continue and perhaps even thereafter as the situation in Europe unfolds, we may see increased volatility in financial markets and a flight to safety by investors, which may impact our stock price and make it more difficult for the Company to raise additional capital at the time when it needs to do so, or for financing to be available upon acceptable terms. All or any of these risks separately, or in combination could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Covid-19
Covid-19 emerged globally in December 2019, and it has been declared a pandemic. Covid-19 is still impacting customers, business, results and financial condition throughout the world. The Company’s day-to-day operations have been impacted differently depending on geographic location and services that are being performed. The Cards Plus business located in South Africa operations has had limitations on its operations as they are following the guidance and requirements of the South African government. Our operations in the United States and Colombia have suffered a lesser immediate impact as most staff can work remotely and can continue to develop our product offerings.
That said we have seen our business opportunities develop more slowly as business partners and potential customers include Covid-19 considerations. Furthermore, working remotely can cause a delay in decision making and finalization of negotiations and agreements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, current assets were $6.9 million and current liabilities outstanding amounted to $2.9 million which resulted in net working capital of $4.0 million.
Net cash used by operating activities was $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.7 million in 2020. Cash used in operations for 2021 and 2020 was the primarily result of funding the business operations as the Company invested in people, product and marketing as we are developing and expanding the business.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 and 2020 was approximately $0.1 million and $0.3 million as the Company invested in software development expenditures which were capitalized.
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2021 and 2020 was approximately $11.1 million and $8.2 million, which consisted primarily of the net proceeds from the sale of common stock and the exercise of stock options and warrants in 2021 and the sale of common stock, issuance of convertible notes payable and exercise of warrants in 2020.
In 2022, the Company will continue to be opportunistic as well as judicious in raising additional funds to support its operations and investments as it creates a sustainable organization. There is no guarantee that such financing will be available if available on acceptable terms.
Our growth-oriented business plan to offer products to our customers will require continued capital investment. Research and development activities and technology deployment will require continued investment. We raised approximately $11.1 million and $8.2 million and in 2021 and 2020, respectively, through equity and debt financing at varying terms. In order to implement and grow our operations through December 31, 2023 and achieve an expected annual revenue stream from our products, we expect that we will need to raise between $17.5 million and $22.5 million dollars. There is no guarantee that our current business plan will not change, and as a result of such change, we will need additional capital to implement such business plan. Further, assuming we achieve our expected growth plan, of which there is no guarantee, we will need additional capital to implement growth beyond our current business plan.
Subsequent Event
On March 21, 2022, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) with certain accredited investors, including certain directors of the Company or their affiliates (the “Note Investors”), and, pursuant to the SPA, sold to the Note Investors Senior Secured Convertible Notes (the “Convertible Notes”) with an aggregate initial principal amount of approximately $9.2 million and an initial conversion price of $3.70 per share. Also on March 21, 2022, the Company entered into a Facility Agreement the (“Facility Agreement") with Stephen J. Garchik, who is both a current shareholder of the Company and a Note Investor (“Garchik”), pursuant to which Garchik agreed to provide to the Company a $10.0 million unsecured standby line of credit facility that will rank behind the Convertible Notes and may be drawn down in several tranches, subject to certain conditions described in the Facility Agreement. Pursuant to the Facility Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Garchik a facility commitment fee of 100,000 shares of our common stock upon the effective date of the Facility Agreement. On March 18 and March 21, 2022, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with an accredited investor and certain members of authID.ai’s management team (the “PIPE Investors”), and, pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, sold to the PIPE Investors a total of 1,063,514 shares of our common stock (the “Other Stock”) at prices of $3.03 per share for an outside investor and $3.70 per share for the management investors (the “PIPE”). The aggregate gross proceeds from the PIPE are approximately $3.3 million before expenses. The Company expects to use the net proceeds from the Notes Private Placement, the PIPE and cash drawn under the Facility Agreement to fund operating expenses and for general working capital, fees and expenses. As of March 21, 2022 The Company has received approximately $11,709,000 and is expecting to receive another $549,000 in cash from the sale of the Convertible Notes and the PIPE.
Description of Indebtedness
As described in Item 1A, (Risk Factors) the Company has a history of losses and may not be able to achieve profitability in the near term. The Company has not been able to achieve positive cash flows from operations and raised additional financing in 2021 and 2020 from equity financing and convertible notes payable financing.
See Notes 5 and 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information associated with the notes and convertible notes payable.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has a convertible note payable outstanding for $662,000 that was due on February 28, 2022, which has been extended to December 31, 2022 by a mutual agreement between the convertible noteholder and the Company.
Additionally, the Company as of December 31, 2021, has an equipment loan outstanding and a capital lease obligation outstanding for $1,579 and $10,562, respectively, which will be paid in 2022.
Equity Financing
See Note 8 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information associated with equity financing in 2021 and 2020.
2021 Common Stock Transactions
● On August 26, 2021, the Company completed the Offering, pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-1, of 1,642,856 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $7.00 per share, including 214,285 shares sold upon full exercise of the underwriter’s option to purchase additional shares, for gross proceeds of approximately $11.5 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
● During 2021, convertible notes totaling approximately $6.2 million and a portion of their accrued interest were converted at the option of the noteholders into approximately 1,171,000 shares of common stock of the Company.
● During 2021, the Company issued approximately 756,000 shares of common stock pursuant to cashless exercises of common stock purchase warrants and options, and approximately 81,000 shares of common stock pursuant to exercises of common stock purchase warrants and options for cash.
2020 Common Stock Transactions
● In June 2020, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements with two accredited investors (the “June 2020 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the June 2020 Accredited Investors agreed to purchase 114,719 shares of common stock for $200,000.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $3.00 Warrants were exercised for cash at an exercise price of $2.10 per share. In addition, the holders that exercised the $3.00 Warrants received a $4.50 Warrant for every four $3.00 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 333,611 shares of common stock and 83,402 $4.50 warrants in consideration of $700,583.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $1.50 Warrants were exercised for cash. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.05 Warrants receive a $4.50 Warrant for every two $1.50 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 154,400 shares of common stock and 77,200 $4.50 Warrants, in consideration of $231,600. Separately, certain holders of the $1.50 Warrants to acquire 59,000 shares of common stock exercised on a cashless basis resulting in the issuance of 560,659 shares of common stock.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $1.80 Warrants were exercised. In addition, the holders that exercised the $1.80 Warrants also received $4.50 Warrant for every two $0.06 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 176,000 shares of common stock and 88,000 $4.50 Warrants in consideration of $316,800.
● On October 30, 2020 and on November 6, 2020, Ipsidy Inc. entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “October 2020 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the October 2020 Accredited Investors agreed to purchase an aggregate of 1,747,833 shares of the Company’s common stock together with Warrants to acquire 873,917 shares of common stock for a term of five years at an exercise price of $4.50 per share for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.24 million. In connection with this private offering, the Company paid a registered broker-dealer, a cash fee of approximately $367,000 and issued the broker-dealer a common stock purchase warrant to acquire approximately 105,000 shares of common stock of the Company exercisable for a term of five years at an exercise price of $4.50 per share.
● During 2020, the Company issued approximately 57,000 shares of common stock pursuant to cashless exercises of common stock purchase warrants and options, other than the June 2020 warrant exercises.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had the following contractual obligations.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto and the report of our independent registered public accounting firm (PCOAB ID 00677), are set forth on pages through of this report.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rules 13a-15 and 15d-15(e) of the Exchange Act. Based on the evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that, as of December 31, 2021, the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that the information required to be disclosed by the Company in the report that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in SEC rules and forms.
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for the Company, as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Our internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable, but not absolute, assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our internal control over financial reporting will prevent or detect all errors and all fraud. A control system, no matter how well-designed and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the control system’s objectives will be met. The design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Further, because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that misstatements due to error or fraud will not occur or that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been detected and such evaluation is subject to the risks discussed in item 1A - Risk Factors of this Report.
The Company’s management assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, using the criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on management’s assessment using the above criteria, management concluded that the Company maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021. During 2021, the Company revised their quarterly and annual financial reporting and closing procedures to remediate previously reported control deficiency.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal year that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting except that, during 2020, the Company revised their quarterly and annual financial reporting and closing procedures to remediate previously reported control deficiency.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections.
Not applicable.
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance;
The current Directors and Officers of the Company are as follows:
* denotes Committee Chair
(1) Audit Committee
(2) Governance Committee
(3) Compensation Committee
Thomas L. Thimot
Mr. Thimot was appointed as Chief Executive Officer and as a Director of our company on June 14, 2021. From 2018 through November 2020, Mr. Thimot served as Chief Executive Officer and Director of Socure, Inc., a leading provider of identity verification and fraud risk solutions. Prior to joining Socure, from September 2015 to October, 2018, Mr. Thimot served as CEO and Director of Clarity Insights a privately held provider of data science consulting acquired by Accenture plc. where he was responsible for all operational aspects of the business. Prior to Clarity Insights, Mr. Thimot served as the Vice President of Cognizant Technology Solutions (Nasdaq: CTSH), a consulting firm and emerging business accelerator where he was responsible for all emerging services related to social, mobile, data analytics and cloud. Prior to 2015, Mr. Thimot held various roles and founded various businesses including his own consulting business, CaseCentral (an eDiscovery cloud-based software service now part of Oracle), Kazeon (a data and analytics software provider now part of Dell), GoRemote, Netegrity and Enigma. Mr. Thimot started his career with Oracle, Price Waterhouse and Accenture and received his BS Mechanical Engineering from Marquette University.
Phillip Kumnick
Phillip Kumnick serves as Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company and has been a director of the Company since 2020. Mr. Kumnick was appointed as CEO in May 2020 and served in the capacity through June 2021. From 2010 to 2018, Mr. Kumnick was Senior Vice President Global Acquirer Processing at Visa, Inc., and was the executive in charge of leading and growing Visa’s acquirer and merchant processing services and omni-channel solutions on a global basis. Mr. Kumnick was also a key contributor to the design of the Secure Remote Commerce (SRC) standard now being rolled out by the card brands, which aims to provide a simple and secure card payment experience. SRC uses tokenization to protect consumers’ sensitive data and intelligent identity authentication to help distinguish legitimate cardholders from fraudsters. Mr. Kumnick was the product owner and developer of Visa’s critical entry into encryption and tokenization products and services for their acquiring partners for transactions at the physical point of sale. Prior to joining Visa, Mr. Kumnick was the leader of the Cards & Payments practice of Cap Gemini Consulting from October 2009 through June 2010. Prior to Cap Gemini Consulting. Mr. Kumnick was a Senior Vice President at TSYS Acquiring Solutions from 2001 to 2009, with responsibility for leading the Product Management team and expanding the Company’s portfolio of merchant and acquirer products. He was also a leader of key M&A activities, including business development and strategic investment in Europe, Latin America and Asia, and helped expand TSYS’ client footprint to over 70 countries. Mr. Kumnick started his payments career at MasterCard International where he worked from 1988 to 2000, in various capacities, rising to Vice President & Chief Settlement Officer - Global Settlement Operations. In that role he was responsible for the 7 x 24 x 365 mission critical clearing and payment operations of a $3.0 billion per day global EFT and treasury operation. Mr. Kumnick was a strategic subject matter expert and key contributor to the evolution of MasterCard’s global processing functions. Mr. Kumnick has an MBA- Finance and a BS Finance from St. Louis University.
Tripp Smith
Mr. Cecil N. Smith III (“Tripp”) was appointed as President and Chief Technology Officer on June 14, 2021. Mr. Smith is a technologist and thought leader specializing in data, analytics and AI. His experience spans entrepreneurial ventures to Fortune 100 enterprises, centered around strategy, product engineering, sales, and building high performance data science and engineering teams. In 2011, Mr. Smith joined Clarity Insights, a RLH Equity and Salesforce Ventures-backed data consultancy with deep data science, artificial intelligence and machine learning expertise. There he worked with hyper scale technology companies ultimately rising to Chief Technology Officer. Mr. Smith led Clarity Insights to a $100MM+ ARR and an acquisition by Accenture AI in 2020. In 2020, Mr. Smith joined Socure Inc., a leading provider of identity verification and fraud risk solutions, as an advisor supporting Product, Technology, Marketing, and Sales functions. Mr. Smith previously held technical leadership roles at Hewlett Packard and the Advisory Board Company and is a graduate of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Stuart Stoller
Stuart Stoller serves as Chief Financial Officer of the Company having been appointed in January 2017. Mr. Stoller. Prior to joining the Company served as Chief Financial Officer and Board Member for TestAmerica Environmental Services LLC from May 2016 to October 2017. From December 2013 to April 2016, he was the Chief Financial Officer of Associated Food Stores. Mr. Stoller served as Chief Financial and Administrative Officer for Sleep Innovations from August 2009 to October 2013. Prior to joining Sleep Innovations, Mr. Stoller for 27 years served various roles with the New York Times Company including Senior Vice President for Process Reengineering and Corporate Controller and various capacities at Macy’s which included the role of Senior Vice President and Corporate Controller. He also was the controller of Coopers & Lybrand LLP. He is a Certified Public Accountant.
Philip R. Broenniman
Philip Broenniman was appointed a director of the Company in March 2020 and served as the President and Chief Operating Officer from May 2020-June 2021. Since 2011, Mr. Broenniman has been Managing Partner and Portfolio Manager for Varana Capital, LLC (“VCLLC”), an investment firm he co-founded in 2011. As part of the VCLLC investment strategy of cooperative engagement, Mr. Broenniman sits on or advises the Board of multiple public/private companies, working with each on strategic planning, operational dynamics, and balance sheet needs/restructuring. Prior to co-founding Varana Capital in 2011, he held the positions of Principal and Portfolio Manager at Visium Asset Management, LP; Managing Partner and Portfolio Manager at Cadence Investment Partners, LLC; and Investment Analyst with the Bass Family Office in Fort Worth, TX. He began his career at Salomon Brothers Inc. trading fixed-income futures and options. Mr. Broenniman earned a BS in Computer Science from Duke University in 1987, an MBA from the Darden School at the University of Virginia in 1993 and the Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) designation in 2000.
Michael A. Gorriz
Dr. Gorriz joined our company as a director on June 9, 2021. Dr. Gorriz was the Chief Information Officer and a member of the management team of Standard Chartered Bank, Singapore from 2015 through 2021. He also served Non-Executive Director of the Standard Charted Bank Hong Kong Board and the mox HK Board. Prior to that he served as Chief Information Officer at Daimler AG from 2007. Dr. Gorriz attended the University of Konstanz, the University of Freiburg and obtained his Doctorate in Engineering from the University of Stuttgart.
Michael L. Koehneman
Mr. Koehneman joined our company as a Director on June 9, 2021. Mr. Koehneman previously held various positions at Pricewaterhouse Coopers, a global accounting firm, through 2020, including the Global Advisory Chief Operating Officer and Human Capital Leader from 2016 through 2019, the U.S. Advisory Operations Leader from 2005 through 2016 responsible for the oversight of Advisory services for PwC, including business unit performance, finance, investments, human resources, acquisitions, and administration, and the Lead Engagement Partner for Financial Statement Audits and Internal Control and Security Reviews from 1993 through 2004 for several public and private company audits. Since 2020 he has also served as a director and member of the Audit Committee of Aspen Group, Inc.
Neepa Patel
Ms. Patel joined our company as a Director on November 15, 2021. Neepa Patel is the Founder and CEO of Them-s - a collaborative tech platform to help fintechs, banks and crypto companies create a strong governance, risk and compliance framework. Neepa has 15+ years of experience in various regulatory and compliance positions across the public and private sector. Prior to founding Themis in March 2020, she was the Head of Compliance for an enterprise blockchain company, R3 from 2016 through December 2019. Before that she had several risk and compliance positions at Deutsche Bank from 2014 to 2016 and at Morgan Stanley between 2011 and 2014. At Morgan Stanley, she helped develop a compliance framework for the newly formed banking entities, Morgan Stanley Bank and Morgan Stanley Private Bank post crisis. Neepa began her career as a Bank Examiner at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), where she worked from 2005 to 2011. Neepa attended Georgia Tech.
Jacqueline L. White
Ms. White joined our company as a Director on June 9, 2021. Ms. White has been a leader in enterprise technology software and IT consulting for the past 25 years. Ms. White has held global positions at SAP, Oracle, and Accenture, always leading diverse, high performing organizations around the world. After leading the Banking & Capital Markets line of business of DXC Technology Co. (NYSE: DXC) as Senior Vice President and Practice Lead from September 2019 to January 2021, Ms. White recently joined in January 2021 the Executive Management Team of Temenos AG (Six: TEMN), a company specializing in enterprise software for banks and financial services, as the President of the Americas Region. From January 2018 through September 2019, Ms. White served as the Chief Revenue Officer of Saltstack, a VM Ware Company, and from January 2015 through January 2018 as Global Senior Vice President Global FSI Consulting for SAP (NYSE: SAP). Prior to joining SAP, Ms. White held various positions with Accenture Services Pvt. Ltd., Oracle, BearingPoint and Novell. Ms. White was named by Utah Business Magazine as “Top Executives to Watch” in July 2020. Ms. White received a BA in Comparative Literature from Brigham Young University and a Leadership Certificate from Boston University.
Board & Committees
Board meetings during calendar year ended 2021
During 2021, the Board of Directors held nine meetings as well as committee meetings, as outlined below. Each director attended all of the meetings of the Board and all of the meetings held by all committees on which such director served. The Board also approved certain actions by unanimous written consent.
Committees established by the Board
The Board of Directors has standing Audit, Compensation, and Governance Committees. Information concerning the function of each Board committee follows.
Audit Committee
The Audit Committee is responsible for overseeing management’s implementation of effective internal accounting and financial controls, supervising matters relating to audit functions, reviewing and setting internal policies and procedures regarding audits, accounting and other financial controls, reviewing the results of our audit performed by the independent public accountants, and evaluating and selecting the independent public accountants. The Audit Committee has adopted an Audit Committee Charter which is posted on the Corporate Governance page under the tab labeled “Board Committees” on our Investor Relations website at https://investors.authid.ai. The Board has not designated a member as the “audit committee financial expert” as defined by the SEC, which is not required at this time. During 2021, the Audit Committee held five meetings.
Compensation Committee
The Compensation Committee determines matters pertaining to the compensation of our named executive officers and administers our stock option and incentive compensation plans. The Compensation Committee has adopted a Compensation Committee Charter which is posted on our which is posted on the Corporate Governance page under the tab labeled “Board Committees” on our Investor Relations website at https://investors.authid.ai. During 2021, the Compensation Committee held three meetings and also approved certain actions by unanimous written consent.
Governance Committee
The Governance Committee is responsible for considering potential Board members, nominating Directors for election to the Board, implementing the Company’s corporate governance policies, recommending compensation for the Board and for all other purposes outlined in the Governance Committee Charter, which is posted on the Corporate Governance page under the tab labeled “Board Committees” on our Investor Relations website at https://investors.authid.ai. During 2021, the Governance Committee held two meetings.
Nomination of Directors
As provided in its charter, the Governance Committee is responsible for identifying individuals qualified to become directors. The Governance Committee seeks to identify director candidates based on input provided by a number of sources including (1) the Governance Committee members, (2) our other directors, (3) our stockholders, (4) our Chief Executive Officer or Chair of the Board, and (5) third parties such as service providers. In evaluating potential candidates for director, the Governance Committee considers the entirety of each candidate’s credentials.
Qualifications for consideration as a director nominee may vary according to the particular areas of expertise being sought as a complement to the existing composition of the Board of Directors. However, at a minimum, candidates for director must possess:
● high personal and professional ethics and integrity;
● the ability to exercise sound judgment;
● the ability to make independent analytical inquiries;
● a willingness and ability to devote adequate time and resources to diligently perform Board and committee duties; and
● the appropriate and relevant business experience and acumen.
Legal Proceedings
There are currently no legal proceedings, and during the past 10 years there have been no legal proceedings, that are material to the evaluation of the ability or integrity of any of our directors.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among our directors and executive officers. There is no arrangement or understanding between or among our executive officers and directors pursuant to which any director or officer was or is to be selected as a director or officer.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
To our knowledge, during the last ten years, none of our directors and executive officers has:
● Had a bankruptcy petition filed by or against any business of which such person was a general partner or executive officer either at the time of the bankruptcy or within two years prior to that time.
● Been convicted in a criminal proceeding or been subject to a pending criminal proceeding, excluding traffic violations and other minor offenses.
● Been subject to any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any court of competent jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining, barring, suspending or otherwise limiting his involvement in any type of business, securities or banking activities.
● Been found by a court of competent jurisdiction (in a civil action), the SEC, or the Commodities Futures Trading Commission to have violated a federal or state securities or commodities law, and the judgment has not been reversed, suspended or vacated.
● Been the subject to, or a party to, any sanction or order, not subsequently reverse, suspended or vacated, of any self-regulatory organization, any registered entity, or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization that has disciplinary authority over its members or persons associated with a member.
To our knowledge, none of our directors and executive officers has at any time been subject to any proceedings:
● that were initiated by any regulatory, civil or criminal agency
● in which claims alleging fraud were asserted and seeking damages in excess of $100,000
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics Policy (the “Code of Ethics”) that applies to all directors and officers, which is posted on the Corporate Governance page under the tab labeled “Board Committees” on our Investor Relations website at https://investors.authid.ai. The Code of Ethics describes the legal, ethical and regulatory standards that must be followed by the directors and officers of the Company and sets forth high standards of business conduct applicable to each director and officer. As adopted, the Code of Ethics sets forth written standards that are designed to deter wrongdoing and to promote, among other things:
● honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical handling of actual or apparent conflicts of interest between personal and professional relationships;
● compliance with applicable governmental laws, rules and regulations;
● the prompt internal reporting of violations of the Code of Ethics to the appropriate person or persons identified in the code; and
● accountability for adherence to the Code of Ethics.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, requires our directors and executive officers and persons who own more than 10% of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock to file reports of initial ownership of common stock and other equity securities and subsequent changes in that ownership with the SEC. Officers, directors and greater than ten percent stockholders are required by SEC regulation to furnish us with copies of all Section 16(a) forms they file. To our knowledge, based solely on a review of the copies of such reports furnished to us and written representations that no other reports were required, during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 all Section 16(a) filing requirements applicable to our officers, directors and greater than 10% beneficial owners were complied with.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The below table sets forth information concerning all cash and non-cash compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to (i) all individuals serving as the Company’s principal executive officers or acting in a similar capacity during the last two completed fiscal years, regardless of compensation level, and (ii) the Company’s two most highly compensated executive officers other than the principal executive officers serving at the end of the last two completed fiscal years (collectively, the “Named Executive Officers”).
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
(1) Mr. Kumnick was hired as Chief Executive Officer on May 22, 2020 and as part of his compensation package was granted 1,111,111 stock options (“2020 Stock Options”) of which 20% vest at grant date and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. As of December 31, 2021, all of Mr. Kumnick’s 2020 Stock Options were vested and exercisable as the performance obligations were met in 2021 for the 2020 Stock Options. In December 2019, Mr. Kumnick was granted 100,000 stock options (66,667 vested) in connection with his appointment to the Board of Directors. In May 2021, Mr. Kumnick was granted an additional 583,333 stock options (“2021 Stock Options”) of which 9,018 were vested and vesting of the remainder of which is subject to performance conditions. In November 2021, Mr. Kumnick agreed to cancel 300,000 of the 2021 Stock Options. None of such 300,000 2021 Stock Options were vested and included in the Executive Compensation table is the grant date fair value of the remaining 2021 stock options net of the amount canceled. Additionally, in March 2020, Mr. Kumnick was granted 50,000 shares of restricted stock that vested in 2021 upon attainment of the performance conditions. The stock option and restricted stock aggregate grant date fair value in 2020 were approximately $1,268,000 and $127,500 respectively. The restricted stock award of $127,500 was earned and reported in 2021 as the performance conditions were met. Mr. Kumnick has not exercised or realized a gain on any of these options or realized a gain on the remaining stock award shares as of the date of this report. The amount reported in the executive compensation has been updated in 2020 to reflect the 2021 presentation. Furthermore, the bonus entitlement of $64,980 agreed to in 2020 lapsed upon Mr. Kumnick’s resignation as Chief Executive Officer in June 2021.
(2) Mr. Thomas Thimot was hired as Chief Executive Officer on June 14, 2021. Mr. Thimot and the Company entered into an Offer Letter pursuant to which Mr. Thimot will earn an annual salary of $325,000 with a bonus target at 50% of the base salary (pro-rated for 2021) upon terms to be agreed with the Compensation Committee for 2021, which was finally determined to be $75,000 and on the understanding that the 2022 target will include a requirement of the Company achieving three times the annual revenue of 2021. The Compensation Committee approved a bonus of $75,000 for 2021 on January 25, 2022. Additionally, Mr. Thimot was granted an option to acquire 1,200,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance is subject to certain performance vesting requirements. The aggregate grant date fair value of Mr. Thimot’s stock options was $5,272,000. Mr. Thimot has not exercised or realized a gain on his vested stock options as of the date of the submission of this report
(3) Mr. Beck was hired on January 31, 2017 and as part of his compensation package was granted 500,000 stock options which vested 1/3 immediately effective January 31, 2017 with the balance over two years and 500,000 shares of restricted stock which shares vest upon attainment of certain performance thresholds.
On May 22, 2020, the Company and Mr. Beck entered into a separation letter agreement, which provided for payment to Mr. Beck of one year’s severance in the amount of $350,000 plus the cost of medical benefits, payable in accordance with the terms of Mr. Beck’s Retention Agreement. During 2020, the Company paid Mr. Beck $287,500 plus his monthly medical insurance premiums. The remaining $87,500 was paid in February 2021. On October 30, 2020, pursuant to the terms of Mr. Beck’s Restricted Stock Agreement, as amended by the Separation Agreement, the Company repurchased for $1.00 the 500,000 shares of restricted stock.
(4) Mr. Smith was hired as President and CTO on June 14, 2021. Mr. Smith and the Company entered an into an Offer Letter pursuant to which Mr. Smith will earn an annual salary of $275,000 with a bonus target at 50% of the base salary (pro-rated for 2021) upon terms to be agreed with the Compensation Committee for 2021, which was finally determined to be $75,000. The Compensation Committee approved a bonus of $75,000 for 2021 on January 25, 2022. In addition, Mr. Smith received a bonus of $50,000 after 90 days of service. Additionally. Mr. Smith was granted an option to acquire 600,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance is subject to certain performance vesting requirements. The aggregate grant date fair value of Mr. Smith’s stock options was $2,636,000. Mr. Smith has not exercised or realized a gain on his vested stock options as of the date of the submission of this report
(5) Mr. Szoke was the Chief Solutions Architect and Former Director of the Company. Mr. Szoke retired in November 2021 and received an agreement to receive $305,000 over the ensuing year in lieu of his executive retention agreement. Additionally, the Company accelerated the vesting of the stock options granted in 2021. Mr. Szoke has not exercised or realized a gain on any of his vested stock options as of the date if the submission of this report.
(6) Mr. Stoller was hired on January 31, 2017 and as part of his compensation package was granted 166,667 stock options which vest over three years and 166,667 shares of restricted stock which shares vest upon attainment of certain performance criteria. In October 2020 and May 2021, Mr. Stoller was granted 83,333 and 100,000 stock options which each vest over three years. The aggregate grant date fair value of the 2021 and 2020 stock options were $414,000 and $127,500. As of December 31, 2021, 194,445 of the stock options granted were vested and exercisable and the restricted stock (166,667 common shares) vested in 2021 as a result of satisfaction of the performance conditions. Mr. Stoller sold 95,000 shares of common stock in 2021 to pay the estimated income tax obligations resulting from the vesting of the restricted stock. Mr. Stoller has not exercised or realized a gain on the remaining stock award shares or vested stock options as of the date of the submission of this report.
Messrs. Thimot, Smith, and Stoller each are party to an Executive Retention Agreement to encourage the Executive to continue to devote the Executive’s full attention and dedication to the success of the Company, and to provide specification compensation and benefits to the Executive in the event of a Termination Upon Change of Control or certain other terminations pursuant to the terms of this Agreement. These agreements include payment of salary and other benefits for one year in addition to acceleration and vesting of certain stock compensation plans.
Pursuant to Mr. Szoke’s Executive Retention Agreement, he would earn additional compensation if certain performance targets were met. One of the Mr. Szoke’s performance target was met in 2021 and was paid an additional payment of approximately $206,000.
Pursuant to Mr. Stoller’s Executive Retention Agreement, he would earn additional compensation if certain performance targets were met. The performance target for Mr. Stoller was met in 2021 and was paid an additional payment of approximately $356,000. Additionally, Mr. Stoller will receive a discretionary bonus of $37,500 for 2021. No other incremental compensation targets for any executive were met in 2020. However, the Board of Directors may allocate salaries and benefits to the officers in its sole discretion.
The Company currently has no retirement, pension, or profit-sharing plan covering its officers and directors; The Company provides medical benefits on a cost sharing basis and has a dental plan which is fully paid by the employees cost. (See “Executive Agreements” below.)
Grant of Plan-Based Awards
During the calendar year ended December 31, 2021, the following grants were made to named executive officers:
● The Company granted Mr. Thimot and Mr. Smith stock options to acquire 1,200,000 and 600,000 shares of common stock respectively upon their employment of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance vest upon the achievement of certain market capitalization thresholds or performance conditions.
●
The Company granted Mr. Kumnick stock options to acquire 583,333 shares of common stock that vest upon the achievement of certain market capitalization thresholds or performance conditions. In November 2021 Mr. Kumnick agreed to cancel 300,000 of these stock options in consideration of removing certain service conditions.
● In May 2021, Mr. Stoller was granted 100,000 stock options which vest over three years.
During the calendar year ended December 31, 2020, the following grants were made to the named executive officers.
● Mr. Kumnick in connection with his employment agreement was granted 1,111,111 stock options of which 20% were vested at grant date and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. Mr. Kumnick was also granted 50,000 shares of restricted stock which shares vest upon attainment of certain performance thresholds.
● In October 2020, Mr. Stoller was granted 83,333 stock options which vest over three years.
As previously described, in connection with their respective employment arrangements, Philip Beck and Stuart Stoller were awarded 500,000 and 166,667 common stock options in 2017. Additionally, Philip Beck and Stuart Stoller received 500,000 and 166,667 restricted common shares in 2017. On October 30, 2020, pursuant to the terms of Mr. Beck’s Restricted Stock Agreement, as amended by the Separation Agreement, the Company repurchased for $1.00 the 500,000 shares of Unvested Restricted Stock
There were no other grants of plan-based awards or common stock options, to other named executive officers during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Outstanding Equity Awards to Executive Officers
The following table sets forth information with respect to outstanding equity awards held by our named executive officers as of December 31, 2021.
(1) The performance conditions for the following stock options for Phillip Kumnick 283,333 shares, Thomas Thimot 600,000 shares, and Tripp Smith 300,000 shares, have not been met as of December 31, 2021.
(2) There were no outstanding unvested stock awards for the named executive officers as of December 31, 2021.
Option Exercises and Stock Vested Table
(1) The performance conditions of the restricted stock awards for Phillip Kumnick and Stuart Stoller were met in the year ended December 31, 2021.
(2) The stock options exercised by Philip Beck were common stock options awarded for consulting services rendered prior to his employment (566,667 stock options) which became exercisable on January 31, 2017 upon his appointment as the Chief Executive Officer of the Company. The consulting services were provided by Parity Labs, LLC, a company principally owned by Mr. Beck and his family.
Compensation of Directors
In May 2021, the Board resolved to adopt a new compensation policy for non-management directors, comprising the following:
● On appointment as a new director, each director shall receive a grant of options having a Black Scholes value of $270,000, subject to three-year vesting, one-third earned after each Annual Meeting. If the director does not serve for at least three years, then they will lose a proportionate part of the award.
● After each Annual Meeting, commencing with the first Annual Meeting at which a director is re-elected to the Board, each director would receive a grant of options having a Black Scholes value of $90,000, subject to one year vesting (one twelfth earned each month). If the director does not serve the full year, then they will lose a proportionate part of the award.
During 2021, the Company recorded stock option expense for grants to the non-management directors for approximately $90,000 for each of Michael Gorriz, Michael Koehneman, Sanjay Puri, and Jacqueline White and $11,250 for Neepa Patel.
During 2021, the Company recorded stock option expense for Mr. Philip Broenniman of approximately $595,000 for his service as a Director and Executive Officer. Mr. Phillip Broenniman served as President of the Company through the middle of June 2021. The Company granted Mr. Broenniman stock options to acquire 583,333 shares of common stock that vest upon the achievement of certain market capitalization thresholds or performance conditions. In November 2021 Mr. Broenniman agreed to cancel 200,000 of these stock options in consideration of removing certain service conditions.
Previously, the non-employee Directors earned $72,000 per annum for Board membership, inclusive of all Board meeting and committee meeting attendance fees in the form of a stock grant and they earn an additional annual retainer for service on each committee of $5,000. The Company has recorded the expense associated with Board compensation but has not granted or paid fees since October 2020. Total Board compensation recorded in 2020 was approximately $349,000 of which $47,000 was the retainer for Board Committees and the balance of $302,000 was the retainer for service on the Board. Mr. Stern and Mr. Selzer each earned $15,000, Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Beck each earned $6,250, Mr. Broenniman earned $3,750 and Mr. Solomon $833.
The non-employee directors in 2020 were as follows:
● Herb Selzer and Theodore Stern for all of 2020.
● Phillip Kumnick until May 22, 2020 when he was appointed Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
● Philip Broenniman who was appointed in March 2020 until he was appointed President of the Company on May 22, 2020.
● Philip Beck from May 22, 2020 (former Chief Executive Officer) until he resigned from the Board of Directors in October 2020.
● Ricky Solomon - January 2020 until he resigned from the Board of Directors.
On his appointment to the Board of Directors Mr. Kumnick received a grant of an option to purchase 100,000 shares of common stock vesting in equal parts over three years, or earlier in the event of a change of control of the Company (as defined in the option grant). In March 2020, the Company entered into a restricted stock purchase agreement with Phillip Kumnick, providing Mr. Kumnick with the right to acquire 50,000 shares of common stock at par value subject to the Vesting Criteria (as defined in the stock purchase agreement). On Philip Broenniman’s appointment, the Company entered into a restricted stock purchase agreement with him, providing Mr. Broenniman with the right to acquire 50,000 shares of common stock at par value subject to the Vesting Criteria. The Vesting Criteria were met in 2021 and as a result the Company recorded a restricted stock expense of $127,500 each for Mr. Phillip Kumnick and Mr. Philip Broenniman.
As of December 31, 2021, the Directors noted above, other than Mr. Kumnick have been granted approximately 1,428,000 stock options to acquire shares at a grant date fair value of approximately $4,495,000. Mr. Kumnick’s stock option information was presented previously in this report on Form 10-K.
Executive Employment Agreements
Mr. Thomas Thimot and Mr. Cecil Smith, became employed by the Company as Chief Executive Officer and President and Chief Technology Officer effective June 14, 2021. Mr. Thimot and the Company entered into an Offer Letter pursuant to which Mr. Thimot will earn an annual salary of $325,000 with a bonus target at 50% of the base salary (pro-rated for 2021) upon terms to be agreed with the Compensation Committee for 2021 and on the understanding that the 2022 target will include a requirement of the Company achieving three times the annual revenue of 2021. Additionally, Mr. Thimot was granted an option to acquire 1,200,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance is subject to certain performance vesting requirements.
On June 14, 2021, Mr. Smith and the Company entered an into an Offer Letter pursuant to which Mr. Smith will earn an annual salary of $275,000 with a bonus target at 50% of the base salary (pro-rated for 2021) upon terms to be agreed with the Compensation Committee for 2021. In addition, Mr. Smith will receive a bonus of $50,000 after 90 days of service. Additionally. Mr. Smith was granted an option to acquire 600,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance is subject to certain performance vesting requirements.
In June 2021, Mr. Kumnick and Broenniman resigned from their positions as Chief Executive Officer and President upon Mr. Thimot and Mr. Smith joining the Company. The terms of their employment arrangement are below.
On May 22, 2020, Phillip L. Kumnick, Deputy Chairman of the Company, was appointed as Chief Executive Officer of the Company. Philip R. Broenniman, a director of the Company, was appointed as Chief Operating Officer and President of the Company. Effective May 22, 2020, Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman each entered into Offer Letters with the Company providing that each of the executives will devote their full time and attention to the business of the Company on an “at will” basis.
Pursuant to the Offer Letter entered with Mr. Kumnick, Mr. Kumnick base salary since his engagement was $125,000 per annum and was increased to $187,500 per annum as of November 1, 2020. Subject to the Company achieving a revenue target of not less than $8,000,000 in a fiscal year (the “Revenue Target”), the base salary is to be increased to $250,000 per annum and to be again further reviewed by the Compensation Committee based on prevailing market conditions. Further, upon achieving the Revenue Target or a portion thereof or in the event of a change of control or involuntary termination, Mr. Kumnick will receive a bonus of up to $64,980 (which was subsequently canceled). Mr. Kumnick is also eligible to receive the usual benefits available to the executives of the Company.
Pursuant to the Offer Letter entered with Mr. Broenniman, Mr. Broenniman base salary since his engagement was $87,500 per annum and was increased to $131,250 per annum as of November 1, 2020. Subject to the Company achieving the Revenue Targets, the base salary is to be increased to $175,000 per annum and to be again further reviewed by the Compensation Committee based on prevailing market conditions. Further, upon achieving the Revenue Target or a portion thereof or in the event of a change of control or involuntary termination, Mr. Broenniman will receive a bonus of up to $45,833 (which was subsequently canceled). Mr. Broenniman is also eligible to receive the usual benefits available to the executives of the Company.
In May 2020, Mr. Kumnick was granted options to acquire 1,111,111 shares of common stock and Mr. Broenniman was granted options to acquire 555,555 shares of common stock. 20% of the options were vested at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. All performance conditions were met in 2021.
On January 31, 2017, Mr. Beck and the Company entered an Executive Retention Agreement pursuant to which Mr. Beck agreed to serve as Chief Executive Officer and President in consideration of an annual salary of $350,000 of which $50,000 shall be deferred until the Company raises in the aggregate $15 million in debt and/or equity capital. The Company has agreed to provide a bonus of 75% of the base salary upon the Company timely filing its annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017 and the Company raising gross proceeds of $15 million in debt and/or equity capital (“Milestone 1”) and a bonus of 150% of the base salary upon the Company achieving (i) any merger or sale of the Company or its assets, (ii) the Company achieving adjusted EBITDA of $10 million in a fiscal year, (iii) the Company achieving a listing on a national exchange and then or subsequently raising gross proceeds in the amount of $10 million or achieving a valuation of $125 million or (iv) the Company achieving $20 million of revenue on a trailing 12 months basis (“Milestone 2”). Mr. Beck met Milestone 1 in 2018.
The Company also granted Mr. Beck a Stock Option to acquire 500,000 shares of common stock of the Company at an exercise price of $0.10 per share for a period of ten years and the Company agreed to a Restricted Stock Purchase Agreement with Mr. Beck pursuant to which Mr. Beck purchased 500,000 shares of common stock at a per share price of $0.0001, which shares of common stock vest upon achieving Milestone 2. The Stock Options vest with respect to (i) one-third of the shares of common stock as of January 31, 2017 and (ii) in 24 equal monthly tranches commencing on the grant date.
On May 22, 2020, the Company and Mr. Beck entered into a separation letter agreement, which provided for payment to Mr. Beck of one year’s severance in the amount of $350,000 as well as certain employee benefits, payable in accordance with the terms of Mr. Beck’s Retention Agreement. During 2020, the Company paid $287,500 plus his monthly medical insurance premiums. The remaining $87,500 was paid in February 2021. On October 30, 2020, Philip Beck resigned as a director of the Company and the Company repurchased Mr. Beck’s restricted stock for $1.00 under the provisions of his Restricted Stock Agreement.
The Company entered an Executive Retention Agreement with pursuant to which Stuart Stoller agreed to serve as Chief Financial Officer in consideration of an annual salary of $225,000. The Company has agreed to provide two different bonus levels upon the achievement of certain performance, financial and other milestones. The Company also granted Mr. Stoller a stock option to acquire 166,667 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.10 per share for a period of ten years. Further, Company has agreed to a Restricted Stock Purchase Agreement in which Mr. Stoller purchased an additional 166,667 shares at a per share price of $0.0001, which shares of common stock vest upon meeting certain performance, financial and other milestones. The Stock Options vest with respect to (i) one third of common stock upon the anniversary of the grant date and (ii) in 24 equal installments commencing on the one year anniversary of the grant.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The following table sets forth the number of shares known to be beneficially owned by all persons who own at least 5% of Ipsidy’s outstanding common stock, the Company’s directors, the Company’s executive officers, and the directors and executive officers as a group as of March16, 2022, unless otherwise noted. Unless otherwise indicated, the stockholders listed in the table have sole voting and investment power with respect to the shares indicated.
(1) Applicable percentage ownership is based on, 23,451,179 shares of common stock outstanding as of March 16, 2022. Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. Shares of common stock that are currently exercisable or exercisable within 60 days of are deemed to be beneficially owned by the person holding such securities for computing the percentage of ownership of such person, but are not treated as outstanding for computing the percentage ownership of any other person.
(2) Includes 71,426 shares of common stock, and (ii) a stock option to acquire 1,200,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share vesting over a four-year period and subject to certain performance vesting criteria, of which 137,500 shares will be vested as of May 15, 2022.
(3) Includes (i) 121,425 shares of common stock, (ii) a stock option to acquire 100,000 shares of common stock at $1.65 per share vesting over a three year period, of which 66,667 will have vested as of May 15, 2022 (iii) a stock option to acquire 1,111,111 shares of common stock at $2.10 per share, (iv) a stock option to acquire 9,018, shares of common stock at $7.20 per share (v) a stock option to acquire 283,334, shares of common stock at $7.20 per share that vest upon meeting performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of March 16, 2022; and (vi) a stock option to acquire 10,238 shares of common stock at $15.16 per share that vest on a monthly basis over 12 months from December 29, 2021.
(4) Includes (i) 172,747 shares of common stock, (ii) a stock option to purchase 555,556 shares of common stock at a price of $2.10 per share, (iii) a stock option to purchase 5,411 shares of common stock at a price of $7.20, (iv) a stock option to purchase 383,334 shares of common stock at a price of $7.20 per share which vest upon meeting performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of March 16, 2022 (v) common stock purchase warrants to acquire 11,667 shares of common stock at $4.95 per share and 8,750 shares of common stock at $2.64 per share, (vi) a stock option to acquire 10,238 shares of common stock at $15.16 per share that vest on a monthly basis over 12 months from December 29, 2021, (vii) 340,832 shares of common stock held by Varana Capital Focused L.P. (“VCFLP”) and a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 30,972 shares of common stock at $4.50 per share held by VCFLP. Mr. Broenniman is the Managing Partner of Varana Capital, LLC, which, in turn, is the investment manager of and has dispositive control over the shares held by VCFLP. By virtue of these relationships, in addition to the shares he holds personally, Mr. Broenniman may be deemed to beneficially own the shares held by VCFLP.
(5) Includes (i) 82,084 shares of common stock (ii) a stock option to acquire 166,667 shares of common stock at $3.00 per share, (iii) a stock option to acquire 83,333 shares of common stock at a price of $2.775 per share which vest as to one-third on each of October 7, 2021, 2022 and 2023 and (v) a stock option to acquire 100,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.20 per share which vest as to one-third on each of May 4, 2022, 2023 and 2024 or earlier change of control.
(6) Includes (i) 7,142 shares of common stock, and (ii) a stock option to acquire 600,000 shares of common stock at $7.80 per share vesting over a four year period and subject to meeting performance criteria, of which 68,750 will have vested as of May 15, 2022.
(7) Includes (i) 1,000 shares of common stock, (ii) 1,000 shares of common stock held by Mrs. Koehneman, (iii) a stock option to acquire 62,500 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share, which vest over a three-year period after each Annual Meeting subject to continued service, of which 20,833 are vested, and (iv) a stock option to acquire 10,238 shares of common stock at $15.16 per share that vest on a monthly basis over 12 months from December 29, 2021
(8) Includes (i) a stock option to acquire 62,500 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share, which vest over a three-year period after each Annual Meeting subject to continued service, of which 20,833 are vested, and (ii) a stock option to acquire 10,238 shares of common stock at $15.16 per share that vest on a monthly basis over 12 months from December 29, 2021.
(9) Comprises a stock option to acquire 29,173 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $15.97 per share, which vest over a three-year period after each Annual Meeting subject to continued service, none of which will be vested as of May 15, 2022.
(10) Includes (i) 1,769,541 shares of common stock held by Mr. Garchik personally, (ii) 78,175 shares of common stock held by Marla Garchik, Mr. Garchik’s wife, (iii) 166,667 shares of common stock held by the Garchik 2019 Irrevocable Trust (“2019 Trust”) of which Mr. Garchik is a trustee and beneficiary, (iv) 11,667 shares of common stock held by Garchik Universal Limited Partnership, which Mr. Garchik jointly controls with his sister, (v) 89,306 shares of common stock held by the Marla Garchik 2020 Irrevocable Trust (the “2020 Trust”) of which Mr. Garchik is a beneficiary, (vi) a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 83,334 shares of common stock at $4.50 per share held by the 2019 Trust and (vii) a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 40,660 shares of common stock at $4.50 per share held by the 2020 Trust.
(11) Includes 106,667 shares held by Multipolaris Corporation, 832,275 shares held by Interpolaris Pte. Ltd. and 640,000 held by MP Informatikai Kft. Mr. Vago is an officer and principal of each of these entities, and he may be deemed the beneficial owner or the shares held by such entities.
(12) The ETFMG Cyber Security ETF, a series of the ETF Managers Trust, which is managed on a discretionary basis by ETF Managers Group LLC, has the right or the power to direct the receipt of dividends, or the proceeds from the sale of, the common stock.
See Item 5 for information pertaining to Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and Director Independence
Pursuant to Rule 4200 of The NASDAQ Stock Market one of the definitions of an independent director is a person other than an executive officer or employee of a company. The Company’s board of directors has reviewed the materiality of any relationship that each of the directors has with the Company, either directly or indirectly. Based on this review the board has determined that there are four independent directors, including all the members of the Audit Committee.
Sale of Common Stock
On August 26, 2021, the Company completed the Offering of 1,642,856 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $7.00 per share, including 214,285 shares sold upon full exercise of the underwriter’s option to purchase additional shares, for gross proceeds of approximately $11.5 million. Two executive officers and three members of the Board of Directors participated in the offering and purchased approximately 1,314,000 shares.
On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s warrants exercisable at per share price of $3.00 (the “$3.00 Warrants”) were exercised for cash at an exercise price of $2.10 per share. In addition, the holders that exercised the $3.00 Warrants received a warrant exercisable for two years to acquire one share of common stock at an exercise price of $3.00 per share (the $4.50 Warrants”) for every four $3.00 Warrants exercised. Mr. Theodore Stern, a director of the Company, participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 33,333 shares of common stock and 8,333 $0.15 Warrants in consideration of $70,000; and Varana Capital Focused, LP (“VCFLP”), participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 123,889 shares of common stock and 30,972 $4.50 Warrants, in consideration of $260,167. Mr. Philip Broenniman, a director, the President and COO of the Company is the investment manager of VCFLP.
On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s warrants exercisable at per share price of $1.80 (the “$1.80 Warrants”) were exercised. In addition, the holders that exercised the $1.80 Warrants also received a $4.50 Warrant for every two $1.80 Warrants exercised. Vista Associates, L.P., (“Vista”) of which, Mr. Herbert Selzer a director of the Company, is the General Partner, participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 29,333 shares of common stock and 440,000 $4.50 Warrants, in consideration of $52,800.
On June 30, 2020, the Company also entered into a Subscription Agreement with VCFLP pursuant to which VCFLP purchased 23,810 shares of common stock in consideration of $50,000.
Convertible Notes Payable
In 2021, the Company received conversion notices from Stern Trust of which Theodore Stern, (a former member of the Board of Directors until June 9, 2021) is the Trustee, converting the principal amount, repayment premium and interest in the amount of approximately $3.5 million payable under the Restated Stern Note into approximately 561,000 shares of common stock. Additionally, Theodore Stern and Herbert Selzer (also a former member of the Board of Directors until June 9, 2021) provided conversion notices for their respective 2020 Notes converting the principal, repayment premium and interest in the amount of approximately $256,000 into approximately 41,000 shares of common stock. The Stern Trust is owed approximately $0.7 million in interest under the Restated Stern Note, which has not been converted and remains outstanding.
Director & Executive Compensation
On June 14, 2021, Phillip L. Kumnick resigned as Chief Executive Officer of Ipsidy Inc., and Thomas L. Thimot was appointed Chief Executive Officer in his place. Further, Philip R. Broenniman resigned as President and Chief Operating Officer and Cecil N. Smith III (Tripp) was appointed President and Chief Technology Officer. In May 2021 the Company granted to each of Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman options (the “May 2021 Options”) to acquire a total of 1,166,667 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.20 per share for a term of ten years that vest upon the achievement of certain market capitalization thresholds, or performance conditions. In November 2021 Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman agreed to cancel 300,000 and 200,000, respectively, of these stock options in consideration of removing certain service conditions.
Mr. Thomas Thimot and Mr. Cecil Smith, became employed by the Company as Chief Executive Officer and President and Chief Technology Officer effective June 14, 2021. Mr. Thimot and the Company entered into an Offer Letter pursuant to which Mr. Thimot will earn an annual salary of $325,000 with a bonus target at 50% of the base salary (pro-rated for 2021) upon terms to be agreed with the Compensation Committee for 2021 and on the understanding that the 2022 target will include a requirement of the Company achieving three times the annual revenue of 2021. Additionally, Mr. Thimot was granted an option to acquire 1,200,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance is subject to certain performance vesting requirements.
On June 14, 2021, Mr. Smith and the Company entered an into an Offer Letter pursuant to which Mr. Smith will earn an annual salary of $275,000 with a bonus target at 50% of the base salary (pro-rated for 2021) upon terms to be agreed with the Compensation Committee for 2021. In addition, Mr. Smith will receive a bonus of $50,000 after 90 days of service. Additionally. Mr. Smith was granted an option to acquire 600,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance is subject to certain performance vesting requirements.
On June 9, 2021 Theodore Stern, Herbert Selzer and Thomas Szoke resigned as directors of the Company. The size of the Board of directors was increased to seven and Dr. Michael A. Gorriz, Michael L. Koehneman, Sanjay Puri, Mr. Thimot and Jacqueline L. White were appointed as additional directors of the Company.
The Company granted each of the four new Directors appointed June 2021 stock options to acquire 62,500 shares of common stock or a total of 250,000 at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years that vest one third per year after each Annual Meeting. The Company granted the previously serving non-employee Directors stock options to acquire 93,470 common shares that are vested as the services were previously rendered. The stock options were granted in lieu of other forms of Board of Director Compensation. The Company also granted Mr. Selzer and Mr. Stern 22,388 stock options to acquire common shares for service in 2021 prior to their resignation as Directors. Upon their resignation as directors in June 2021, 13,992 stock options were vested and the balance was cancelled.
Additionally, the Company appointed another Director in November 2021 and granted stock options to acquire 29,173 shares of common stock that vest one third a year after each Annual Meeting beginning in 2022. One of the Directors appointed in June did not stand for reelection to the Board of Directors in December 2021 and forfeited 41,667 stock options. In December 2021, the Company granted additional options to acquire 10,238 shares of common stock each to five of the non-employee Directors, by way of annual compensation under the Company’s compensation policy for non-employee directors, which vest monthly over a one-year-period
On August 10, 2016, the Company entered into a Letter Agreement (the “Amendment”) with Parity Labs, LLC (“Parity”), a company principally owned by Mr. Beck (former director and CEO) and his family, to amend the compensation section of that certain Advisory Agreement previously entered into between the Company and Parity on November 16, 2015 for the provision of strategic advisory services, to provide for the issuance to Parity of a common stock option (the “Parity Option”) to acquire 666,667 shares of common stock of the Company exercisable at $1.50 per share for a period of ten years. The Parity Option vested in entirety upon Mr. Beck becoming the Chief Executive Officer of Ipsidy, Inc. on January 31, 2017. The Company’s headquarters are located in Long Beach, New York where the Company currently leases offices on a month-to-month basis. The facilities are managed by Bridgeworks LLC, (“Bridgeworks”) a company providing office facilities to emerging companies, principally owned by Mr. Beck and his family. The arrangement with Bridgeworks LLC allows the Company to use offices and conference rooms for a fixed, monthly fee. Since 2014, Mr. Beck has served as managing member of Parity, and since 2016, as Chairman, a Member and co-founder of Bridgeworks. During 2021 and 2020, the Company paid Bridgeworks $30,000 and $52,500, respectively in each year for the use of the facilities.
In February 2020, Mr. Beck, Mr. Selzer and Mr. Stern purchased $50,000, $100,000 and $50,000 respectively of 2020 Notes. In addition, Mr. Stern is a trustee of the Stern Trust whose Stern Note was amended and restated as part of the 2020 Notes Offering. A comprehensive disclosure of the 2020 Notes can be found in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the Year Ended December 31, 2021.
In March 2020, the Company granted 50,000 shares of Restricted Common Stock to each of Phillip Kumnick and Philip Broenniman, new members of our Board of Directors, in connection with their compensation for service as Board Members. The restricted stock vests upon the achievement of certain performance criteria. The performance criteria were met in 2021.
Mr. Phillip Kumnick and Mr. Philip Broenniman, two of the Company’s Director’s became employed by the Company as Chief Executive Officer and President and Chief Operating Officer effective May 22, 2020. Mr. Kumnick earned an initial base salary of $125,000 per annum which was increased to $187,500 per annum as of November 1, 2020 and is subject to review after one year. Mr. Kumnick was granted options to acquire 1,111,111 shares of common stock of which 20% vest at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. Mr. Broenniman earned an initial base salary of $87,500 per annum which was increased to $131,250 as of November 1, 2020 and is subject to review after one year. Mr. Broenniman was granted options to acquire 555,555 shares of common stock of which 20% vest at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions.
In 2021, the Company and Progress Partners Inc. (“Progress”) modified their Business Advisory Agreement dated May 6, 2020 (“Progress Agreement”). The amended Progress Agreement provides for Progress to undertake continuing business development activities for the Company, for which the Company paid Progress $350,000. Additionally, the Company paid Progress, another $115,000 for additional consulting services. Mr. Puri, a former Director of the Company from June 9, to December 29, 2021 is an employee and Managing Director of Progress but is not a principal shareholder nor an executive officer of Progress.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services.
The aggregate fees incurred for each of the last two years for professional services rendered by Cherry Bekaert LLP, the independent registered public accounting firm (PCOAB ID 00677) or the audit of the Company’s annual financial statements included in the Company’s Form 10-K and review of financial statements for its quarterly reports (Form 10-Q) are reported below.
The total fees billed by Cherry Bekaert, LLP in 2021 aggregated $248,900 which includes fees for the audit of financial statements and review of the quarterly financial statements for 2021. Additionally, the Company paid Cherry Bekaert, LLP $41,400 for services associated with the filing of the Company’s S-1, S-3 and S-8. Furthermore, the Company paid Cherry Bekaert, LLP $10,000 for assistance with the filing for certain tax credits.
The total fees paid to Cherry Bekaert LLP in 2020 aggregated $230,500 which includes fees for the 2020 audited financial statements and review of the quarterly financial statements for 2020. Additionally, the Company paid Cherry Bekaert, LLP $5,000 for services associated with the updated filing of the Company’s S-1.
The Audit Committee by its Charter pre-approves all audit services to be provided to the Company, whether provided by the principal auditor or other firms, and all other services (review, attest and non-audit) to be provided to the Company by the independent auditor. The Audit Committee approved the services rendered for the audit of the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 in addition to the services rendered for the filing of the quarterly financial statements on Form 10-Q in 2021 and 2020. Additionally, the Audit Committee approved the fee for Cherry Bekaert, LLP’s assistance with filing for certain tax credits.
We expect representatives of Cherry Bekaert, LLP to be at the 2022 stockholders’ meeting and will be available to respond to any questions.
The current policy of the directors, acting via the Audit Committee, is to approve the appointment of the principal auditing firm and any permissible audit-related services. The audit and audit related fees include fees for the annual audit of the financial statements and review of financial statements included in 10K and Q filings.
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits & Financial Statements Schedules.
* Filed herewith
(1) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on March 23, 2021.
(2) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on January 22, 2021.
(3) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on June 15, 2021.
(4) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on December 16, 2019.
(5) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 18, 2020.
(6) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on May 13, 2020.
(7) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-Q Quarterly Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on May 6, 2021.
(8) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 6, 2017.
(9) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-Q Quarterly Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on May 4, 2018.
(10) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-K Annual Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on July 12, 2017.
(11) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 1, 2017.
(12) Incorporated by reference to the Form S-1/A Amendment No. 1 to the S-1 Registration Statement filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on July 16, 2021.
(13) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-Q Quarterly Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on November 8, 2021.
(14) Incorporated by reference to the Form S-8 Registration Statement filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 1, 2022.
(15) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on March 21, 2022.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
Ipsidy Inc.
Date: March 22, 2022 By: /s/ Thomas Thimot
Name: Thomas Thimot
Title: Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: March 22, By: /s/ Stuart P. Stoller
Name: Stuart P. Stoller
Title: Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
In accordance with the Exchange Act, this report has been signed below by the following persons on March 22, 2022 on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated.
Signature
Title
/s/ Phillip L. Kumnick
Chairman of the Board of Directors
Phillip L. Kumnick
/s/ Thomas Thimot
Chief Executive Officer
Thomas Thimot
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Philip R. Broenniman
Director
Philip R. Broenniman
/s/ Michael Gorriz
Director
Michael Gorriz
/s/ Michael Koehneman
Director
Michael Koehneman
/s/ Neepa Patel
Director
Neepa Patel
/s/ Stuart P. Stoller
Chief Financial Officer
Stuart P. Stoller
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
/s/ Jacqueline White
Director
Jacqueline White
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
Ipsidy Inc.
Long Beach, New York
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Ipsidy Inc. and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive loss, stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the years then ended, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits, we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Emphasis of a Matter
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company has incurred recurring losses from operations and negative cash flows from operating activities. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note 1. Our opinion is not modified with respect to this matter.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and (2) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
Going Concern Considerations
Description of Matter
As described further in Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company has incurred net losses and is dependent upon future financial support to continue operations. Currently management’s forecasts and related assumptions illustrate their ability to sufficiently fund operations and satisfy the Company’s obligations as they come due for at least one year from the financial statement issuance date.
Management made judgments to conclude that it is probable that the Company’s plans will be effectively implemented and will provide the necessary cash flows to fund the Company’s obligations as they become due. The judgments with the highest degree of impact and subjectivity in reaching this conclusion included assumptions underlying its forecasted cash expenditures, its ability to reduce operating expenditures and its ability to access funding. As a result, a high degree of auditor judgment and increased audit effort was required in performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of management’s estimates.
How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit
Our principal audit procedures performed to address this critical audit matter included the following:
● We obtained management’s plans for dealing with the adverse effects of the conditions and events which give rise to substantial doubt.
● We tested the reasonableness of the forecasted uses and sources of cash used in management’s assessment of whether the Company has sufficient liquidity to fund operations for at least one year from the financial statement issuance date. This testing included inquiries with management, assessed forecasted cash expenditures for reasonableness based on historical operations, consideration of positive and negative evidence impacting management’s forecasts, the Company’s financing arrangements in place as of the report date, market and industry factors and consideration of the Company’s relationships with its financing partners.
Impairment of Intangible Assets
Description of Matter
The Company’s evaluation of intangible assets for impairment involves assessing the recoverability of the asset group by comparing the fair value of the asset group to its carrying value. The fair value of the asset group is estimated using the sum of undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset group, which requires the use of estimates and assumptions related to cash flow forecasts. Management’s cash flow forecasts included significant judgments and assumptions relating to revenue growth rates.
The fair value of the asset group exceeded their carrying values as of the annual evaluation date; therefore, no impairments were recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021, except for certain intangible assets relating to the 2016 business combination, which were deemed to not be recoverable; therefore, an impairment charge totaling $831,077 was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Management made significant judgments when developing the fair value estimate of the asset group. As a result, a high degree of auditor judgment and effort was required in performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of management’s cash flow forecasts and the significant assumptions identified above. Significant uncertainty exists with these assumptions because they are sensitive to future market or economic conditions.
How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit
Our audit procedures included the following:
● Evaluated management’s determination of asset group.
● Evaluated the significant assumptions and inputs used in the undiscounted cash flow model and reviewed corroborating documentation to support the assumptions and inputs.
● Performed a sensitivity analysis over the Company’s annual impairment analysis.
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2015.
Tampa, Florida
March 22, 2022
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1 - DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Ipsidy Inc dba authID.ai. (“Ipsidy” or the “Company”) was incorporated on September 21, 2011 under the laws of the State of Delaware. Ipsidy is a leading provider of secure, mobile, biometric identity verification software products delivered by an easy to integrate Identity as a Service (IDaaS) platform. The Company provides its biometric identification services to government and private sector organizations and businesses, seeking to authenticate and manage identities for a variety of security purposes, including issuing identity cards, exercise of rights such as voting in elections and controlling access to digital and physical environments. The Company’s platform comprising internally developed software as well as acquired and licensed technology provides secure, facial biometric, identity verification, and strong customer authentication. The Company’s system enables participants to consent to transactions using their biometric information with a digitally signed authentication response, embedding the underlying transaction data and each user’s identity attributes within every electronic transaction message processed through our platform.
The Company also owns an entity in South Africa, Cards Plus, which manufactures secure plastic identity credentials and loyalty card products.
Going Concern
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“US GAAP”) assuming the Company will continue as a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to meet its obligations and continue its operations for the next year following the issuance date of these financial statements.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $115.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company earned revenue of approximately $2.3 million, used $8.8 million to fund its operations, and incurred a net loss of approximately $17.7 million. Additionally, in March 2022, the Company received notice from a US customer that accounted for 27% of consolidated 2021 revenue that they will not use the service previously rendered after April 1, 2022.
The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon financial support from the Company’s current shareholders, the ability of the Company to obtain additional debt or equity financing to continue operations, the Company’s ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations, successfully locating and negotiating with other business entities for potential acquisition, and acquiring new clients to generate revenues and cash flows.
As discussed in the subsequent event below, the Company has secured additional financing which management believes will provide adequate funding for its operations as it continues to invest in its product, people, and technology. The Company projects that the investments will lead to revenue expansion thereby reducing liquidity needs. The Company may need additional capital in the future but currently it believes it has the required funds to operate its business through December 31, 2023.
Subsequent Event
On March 21, 2022, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) with certain accredited investors, including certain directors of the Company or their affiliates (the “Note Investors”), and, pursuant to the SPA, sold to the Note Investors Senior Secured Convertible Notes (the “Convertible Notes”) with an aggregate initial principal amount of approximately $9.2 million and an initial conversion price of $3.70 per share. Also on March 21, 2022, the Company entered into a Facility Agreement the (“Facility Agreement") with Stephen J. Garchik, who is both a current shareholder of the Company and a Note Investor (“Garchik”), pursuant to which Garchik agreed to provide to the Company a $10.0 million unsecured standby line of credit facility that will rank behind the Convertible Notes and may be drawn down in several tranches, subject to certain conditions described in the Facility Agreement. Pursuant to the Facility Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Garchik a facility commitment fee of 100,000 shares of our common stock upon the effective date of the Facility Agreement. On March 18 and March 21, 2022, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with an accredited investor and certain members of authID.ai’s management team (the “PIPE Investors”), and, pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, sold to the PIPE Investors a total of 1,063,514 shares of our common stock (the “Other Stock”) at prices of $3.03 per share for an outside investor and $3.70 per share for the management investors (the “PIPE”). The aggregate gross proceeds from the PIPE are approximately $3.3 million before expenses. The Company expects to use the net proceeds from the Notes Private Placement, the PIPE and cash drawn under the Facility Agreement to fund operating expenses and for general working capital, fees and expenses. As of March 21, 2022, the Company has received approximately $11,709,000 and is expecting to receive another $549,000 in cash from the sale of the Convertible Notes and the PIPE.
The Company has considered subsequent events through March 22, 2022 in connection with the preparation of these consolidated financial statements, which is the date the financial statements were available to be issued.
Ukraine
The war in the Ukraine may impact the Company and its operations in a number of different ways, which are yet to be fully assessed and are therefore uncertain. The Company’s principal concern is for the safety of the personnel who support us from that region. The Company works with third party sub-contractors for outsourced services, including software engineering and development, some of whom are based in Eastern Europe, including Russia and Ukraine. The Company also works with outsourced engineers and developers and third-party providers in other parts of the world, including the United States, Europe, India, South Africa and South America. While the continuing impact of this conflict and the response of the United States and other countries to it by means of trade and economic sanctions, or other actions is still unknown, it could disrupt our ability to work with certain contractors The Company has taken steps to diversify its sub-contractor base, which may in the short term give rise to additional costs and delays in delivering software and product upgrades.
The uncertainty impacting and potential interruption in energy and other supply chains resulting from military hostilities in Europe and the response of the United States and other countries to it by means of trade and economic sanctions, or other actions, may give rise to increases in costs of goods and services generally and may impact the market for our products as prospective customers reconsider additional capital expenditure, or other investment plans until the situation becomes clearer. On the other hand, the threat of increased cyber-attacks from Russia or other countries may prompt enterprises to adopt additional security measures such as those offered by the Company.
For so long as the hostilities continue and perhaps even thereafter as the situation in Europe unfolds, we may see increased volatility in financial markets and a flight to safety by investors, which may impact our stock price and make it more difficult for the Company to raise additional capital at the time when it needs to do so, or for financing to be available upon acceptable terms. All or any of these risks separately, or in combination could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Covid-19
Covid-19 emerged globally in December 2019, and it has been declared a pandemic. Covid-19 is still impacting customers, business, results and financial condition throughout the world. The Company’s day-to-day operations have been impacted differently depending on geographic location and services that are being performed. The Cards Plus business located in South Africa operations has had limitations on its operations as they are following the guidance and requirements of the South African government. Our operations in the United States and Colombia have suffered less impact as most staff can work remotely and we can continue to develop our product offerings.
That said we have seen our business opportunities develop more slowly as business partners and potential customers include Covid-19 considerations. Furthermore, working remotely can cause a delay in decision making and finalization of negotiations and agreements.
Basis of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Ipsidy Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries Innovation in Motion Inc. MultiPay S.A.S., ID Global LATAM, IDGS S.A.S., ID Solutions, Inc., FIN Holdings, Inc., Cards Plus Pty Ltd., Ipsidy Perú S.A.C., and Ipsidy Enterprises Limited (collectively, the “Company”). All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
The summary of significant accounting policies presented below is designed to assist in understanding the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Such consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are the representations of the Company’s management, who are responsible for their integrity and objectivity. These accounting policies conform to US GAAP in all material respects and have been consistently applied in preparing the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Use of Estimates
In preparing these consolidated financial statements in conformity with US GAAP, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Cards Plus - The Company recognizes revenue for the design and production of cards at the point in time when products are shipped, or services have been performed due to the short term nature of the contracts. Additionally, the cards produced by the Company have no alternative use and the Company has an enforceable right to payment for work performed should the contract be cancelled. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, Cards Plus had approximately $48,000 and $87,000, respectively, of contract liability from payments received in advance that will be earned in future periods.
Payment Processing - The Company recognizes revenue for variable fees generated for payment processing solutions that are earned on a usage fee over time based on monthly transaction volumes or on a monthly flat fee rate. Additionally, the Company also sells certain equipment from time to time for which revenue is recognized at a point in time the equipment is delivered to the customer.
Identity Solutions Software - The Company recognizes revenue based on the identified performance obligations over the performance period for fixed consideration and/or for variable fees generated that are earned on a usage fee earned over time based on monthly transaction or user volumes and/or on a monthly flat fee rate. The Company had a contract liability of approximately $199,000 and $150,000 as of December 31, 2021, and 2020 respectively for certain revenue that will be earned in future periods. Of the $199,000 of deferred revenue contract liability as of December 31, 2021, approximately $140,000 will be earned in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 and the balance over the course of the year. The majority of the deferred revenue contract liability as of December 31, 2020, was recognized in the quarter ended March 31, 2021. We have allocated the selling price in the contract to one customer which has multiple performance obligations based on the contract selling price that we believe represents a standalone selling price for the service rendered.
All contracts are reviewed for their respective performance obligations and related revenue and expense recognition implications. Certain of the revenues are derived from identity services that could include multiple performance obligations. A performance obligation is defined as a promise to provide a “distinct” good or service to a customer. The Company has determined that one possible treatment under U.S. GAAP is that these services will represent a stand-ready series of distinct daily services that are substantially the same, with the same pattern of transfer to the customer. Further, the Company has determined that the performance obligation to provide account access and facilitate transactions should meet the criteria for the “as invoiced” practical expedient, in that the Company has a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value to the customer of the Company’s performance completed to date. As a result, the Company anticipates it may recognize revenue in the amount to which the Company has a right to invoice, based on completed performance at the relevant date. Additionally, the contracts could include implementation services, or support on an “as needed” basis and we will review each contract and determine whether such performance obligations are separate and distinct and apply the new standard accordingly to the revenue and expense derived from or related to each such service.
During both 2021 and 2020, the Company provided annual software maintenance support services relating to previously licensed software on a stand-ready basis. These fees were billed in advance and recognized ratably over the requisite service period as revenue.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had revenues from operations in North America, South America and Africa of $0.6 million, $0.4 million and $1.3 million, respectively, compared to $0.6 million, $0.4 million and $1.5 million, respectively, in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Furthermore, the Company will capitalize the incremental costs of acquiring and fulfilling a contract with a customer if the Company expects to recover those costs. These incremental costs were immaterial in 2021 and the Company recognizes these costs as incurred as it typically relates to a period of less than 1 year as allowed by the practical expedient and the amounts in 2021 were immaterial.
Contract cost assets will be amortized using the straight-line method over the expected period of benefit beginning at the time revenue begins to be realized. The amortization of contract fulfillment cost assets associated with facilitating transactions will be recorded as cost of services in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations. The amortization of contract acquisition cost assets associated with sales commissions that qualify for capitalization will be recorded as selling, general and administrative expense in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any deferred contract costs or fees payable.
Financing revenue related to direct financing leases is outside the scope of Topic 606 and is recognized over the term of the lease using the effective interest method. The Company in 2021 and 2020 leased kiosks to one customer that has met the criteria for a financing lease. The Company is currently discussing the termination of the kiosk lease with the lessee.
Accounts Receivable
All customers are granted credit on a short-term basis and related credit risks are considered minimal. The Company routinely reviews its trade receivables and makes provisions for probable doubtful accounts; however, those provisions are estimates and actual results could differ from those estimates and those differences may be material. Trade receivables are deemed uncollectible and removed from accounts receivable and the allowance for doubtful accounts when collection efforts have been exhausted. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, management determined no allowance for doubtful accounts was required.
Inventories
Inventory of plastic/ID cards, digital printing material, which are held by Cards Plus Pty Ltd., are at the lower of cost (using the average method) or market. The Plastic/ID cards and digital printing material are used to provide plastic loyal ID and other types of cards.
Inventories at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 consist of cards inventory and the Company recorded an inventory valuation allowance of approximately $20,000 and $18,000, respectively, to reflect net realizable value of the cards inventory.
Any adjustments to reduce the cost of inventories to their net realizable value are recognized in earnings in the current period.
Concentration of Credit Risk and Major Customers
The Company’s financial instruments that potentially expose the Company to a concentration of credit risk consist of cash and accounts receivable.
Cash: The Company’s cash is deposited at financial institutions and cash balances held in United States (“US”) bank accounts are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) up to $250,000. At various times during the year, the Company may have exceeded amounts insured by the FDIC. At December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $5,505,000 in funds in the United States which were in excess of the insured amounts by the FDIC. For the Company’s foreign subsidiaries, no amounts are insured. At December 31, 2021, the Company held approximately $4,000, $87,000, $183,000, and $8,000 in cash maintained in Peruvian, Colombian, African, and British Banks, respectively.
2021 Revenues and accounts receivable: For the year ended December 31, 2021, 27% of consolidated revenues were derived from the US and one customer represented the majority of US based income. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2021, 57%, and 16% of the consolidated revenues were from Cards Plus (Africa) and the Colombian operations, respectively. Revenue for approximately 87% of the Colombian operations were derived from two customers. Revenue for approximately 13% of Cards Plus was from one customer. As of December 31, 2021, accounts receivable related to Cards Plus (Africa) amounted to 64% of the accounts receivable. The US operations represented 19% of the accounts receivable and the balance of 17% was from the Colombian operations, respectively. The US customer that accounted for 27% of the consolidated revenue in 2021 will not use the service previously rendered after April 1, 2022.
2020 Revenues and accounts receivable: For the year ended December 31, 2020, 27% of consolidated revenues were derived from one customer who is a US customer and is substantially all of the US based income. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2021, 55%, and 16% of the consolidated revenues were from Cards Plus (Africa) and the Colombian operations, respectively. Revenue for approximately 87% of the Colombian operations were derived from two customers. As of December 31, 2021, accounts receivable related to Cards Plus (Africa) amounted to 90% of the accounts receivable. The US operations represented 9% of the accounts receivable and the balance of 1% was from the Colombian operations, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740 “Income Taxes.” Under the asset and liability method of FASB ASC 740, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under FASB ASC 740, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period the enactment occurs. A valuation allowance is provided for certain deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that the Company will not realize tax assets through future operations.
Leases
All leases are classified at the inception as direct finance leases or operating leases based on whether the lease transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership. Leases that transfer to the lessee substantially all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of the asset are classified as direct finance leases.
The Company, effective January 1, 2020 adopted the provisions of Topic 842. The Company used the practical expedients available under Topic 842 which allowed Ipsidy to run off existing leases, as initially classified as operating or financing, and classify new leases after implementation under the new standard as the business evolves.
The practical expedients elected by the Company allows the Company not to reassess our prior conclusions about lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs. Furthermore, Company elected the short-term lease recognition exemption for leases with a term of 12 or less months which are not reasonably certain of exercising any available renewal options that would extend past 12 months. Additionally, we will continue to account for the executory costs of the direct financing lease as previously concluded and the initial direct costs were not considered significant.
The Company has operating leases principally for offices and some of the leases have renewal options. Management evaluates each lease independently to determine the purpose, necessity to its future operations in addition to other appropriate facts and circumstances.
Property and Equipment, net
Property and equipment consist of furniture and fixtures and computer equipment and are stated at cost. Property and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful service lives of three to five years. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred and improvements are capitalized. Gains or losses on the disposition of property and equipment are recorded upon disposal.
Other Assets - Software Development Costs
Other assets consist primarily of costs associated with software development of new product offerings and enhancements to existing and new applications. Development costs of computer software to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning when a product’s technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is available for general release to customers. As of December 31, 2020, the balance sheet “Other assets” are under further development and have not been placed in service. During the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately $0.4 million was placed into service. Upon completion, the amounts remaining in “other assets” will be recorded in the appropriate asset category and amortized over their estimated useful lives.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the balance in other assets for software was $-0- and no assets were placed into service.
Intangible Assets
Excluding goodwill, acquired intangible assets and internally developed software are amortized over their estimated useful lives. Acquired amortizing intangible assets are carried at cost, less accumulated amortization. Internally developed software costs are capitalized upon reaching technological feasibility. Amortization of acquired finite-lived intangible assets is computed over the estimated useful lives (5- 10 years) of the respective assets which is the shorter of the life of the asset or the period during which sales will be generated.
The Company’s evaluation of intangible assets for impairment involves assessing the recoverability of the asset group by comparing the fair value of the asset group to its carrying value. The fair value of the asset group is estimated using the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset group, using estimates and assumptions relating to revenue growth rates. The Company has identified two distinct asset groups, of which one was deemed to be fully recoverable. However, in our evaluation, we believe that the other asset group was not deemed to be recoverable and an impairment charge totaling $831,000 was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Goodwill
Goodwill is recorded when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the fair value of net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The Company performs an annual impairment test of goodwill and further periodic tests to the extent indicators of impairment develop between annual impairment tests. The Company’s impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value, including the goodwill related to the reporting unit utilizing qualitative considerations. To determine the fair value of the reporting unit, the Company may use various approaches including an asset or cost approach, market approach or income approach or any combination thereof. These approaches may require the Company to make certain estimates and assumptions including future cash flows, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are reviewed each time the Company tests goodwill for impairment and are typically developed as part of the Company’s routine business planning and forecasting process. While the Company believes its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, variations from those estimates could produce materially different results.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s projection and assessment did not indicate that an impairment charge was required as its fair value was in excess of carrying value.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment loss of approximately $1.0 million, associated with goodwill at one of its reporting units. As a result of the current pandemic and its potential impact on future results, the Company updated its reporting unit projections, and it indicated a goodwill impairment as the carrying value may not be recovered as revenue assumptions and related revenue were revised downward.
The fair value of the reporting unit in both years was determined using discounted cash flow model and the market approach.
Stock-based compensation
The Company has accounted for stock-based compensation under the provisions of FASB ASC 718 - “Stock Compensation” which requires the use of the fair-value based method to determine compensation for all arrangements under which employees and others receive shares of stock or equity instruments (stock options and common stock purchase warrants). For all awards, the fair value of each stock option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model that uses assumptions for expected volatility, expected dividends, expected term, and the risk-free interest rate. Expected volatilities are based on historical volatility of peer companies and other factors estimated over the expected term of the stock options. For employee awards, the expected term of options granted is derived using the “simplified method” which computes expected term as the average of the sum of the vesting term plus the contract term. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for the period of the expected term.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset.
If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its undiscounted estimated future cash flows, an impairment review is performed. An impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Generally, fair value is determined using valuation techniques such as expected discounted cash flows or appraisals, as appropriate. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell, and are no longer depreciated or amortized. The assets and liabilities of a disposed group classified as held for sale would be presented separately in the appropriate asset and liability sections of the balance sheet.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment on intangible assets of approximately $0.3 million at one reporting unit. The current projection indicated the carrying value of the intangible assets was in excess of its estimated recoverable value.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs consist of expenditures for the research and development of new products and technology. These costs are primarily expenses to incurred to perform research projects and develop technology for the Company’s products. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Net Loss per Common Share
The Company computes net loss per share in accordance with FASB ASC 260, “Earnings per Share”. ASC 260 requires presentation of both basic and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) on the face of the statement of operations. Basic EPS is computed by dividing net loss available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period including stock options, using the treasury stock method, and convertible notes and stock warrants, using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options, warrants and conversion of convertible notes. Diluted EPS excludes all dilutive potential common shares if their effect is anti-dilutive. The following potentially dilutive securities were excluded from the calculation of diluted loss per share for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 because their effect was antidilutive:
Foreign Currency Translation
The assets, liabilities and results of operations of certain of Ipsidy’s subsidiaries are measured using their functional currency which is the currency of the primary foreign economic environment in which they operate. Upon consolidating these subsidiaries with Ipsidy, the applicable assets and liabilities are translated to US dollars at currency exchange rates as of the applicable dates and their revenues and expenses are translated at the weighted average currency exchange rates during the applicable reporting periods. Translation adjustments resulting from the process of translating these subsidiaries’ financial statements are reported in other comprehensive loss in the accompanying consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
See Notes 5 and 6 for additional information on indebtedness outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
NOTE 2 - PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, NET
Property and equipment consisted of the following as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Depreciation expense totaled $69,635 and $54,093 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
NOTE 3 - INTANGIBLE ASSETS, NET (OTHER THAN GOODWILL)
The Company’s intangible assets consist of intellectual property acquired from Multi-Pay and FIN in addition to internally developed software that have been placed into service. They are amortized over their estimated useful lives as indicated below. The following is a summary of activity related to intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following is a summary of intangible assets as of December 31, 2021:
The following is a summary of intangible assets as of December 31, 2020:
The following is the future amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31:
NOTE 4 - ACCOUNTS PAYABLE AND ACCRUED EXPENSES
Accounts payable and accrued expenses consisted of the following as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
* Included in other is accrued Board of Directors Compensation of $-0- and $349,000 as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. In May 2021, the non-employee Directors were compensated for their service through the issuance of stock options and therefore the balance of the accrual for Directors’ compensation was $-0- as of December 31, 2021. See Note 8.
NOTE 5 - NOTES PAYABLE, NET
The following is a summary of notes payable as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
In May 2020, the Company received a loan of approximately $486,000 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act which is administered by the U.S. Small Business Association (“USSBA”) related to its U.S. Operations. The Company received notice from the USSBA in May 2021, that the May 2020 PPP loan was forgiven as we met the applicable requirements.
In January 2021, the Company received a second loan of approximately $486,000 under the PPP related to its U.S. Operations. The Company received notice from the USSBA in August 2021, that the January 2021 PPP loan was forgiven as the Company met the applicable requirements.
In accordance with ASC 470, extinguishment accounting, the amount forgiven by the USSBA is recorded as other income - gain on extinguishment of notes payable.
The remaining amounts Notes Payable due as of December 31, 2021 will be paid in the first quarter of 2022.
NOTE 6 - CONVERTIBLE NOTES PAYABLE
On December 13, 2019, the Company entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “8% Note Investors”) providing for the sale by the Company to the 8% Note Investors of 8% Convertible Notes in the aggregate amount of $428,000 (the “8% Notes”). The 8% Notes were to mature on November 30, 2021 and were a general unsecured obligation of the Company.
In February 2020, the Company and the holders of the 8% Notes entered into an amendment agreement pursuant to which the principal and interest due under the 8% Notes will remain due and payable on the same terms as exist in the 8% Notes prior to modification, that the maturity shall be extended to the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes, namely February 28, 2022, and the 8% Notes became a secured obligation of the Company.
On February 14, 2020 the Company, entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “2020 Note Investors”) providing for the sale by the Company to the 2020 Note Investors of 15% Senior Secured Convertible Notes in the aggregate amount of $1,510,000 (the “2020 Notes”). Philip D. Beck, then Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, invested $50,000 in consideration of a 2020 Note in the principal amount of $50,000 paid by a deduction from his salary. Theodore Stern, a former director of the Company, invested $50,000 in consideration of a 2020 Note in the principal amount of $50,000. Herbert Selzer, a former director of the Company invested $100,000 in consideration of a 2020 Note in the principal amount of $100,000. Mr. Selzer provided $50,000 on the closing date and provided the balance of the funding in April 2020.
The 2020 Notes were to mature February 28, 2022 and were a secured obligation of the Company. At the option of the 2020 Note Investors, they may at any time convert the 2020 Notes. The number of shares delivered shall be equal to 150% of the amount of the principal converted divided by the conversion price of $6.00 per share. The Company may require that the 2020 Note Investors convert all or a portion of the 2020 Notes, if the Company’s volume weighted average price for any preceding 20-day period is equal to or greater than $9.00.
In connection with this private offering, the Company paid Network 1 Financial Securities, Inc., a registered broker-dealer, a cash fee of approximately $104,800.
During 2021, the 8% Note Investors and the 2020 Note Investors representing a total of approximately $6.2 million and a portion of their accrued interest at the option of the noteholders were converted into approximately 1,171,000 shares of common stock of the Company.
As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding convertible notes payable was $662,000 owed to the Stern Trust with a maturity date of February 28, 2022. During February 2022, the Company and the Stern Trust mutually agreed to extend the due date of the convertible note until December 31, 2022. The Stern Trust shall have the right at its sole option to extend the Maturity Date for a further six months after December 31, 2022, by service of written notice upon the Borrower at any time on or before December 31, 2022.
NOTE 7 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
2021 Transactions
Sale of Common Stock
On August 26, 2021, the Company completed the Offering of 1,642,856 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $7.00 per share, including 214,285 shares sold upon full exercise of the underwriter’s option to purchase additional shares, for gross proceeds of approximately $11.5 million. Two executive officers and three members of the Board of Directors participated in the offering and purchased approximately $1.3 million of common shares.
Convertible Notes Payable
See discussion in Note 6 regarding the $662,000 Stern Trust Note.
Additionally, Theodore Stern and Herbert Selzer (also a former member of the Board of Directors until June 9, 2021) provided conversion notices for their respective 2020 Notes converting the principal, repayment premium and interest in the amount of approximately $256,000 into approximately 41,000 shares of common stock.
Executive Officers
On June 14, 2021, Phillip L. Kumnick resigned as Chief Executive Officer of Ipsidy Inc., and Thomas L. Thimot was appointed Chief Executive Officer in his place. Further, Philip R. Broenniman resigned as President and Chief Operating Officer and Cecil N. Smith III (Tripp) was appointed President and Chief Technology Officer. In May 2021 the Company granted to each of Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman options (the “May 2021 Options”) to acquire a total of 1,166,667 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.20 per share for a term of ten years that vest upon the achievement of certain market capitalization thresholds, or performance conditions. In November 2021 Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman agreed to cancel 300,000 and 200,000, respectively, of these stock options in consideration of removing certain service conditions.
Mr. Thomas Thimot and Mr. Cecil Smith, became employed by the Company as Chief Executive Officer and President and Chief Technology Officer effective June 14, 2021. Mr. Thimot and the Company entered into an Offer Letter pursuant to which Mr. Thimot will earn an annual salary of $325,000 with a bonus target at 50% of the base salary (pro-rated for 2021) upon terms to be agreed with the Compensation Committee for 2021 and on the understanding that the 2022 target will include a requirement of the Company achieving three times the annual revenue of 2021. Additionally, Mr. Thimot was granted an option to acquire 1,200,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance is subject to certain performance vesting requirements.
On June 14, 2021, Mr. Smith and the Company entered an into an Offer Letter pursuant to which Mr. Smith will earn an annual salary of $275,000 with a bonus target at 50% of the base salary (pro-rated for 2021) upon terms to be agreed with the Compensation Committee for 2021. In addition, Mr. Smith will receive a bonus of $50,000 after 90 days of service. Additionally. Mr. Smith was granted an option to acquire 600,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance is subject to certain performance vesting requirements.
Board of Directors
On June 9, 2021 Theodore Stern, Herbert Selzer and Thomas Szoke resigned as directors of the Company. The size of the Board of directors was increased to seven and Dr. Michael A. Gorriz, Michael L. Koehneman, Sanjay Puri, Mr. Thimot and Jacqueline L. White were appointed as additional directors of the Company. Messrs. Stern, Selzer and Szoke did not advise the Company of any disagreement with the Company on any matter relating to its operations, policies or practices. Mr. Szoke continued with the Company as Chief Solutions Architect until December 1, 2021 and entered an agreement with the Company in lieu of his Executive Retention Agreement in which he will receive $305,000 equally on a monthly basis for twelve months.
The Company granted each of the four new Directors appointed in June 2021 stock options to acquire 62,500 shares of common stock or a total of 250,000 at an exercise price of $7.80 per share for a term of ten years that vest one third per year after each Annual Meeting. The Company granted the previously serving Directors stock options to acquire 93,470 common shares that were vested upon grant as the services were previously rendered. The stock options were granted in lieu of other forms of Director Compensation. The Company also granted Mr. Selzer and Mr. Stern 22,388 stock options to acquire common shares for service in 2021 prior to their resignation as Directors. Upon their resignation as Directors in June 2021, 13,992 stock options were vested and the balance was cancelled.
Additionally, the Company appointed another Director in November 2021 and granted stock options to acquire 29,173 shares of common stock that vest one third a year after each Annual Meeting beginning in 2022. One of the Directors appointed in June did not stand for reelection to the Board of Directors in December 2021 and forfeited 41,667 stock options. In December 2021, the Company granted additional options to acquire 10,238 shares of common stock each to five of the non-employee Directors by way of annual compensation under the Company’s compensation policy for non-employee directors and which vest monthly over a one-year-period
Other
In 2021, the Company and Progress Partners Inc. (“Progress”) modified their Business Advisory Agreement dated May 6, 2020 (“Progress Agreement”). The amended Progress Agreement provides for Progress to undertake continuing business development activities for the Company, for which the Company paid Progress $350,000. Additionally, the Company paid Progress, another $115,000 for additional consulting services. Mr. Puri, a former Director of the Company from June 9, to December 29, 2021 is an employee and Managing Director of Progress but is not a principal shareholder nor an executive officer of Progress.
2020 Transactions
Appointment of Executive Officers
Mr. Phillip Kumnick and Mr. Philip Broenniman, two of the Company’s Director’s became employed by the Company as Chief Executive Officer and President and Chief Operating Officer effective May 22, 2020.
Mr. Kumnick earned an initial base salary of $125,000 per annum, which was increased to $187,500 as of November 1, 2020 and is subject to review after one year. Mr. Kumnick was granted options to acquire 33,333,334 shares of common stock of which 20% vest at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. Mr. Broenniman will earn an initial base salary of $87,500 per annum which was increased to $131,250 as of November 1, 2020 and is subject to review after one year. Mr. Broenniman was granted options to acquire 16,666,666 shares of common stock of which 20% vest at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman have bonus targets in their respective employment arrangements subject to meeting certain performance thresholds.
Issuance of Common Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted 1,500,000 shares of Restricted Common Stock to each of Phillip Kumnick and Philip Broenniman, new members of our Board of Directors, in connection with their compensation for service as Board Members. The restricted stock vested in 2021 upon the achievement of certain performance criteria.
Warrant Exercises
On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s warrants exercisable at per share price of $3.00 (the “$3.00 Warrants”) were exercised for cash at an exercise price of $2.10 per share. In addition, the holders that exercised the $3.00 Warrants received a warrant exercisable for two years to acquire one share of common stock at an exercise price of $4.50 per share (the $4.50 Warrants”) for every four $3.00 Warrants exercised. Mr. Theodore Stern, a director of the Company, participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 33,334 shares of common stock and 8,333 $4.50 Warrants in consideration of $70,000; and Varana Capital Focused, LP (“VCFLP”), participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 123,889 shares of common stock and 30,792 $4.50 Warrants, in consideration of $260,167. Mr. Philip Broenniman, a director, the President and COO of the Company is the investment manager of VCFLP.
On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s warrants exercisable at per share price of $1.80 (the “$1.80 Warrants”) were exercised. In addition, the holders that exercised the $1.80 Warrants also received a $4.50 Warrant for every two $1.80 Warrants exercised. Vista Associates, L.P., (“Vista”) of which, Mr. Herbert Selzer a director of the Company, is the General Partner, participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 29,333 shares of common stock and 14,667 $4.50 Warrants, in consideration of $52,800.
Sale of Common Stock
On June 30, 2020, the Company also entered into a Subscription Agreement with VCFLP pursuant to which VCFLP purchased 23,810 shares of common stock in consideration of $50,000.
Convertible Notes Payable
Theodore Stern and Philip Beck former members of the Board of Directors of the Company, invested $50,000 each in consideration of the 2020 Notes. Another former director, Herbert Selzer invested $100,000 in consideration of a 2020 Note in the principal amount of $100,000. Vista held 29,33 2015 Warrants, which were also extended as a result of Mr. Selzer’s investment and as noted above were exercised for cash on June 30, 2020. See Note 6
Further, the Company and the Stern Trust entered the Restated Stern Note providing that the $2,000,000 principal of the Stern Note will be due and payable on the same terms (bearing interest at 15% per annum) and on the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes and subject to the same Security Agreement. The interest due under the Stern Note as of January 31, 2020 in the amount of $662,000 has been capitalized and will earn interest at 10% per annum, which at the election of the Stern Trust can be paid in shares of common stock at a conversion price of $0.20 and the maturity of such interest shall be extended to the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes. The Restated Stern Note includes a 50% repayment premium. Mr. Stern, the Trustee of the Stern Trust also entered into the Security Agreement as one of the joint collateral agents.
Other
In connection with the offering of the 2020 Notes and the sale of common stock in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company paid Network 1 Financial Securities, Inc., a registered broker-dealer (“Network 1”), a cash fee of approximately $471,800. A former member of the Company’s Board of Director’s maintains a partnership with a principal of Network 1.
Additionally, the Company rents office space in Long Beach, New York at a monthly cost of $5,000 (as of January 1, 2020 reduced from $7,425). The rent was further reduced to $2,500 per month beginning October 1, 2020. The agreement is month to month and can be terminated on 30 days’ notice. The agreement is between the Company and Bridgeworks LLC, an entity principally owned by Mr. Beck, a former member of the Board of Directors and his family. During years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company paid rent of $52,500 and $89,100 respectively.
On May 22, 2020, the Company and Mr. Beck entered into a separation letter agreement, which provided for payment to Mr. Beck of one year’s severance in the amount of $350,000 as well as certain employee benefits, payable in accordance with the terms of Mr. Beck’s Retention Agreement. Mr. Beck’s severance was paid over a one-year period. Furthermore, the company started recording the expense associated with Mr. Beck’s restricted stock agreement dated September 29, 2017. In connection with the separation letter agreement, the Company exchanged the September 29, 2017 Restricted Stock Agreement to substantially modify the vesting provisions of the previously issued 500,000 shares of restricted stock and allows a time-vesting provision whereby the restricted shares will fully vest by May 2022. On October 30, 2020, pursuant to the terms of Mr. Beck’s Restricted Stock Agreement, as amended by the Separation Agreement, the Company repurchased for $1.00 the 500,000 Unvested Restricted Stock upon his resignation from the Board of Directors.
NOTE 8 - STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
The Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000,000 shares of common stock. The Company had 23,294,024 and 19,642,401 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, the Company is authorized to issue 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock but no shares of preferred stock have been issued.
Common Stock
2021 Common Stock Transactions
● On August 26, 2021, the Company completed the Offering, pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-1, of 1,642,856 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $7.00 per share, including 214,285 shares sold upon full exercise of the underwriter’s option to purchase additional shares, for gross proceeds of approximately $11.5 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
● During 2021, convertible notes totaling approximately $6.2 million and a portion of their accrued interest at the option of the noteholders were converted into approximately 1,171,000 shares of common stock of the Company.
● During 2021, the Company issued approximately 756,000 shares of common stock pursuant to cashless exercises of common stock purchase warrants and options, and approximately 81,000 shares of common stock pursuant to exercises of common stock purchase warrants and options for cash.
2020 Common Stock Transactions
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted 266,667 shares of Restricted Common Stock of which 100,000 shares were granted to two new members of our Board of Directors in connection with their compensation for service as Board Members and 166,667 to an employee in connection with his employment compensation. The shares were valued at the fair market value at the date of grant. The restricted stock vests upon the achievement of certain performance criteria.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued approximately 3,540 shares of common stock to a third-party provider of services in lieu of cash compensation.
● In June 2020, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements with two accredited investors (the “June 2020 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the June 2020 Accredited Investors agreed to purchase 114,719 shares of common stock for $200,000.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $3.00 Warrants were exercised for cash at an exercise price of $2.10 per share. In addition, the holders that exercised the $3.00 Warrants received a $0.15 Warrant for every four $3.00 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 333,611 shares of common stock and 83,403 $4.50 Warrants in consideration of $700,583.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $1.50 Warrants were exercised for cash. In addition, the holders that exercised the $1.50 Warrants received a $4.50 Warrant for every two $1.50 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 154,400 shares of common stock and 77,200 $4.50 Warrants, in consideration of $231,600. Separately, certain holders of the $1.50 Warrants to acquire 59,000 shares of common stock exercised on a cashless basis resulting in the issuance of 18,689 shares of common stock.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $1.80 Warrants were exercised. In addition, the holders that exercised the $1.80 Warrants also received $4.50 Warrant for every two $1.80 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 176,000 shares of common stock and 88,000 $4.50 Warrants in consideration of $316,800.
● On October 30, 2020 and on November 6, 2020, Ipsidy Inc. entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “October 2020 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the October 2020 Accredited Investors agreed to purchase approximately 1,748,000 shares of the Company’s common stock together with Warrants to acquire approximately 874,000 shares of common stock for a term of five years at an exercise price of $4.50 per share for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.24 million. In connection with this private offering, the Company paid a registered broker-dealer, a cash fee of approximately $367,000 and issue the broker-dealer a common stock purchase warrant to acquire approximately 105,000 shares of common stock of the Company exercisable for a term of five years at an exercise price of $4.50 per share.
● During 2020, the Company issued approximately 56,000 shares of common stock pursuant to cashless exercises of common stock purchase warrants and options, other than the June 2020 warrant exercises.
Warrants
● During 2021, under the terms of the Underwriting Agreement in connection with the Offering, the Company issued underwriters warrants (the “Representative’s Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 64,286 shares of common stock (4.5% of the total shares issued in the Offering). The Representative’s Warrants are exercisable at a per share price of $8.75 (equal to 125% of the Offering price of the Company’s common stock). The Representative’s Warrants are exercisable for a term of four and one half years beginning on February 23, 2022.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued approximately 980,000 common stock warrants in connection with its sale of common stock in the 4th quarter of 2020 for a term of five years at an exercise price $4.50 per share. Of the approximate 980,000 shares, approximately 105,000 shares were issued to a broker-dealer in connection with the sale of common stock.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued approximately 250,000 common stock warrants for a term of five years at an average exercise price of $4.50 cents in connection with cash exercises of previously issued warrants. The Company recorded a charge of approximately $367,000 in connection with an inducement to the warrant holders who exercised their outstanding warrants.
See Common Stock Transaction above for a further description of the warrant issuances.
The following is a summary of the Company’s warrant activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Stock Options
The Company has adopted the Ipsidy Inc. 2014 Equity Compensation Plan, 2017 Incentive Stock Plan, and the 2021 Equity Incentive Plan. The Company has no other stock options plans in effect as of December 31, 2021.
On November 21, 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the Ipsidy Inc. Equity Compensation Plan (the “2014 Plan”). On September 28, 2017, the shareholders of the Company approved the 2017 Incentive Stock Plan (“2017 Incentive Plan”) and on December 29, 2021, the shareholders of the Company approved the 2021 Equity Incentive Plan. (“2021 Plan”). The following is a summary of principal features of the 2014 Plan, the 2017 Incentive Plan, and the 2021 Plan. The summaries, however, does not purport to be a complete description of all the provisions of each plan.
The terms of Awards granted under the plans shall be contained in an agreement between the participant and the Company and such terms shall be determined by the Compensation Committee consistent with the provisions of the applicable plan. The terms of Awards may or not require a performance condition in order to vest the equity comprised in the relevant Award. The terms of each Option granted shall be contained in a stock option agreement between the optionee and the Company and such terms shall be determined by the Compensation Committee consistent with the provisions of the applicable plan.
The Company has also granted equity awards that have not been approved by security holders.
2021 Stock Option Issuances
● The Company granted Mr. Thimot and Mr. Smith stock options to acquire 1,200,000 and 600,000 shares of common stock respectively upon their employment of which half of the options vest monthly over four years and the balance vest upon the achievement of certain market capitalization thresholds or performance conditions.
● The Company granted each of Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman stock options to acquire 583,333 shares of common stock that vest upon the achievement of certain market capitalization thresholds or performance conditions. In November 2021 Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman agreed to cancel 300,000 and 200,000, respectively, of these stock options in consideration of removing certain service conditions.
● The Company granted each of the four new Directors appointed June 2021 (“June Directors”) stock options to acquire 62,500 shares of common stock or a total of 250,000 that vest one third a year after each Annual Meeting. Additionally, the Company added another Director in November 2021 and granted stock options to acquire 29,173 shares of common stock that vest one third a year after each Annual Meeting beginning in 2022. One of the June Directors did not stand for reelection to the Board of Directors in December 2021 and forfeited 41,667 stock options. In December 2021, the Company granted additional options to acquire 10,238 shares of common stock each to five of the non-employee Directors, by way of annual compensation under the Company’s compensation policy for non-employee directors and which vests monthly over a one-year-period.
● The Company granted the previously serving Directors stock options to acquire 93,470 common shares that are vested as the services were rendered. The stock options were granted in lieu of other forms of Board of Director Compensation and was used to eliminate previously accrued Board of Director compensation. The Company also granted to each of Mr. Selzer and Mr. Stern 22,388 stock options to acquire common shares for service in 2021 prior to their resignation as Directors. Upon their resignation as directors in June 2021, 6,997 stock options to each of them were vested and the balance was cancelled.
● Additionally, the Company granted options to acquire common stock to employees. The options for the majority vest annually over a three-year period, 100,000 vest equally over a four-year period, and the balance of 100,000 vest upon the achievement of certain market capitalization thresholds or performance conditions.
2020 Stock Option Issuances
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman granted options to acquire 1,111,111 and 555,555,respectively, shares of common stock upon their employment. The options granted to Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman vest 20% at date of the grant with the balance vesting upon achieving certain performance thresholds. The performance thresholds have been met. Additionally, the Company granted options to acquire approximately 422,000 shares of common stock to employees and one service provider in connection with service. The options have a term of ten years with vesting ranging from immediate to a three-year period. All options granted approximated fair value.
The Company determined the grant date fair value of the options granted during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 using the Black Scholes Method and the following assumptions:
Activity related to stock options for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 is summarized as follows:
The following table summarizes stock option information as of December 31, 2021:
As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $15,597,000 of unrecognized compensation costs related to employee stock options outstanding which will be recognized in 2022 through 2025. The company will recognize forfeitures as they occur. Stock compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 was approximately $5,475,000 and $823,000, respectively.
Additionally, the Company recorded approximately $1,228,000 in 2021 for restricted stock expense in which the Company met certain performance thresholds.
The criteria for certain performance-based stock options awarded in 2021 have not been achieved as of December 31, 2021.
NOTE 9 - DIRECT FINANCING LEASE
In September 2016, the Company and an entity in Colombia entered into a rental contract for the rental of kiosks to provide cash collection and fare services at transportation stations. The lease term commenced in May 2017 when the kiosks were installed and operational. The term of the rental contract is ten years at an approximate monthly rental of $11,900. The lessee has the option at the end of the lease term to purchase each unit for approximately $40. The term of the lease approximates the expected economic life of the kiosks. As such, the lease was accounted for as a direct financing lease.
The equipment under the capital lease is valued at approximately $748,000. At the inception of the lease term, the aggregate minimum future lease payments to be received was approximately $1,422,000 before executory cost. Unearned income recorded at the inception of this lease was approximately $474,000 and will be recorded over the term of the lease using the effective income rate method. Future minimum lease payments to be received under the lease for the next five years and thereafter are as follows:
In December 2021, the lessee under the rental arrangement unilaterally removed the equipment from service and raised doubt with respect to the future payments under the lease. The Company intends to use commercially reasonable means to collect the obligation due under the direct financing lease. However, as a result, the Company has recorded a reserve for doubtful accounts for the entire balance remaining.
NOTE 10 - LEASE OBLIGATION PAYABLE
The Company entered into a lease in March 2017 for the rental of its printer for its secured plastic and credential card products business under an arrangement that is classified as a capital lease. The leased equipment is amortized on a straight line basis over its lease term including the last payment (61 payments) which would transfer ownership to the Company. Total amortization related to the lease equipment as of December 31, 2021 is $155,370. The following is a schedule showing the future minimum lease payments under capital lease by year and the present value of the minimum lease payments as of December 31, 2021. The interest rate related to the lease obligation is 12% and the maturity date is March 31, 2022. Future cash payments related to this capital lease for 2022 are as follows:
NOTE 11 - INCOME TAXES
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740 which prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC 740 also provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim period, disclosure and transition. There were no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company’s loss before income taxes from US and Foreign sources for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, are as follows:
The following table summarizes the significant differences between the U.S. Federal statutory tax rate and the Company’s effective tax rate for financial statement purposes for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The Company has paid certain minimum taxes and other obligations during the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 of approximately $21,000 and $36,000, respectively.
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized as follows:
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has available federal net operating loss carry forward of $51.7 million and state net operating loss carry forwards of $36.4 million. Operating loss carryforwards of approximately $14.4 million will expire through 2037 and the balance of $37.3 million have an indefinite life. Additionally, the Company has income tax net operating loss carryforwards related to our international operations which have an indefinite life.
The Company assess the recoverability of its net operating loss carry forwards and other deferred tax assets and records a valuation allowance to the extent recoverability does not satisfy the “more likely than not” recognition criteria. The Company continues to maintain the valuation allowance until sufficient positive evidence exists to support full or partial reversal. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a valuation allowance of approximately $18.9 million against its deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, due to insufficient positive evidence, primarily consisting of losses within the taxing jurisdictions that have tax attributes and deferred tax assets.
NOTE 12 - COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Legal Matters
From time to time the Company is a party to various legal or administrative proceedings arising in the ordinary course of our business. While any litigation contains an element of uncertainty, we have no reason to believe that the outcome of such proceedings will have a material adverse effect on the financial condition or results of operations of the Company.
Executive Compensation
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had employment agreements with members of the management team providing base salary amounts and provisions for stock compensation, cash bonuses and other benefits to be granted at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Additionally, certain employment agreements include provisions for base salary, bonus amounts upon meeting certain performance milestones, severance benefits for involuntary termination from a change in control or other events as defined in their respective agreements. Additionally, the vesting of certain awards could be accelerated upon a change in control (as defined) or by action of the Board of Directors. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has an agreement with a former member of the management team to pay a total of approximately $279,600 on a monthly basis over the next eleven months.
Leases
The lease related balances included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021 were as follows:
The weighted average lease term remining is less than one year and the weighted average discount rate is 13.55%.
The following table presents the maturity of the Company’s operating lease liabilities as of December 31, 2021:
The Company rents office space in Long Beach, New York at a monthly cost of $2,500 (reduced from $5,000 in September 2020) in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The agreement is month to month and can be terminated on 30 days notice. The agreement is between the Company and Bridgeworks LLC, an entity principally owned by Mr. Beck, our former CEO and Director and his family.
The Company leased office space in Plantation, Florida for a monthly rental of approximately $2,700 plus a share of building expenses. The lease ended in August 2020. The Company leased office space in Alpharetta, Georgia for a monthly rental of approximately $3,800 per month. The lease ended March 31, 2020.
The Company leased an office location in Bogota, Colombia with a base rent of approximately $8,500 per month which was adjusted for inflation when compared to the original lease date in 2017. In April 2021, MultiPay entered into a six-month lease for a monthly rental of approximately $1,375 which terminated in September 2021. In October 2021, MultiPay entered into a one-year-lease for approximately $2,900 per month. The Company leased an apartment for a management team member for approximately $2,000 a month through April 2020. The Company did not renew the apartment lease after it ended in October 2020.
The Company also leases space for its operation in South Africa. The current lease is through June 30, 2022, and the approximate monthly rent is $8,000. The Company plans to renew the lease of the current space or locate a similar facility.
Rent expense included in general and administrative on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $187,000 and $284,000, respectively.
Potential Obligation
The Company has entered into an agreement with a facial recognition software company for the grant of a perpetual license for commercial use (unless terminated for breach by either party). The initial payment under the license of $160,000 was paid in 2018 with two additional installments due on the first and second anniversary of the Effective Date of the arrangement amounting to $80,000 and $40,000, respectively. The Company has recorded the outstanding liability and it is included in “Other of Accounts Payable and Accrued Expenses”. See Note 4. The Company is in discussion with the provider with respect to functionality as well as the financial obligation.
NOTE 13 - SEGMENT INFORMATION
General information
The segment and geographic information provided in the table below is being reported consistent with the Company’s method of internal reporting. Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise for which separate financial information is available and which is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. The CODM regularly reviews net revenue and gross profit by geographic regions. The Company products and services operate in two reportable segments: identity management and payment processing.
Information about revenue, profit/loss and assets
The CODM evaluates performance and allocates resources based on net revenue and operating results of the geographic region as the current operations of each geography are either primarily identity management or payment processing. Identity management revenue is generated in North America and Africa and payment processing is earned in South America which are the three geographic regions of the Company. We have included the lease income in payment processing are the leases are related to unattended ticking kiosks.
Long lived assets are in North America, South America and Africa. Most assets are intangible assets recorded from the acquisition of MultiPay (South America) in 2015 and FIN Holdings (North America and Africa) in 2016 as well as the investment the Company has made in Acquired and Developed Software. Assets for North America, South America and Africa amounted to approximately $7.4 million (goodwill $4.2 million), $0.1 million and $0.2 million, respectively. North America is the only geographic region with a goodwill balance).
Analysis of revenue by segment and geographic region and reconciliation to consolidated revenue, gross profit, and net loss are provided below. The Company has included in the schedule below an allocation of corporate overhead based on management’s estimate of resource requirements.
274-8700
false FY
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
2022-03-16
2021-06-30
2021-12-31
2020-12-31
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2019-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2019-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2019-12-31
us-gaap:AccumulatedOtherComprehensiveIncomeMember
2019-12-31
2019-12-31
us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:AccumulatedOtherComprehensiveIncomeMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:AccumulatedOtherComprehensiveIncomeMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:AccumulatedOtherComprehensiveIncomeMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:AccumulatedOtherComprehensiveIncomeMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:SubsequentEventMember
2022-03-01 2022-03-21
us-gaap:CommonStockMember us-gaap:SubsequentEventMember
2022-03-01 2022-03-21
2022-03-01 2022-03-21
us-gaap:SubsequentEventMember
2022-03-01 2022-03-31
us-gaap:SubsequentEventMember
2022-03-31
srt:NorthAmericaMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
srt:SouthAmericaMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
srt:AfricaMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
srt:NorthAmericaMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
srt:SouthAmericaMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
srt:AfricaMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
idty:PeruvianMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:CO
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:BritishBanksMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:US idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2021Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:CardsPlusAfricaMember idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2021Member idty:Customer1Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:CO idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2021Member idty:Customer2Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:CO idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2021Member idty:Customer3Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:CO idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2021Member idty:Customer1Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:CardsPlusAfricaMember idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2021Member us-gaap:AccountsReceivableMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:CO idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2021Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:USCustomerMember idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2021Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:US idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2020Member
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
idty:CardsPlusAfricaMember idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2020Member idty:Customer1Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:CO idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2020Member idty:Customer2Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:CO idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2020Member idty:Customer3Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:CardsPlusAfricaMember idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2020Member us-gaap:AccountsReceivableMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:US idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2020Member us-gaap:AccountsReceivableMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
country:CO idty:RevenuesAndAccountsReceivable2020Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:ConvertibleNotesPayableMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:ConvertibleNotesPayableMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:WarrantMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:WarrantMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:EmployeeStockOptionMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:EmployeeStockOptionMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:PropertyPlantAndEquipmentMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:PropertyPlantAndEquipmentMember
2020-12-31
idty:EquipmentUnderCapitalLeaseMember
2021-12-31
idty:EquipmentUnderCapitalLeaseMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CustomerRelationshipsMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:AcquiredAndDevelopedSoftwareMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:IntellectualPropertyMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:PatentsMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CustomerRelationshipsMember
2019-12-31
idty:AcquiredAndDevelopedSoftwareMember
2019-12-31
us-gaap:IntellectualPropertyMember
2019-12-31
us-gaap:PatentsMember
2019-12-31
us-gaap:CustomerRelationshipsMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
idty:AcquiredAndDevelopedSoftwareMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:IntellectualPropertyMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:PatentsMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CustomerRelationshipsMember
2020-12-31
idty:AcquiredAndDevelopedSoftwareMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:IntellectualPropertyMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:PatentsMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CustomerRelationshipsMember
2021-12-31
idty:AcquiredAndDevelopedSoftwareMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:IntellectualPropertyMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:PatentsMember
2021-12-31
idty:PaycheckProtectionProgramLoanMember
2020-05-31
idty:PaycheckProtectionProgramLoanMember
2021-01-31
us-gaap:VehiclesMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:VehiclesMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:VehiclesMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:VehiclesMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:InvestorMember
2019-12-13
2021-11-30
2020-02-01 2020-02-29
2020-02-01 2020-02-14
2020-02-14
idty:PhilipDBeckMember
2020-02-14
idty:TheodoreSternMember
2020-02-14
idty:HerbertSelzerMember
2020-02-14
idty:MrSelzerMember
2020-02-14
us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-08-01 2021-08-26
us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-08-26
idty:SternTrustMember idty:TheodoreSternMember
2021-12-31
idty:HerbertSelzerMember idty:TheodoreSternMember
2021-12-31
idty:HerbertSelzerMember idty:TheodoreSternMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:MrKumnickMember idty:MrBroennimanMember
2021-05-01 2021-05-31
idty:MrKumnickMember idty:MrBroennimanMember
2021-05-31
idty:MrKumnickMember
2021-11-10 2021-11-30
idty:MrBroennimanMember
2021-11-10 2021-11-30
idty:MrThimotMember
2021-06-14
idty:MrThimotMember
2021-06-01 2021-06-14
idty:MrSmithMember
2021-06-14
idty:MrSmithMember
2021-06-01 2021-06-14
idty:ExecutiveRetentionAgreementMember
2021-06-09
idty:MrSzokeMember
2021-06-01 2021-06-30
idty:MrSzokeMember
2021-06-30
srt:BoardOfDirectorsChairmanMember
2021-06-01 2021-06-30
srt:BoardOfDirectorsChairmanMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
2021-11-05 2021-11-30
idty:ProgressPartnersIncMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:MrKumnickMember
2021-10-25 2021-11-01
idty:MrBroennimanMember
2021-10-25 2021-11-01
idty:MrKumnickMember idty:MrBroennimanMember
2021-10-25 2021-11-01
idty:PhillipKumnickMember idty:PhilipBroennimanMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
2020-06-01 2020-06-30
2020-06-30
us-gaap:WarrantMember
2020-06-01 2020-06-30
idty:VaranaCapitalFocusedLPMember
2020-06-30
idty:VaranaCapitalFocusedLPMember
2020-06-01 2020-06-30
idty:TheodoreSternMember idty:PhilipBeckMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:HerbertSelzerMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:HerbertSelzerMember
2021-12-31
idty:TheodoreSternMember
2021-12-31
idty:TheodoreSternMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:Network1FinancialSecuritiesIncMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:LongBeachNewYorkMember idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:LongBeachNewYorkMember
2020-01-01 2020-01-02
idty:LongBeachNewYorkMember idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2020-10-01
idty:LongBeachNewYorkMember idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2021-12-31
idty:LongBeachNewYorkMember idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2020-12-31
idty:PhilipBeckMember
2020-05-05 2020-05-22
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-08-01 2021-08-26
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-08-26
idty:Warrant1Member
2020-06-01 2020-06-30
idty:Warrant2Member
2020-06-01 2020-06-30
idty:Warrant3Member
2020-06-01 2020-06-30
idty:SecuritiesPurchaseAgreementsMember
2020-10-30 2020-11-06
us-gaap:WarrantMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:MrThimotMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:MrSmithMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:MrKumnickMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:MrBroennimanMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:MrKumnickMember
2021-11-10 2021-11-30
idty:MrBroennimanMember
2021-11-10 2021-11-30
us-gaap:EmployeeStockOptionMember
2021-12-31
srt:MinimumMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
srt:MaximumMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
srt:MinimumMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
srt:MaximumMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:ExercisePrice03400Member
2021-12-31
idty:ExercisePrice03400Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:ExercisePrice401700Member
2021-12-31
idty:ExercisePrice401700Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:ExercisePrice7011000Member
2021-12-31
idty:ExercisePrice7011000Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:ExercisePrice10011350Member
2021-12-31
idty:ExercisePrice10011350Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:DomesticCountryMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:DomesticCountryMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:ForeignCountryMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:ForeignCountryMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
2020-09-01 2020-09-30
stpr:FL idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
stpr:GA idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
exch:XBOG idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember idty:MultiPaySASMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2021-04-01 2021-04-30
idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2021-10-01 2021-10-31
idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2020-04-01 2020-04-30
country:ZA idty:NewOfficeFacilitiesMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
srt:NorthAmericaMember
2021-12-31
srt:SouthAmericaMember
2021-12-31
srt:AfricaMember
2021-12-31
idty:IdentitySolutionsMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:IdentitySolutionsMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
idty:PaymentProcessingMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
idty:PaymentProcessingMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
xbrli:shares
iso4217:USD
iso4217:USD
xbrli:shares
xbrli:pure