ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes beginning on page in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual
results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Our Company
We were incorporated in Delaware under the Delaware General Corporation Law in March 2009 and are the successor to Apex Silver Mines Limited for purposes of reporting under the Exchange Act. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our principal source of revenue was from the sale of gold and silver from our Rodeo Property in Durango, Mexico. We incurred net operating losses for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020.
We remain focused on mining operations at the Rodeo Property as well as the completion of further studies of a restart plan for Velardeña including the use of bio-oxidation to improve the payable gold recovery. We also continue to evaluate and search for mining opportunities in North America (including Mexico) with near-term prospects of mining, and particularly for properties within reasonable haulage distances of our Velardeña Properties. We are also focused on advancing our El Quevar exploration property in Argentina through the Earn-In Agreement with Barrick and on advancing selected properties in our portfolio of exploration properties, located in Mexico, Nevada and Argentina. We are reviewing strategic opportunities, focusing primarily on development or operating properties in North America, including Mexico.
2021 Highlights
Rodeo Property
We began mining activities at the Rodeo Property, using a contract miner, in December 2020. We began hauling the mined material, also using a contractor, for processing at our Velardeña oxide plant beginning in January 2021. We provide the overall mine management and engineering, which includes in-pit technicians who determine whether material is suitable for process or placement on the waste dump. We also employ and supervise the workforce responsible for processing activities at our oxide plant. Our assay lab, located in Velardeña, Durango, Mexico is used for the project’s assaying requirements. We poured our first doré bar at the end of January 2021 and completed our first shipment of doré to a refinery located in the United States in March 2021.
We installed a new regrind mill circuit at the plant specifically designed to process the harder mined material coming from the Rodeo Property, which was completed in April at a total cost of approximately $1.2 million. The new circuit, which was fully operational at the end of April, allowed us to increase daily throughput of Rodeo material in the oxide plant to at least 500 tonnes per day. Mill throughput averaged 532 tonnes per day in third quarter 2021 and 468 tonnes per day in fourth quarter 2021. At approximately 500 tonnes per day, the current life of the Rodeo mine is estimated to run into the third quarter of 2023, based on our current estimate of remaining mineral resources.
Assays from processing at the oxide plant indicate the doré extracted to date are generally comprised of approximately 20 to 30 percent gold and 65 to 80 percent silver and are of a quality that is readily marketable and saleable to refineries located either in the U.S., Mexico or internationally, consistent with standard commercial terms. We entered into a refining agreement with a third party located in the U.S. in February 2021 and have completed 37 shipments of doré as of March 9, 2022.
The table below sets forth the key processing and sales statistics for the Rodeo operation for the year ended December 31, 2021. Payable gold and silver produced in doré include final settlement adjustments for all doré produced through December 31, 2021:
The following table highlights additional non-GAAP cost and revenue statistics related to the Rodeo operations:
Tonnes processed in the oxide plant for the full year 2021 were approximately 149,000, with grades for gold and silver averaging 4.2 and 12.1 grams per tonne, respectively, which is above the remaining life of mine average resource grades of approximately 2.9 and 11.7 grams per tonne for gold and silver, respectively, as depicted in the 2022 PEA. Payable extraction for the full year was approximately 14,400 ounces of gold and 59,900 ounces of silver, which exceeded initial guidance for the full year 2021 of 12,000 to 14,000 ounces of gold and 25,000 to 30,000 ounces of silver. Plant recovery for gold was approximately 74.9% for the full year 2021, as compared to projections based on 2022 PEA results of approximately 80%. Gold recoveries were lower than the PEA for the full year 2021 as we continued to balance the operating performance of the plant between higher throughput and recovery. We continue to optimize the mill circuit for increased recovery with a focus on a finer grind and additional aeration in the leach tank train.
Cash costs, net of silver by-product credits, were approximately $937 per payable gold ounce for the full year 2021. Our average realized prices for 2021 were $1,793 and $24.83 for gold and silver, respectively. Net operating margin for the full year 2021 from the Rodeo Property (defined as revenue from the sale of metals less the cost of metals sold) was approximately $12.3 million.
For the full year 2022, we are estimating that we will process 175,000 to 185,000 tonnes in the oxide plant, or approximately 500 tonnes per day, with payable extraction for 2022 of approximately 12,000 to 14,000 ounces of gold and 42,000 to 47,000 ounces of silver. Grades for 2022 are estimated to be approximately 2.9 grams per tonne for gold and 9.4 grams per tonne for silver, lower than grades achieved in 2021, but as anticipated in the PEA mine plan for 2022. Mill recoveries are expected to continue during 2022 near current rates of approximately 80 percent for both gold and silver. Higher expected total throughput in the oxide plant for the year 2022, as compared to 2021, will help offset the lower gold grades anticipated for 2022 resulting in similar payable gold extraction in 2022 as compared to 2021, but unit costs will be higher in 2022 as a result of higher plant throughput. Cash costs per payable gold ounce, net of silver by-product credits are expected to be approximately $1,100 to $1,200 for the full year 2022. Using an assumed gold price of $1,800/oz and
an assumed silver price of $25.00/oz, net operating margin for the full year 2022 from the Rodeo Property (defined as revenue from the sale of metals less the cost of metals sold) is estimated at approximately $7.0 million to $9.0 million.
The estimates detailed above for 2022 were derived using the actual results of operations achieved during 2021 and a projection of the mine plan, grades, plant throughput, and recoveries for 2022. Actual future results from mining at Rodeo may vary significantly based upon, among other things, unanticipated variations in grade, unexpected challenges associated with our proposed mining plan, volatility in commodity prices, variations in expected recoveries, increases in projected operating costs, working capital or capital costs or interruptions in mining. See “Risk Factors - Risk Factors related to our Mining and Processing Activities”.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Throughout this report, we have provided information prepared or calculated according to U.S. GAAP and have referenced some non-GAAP performance measures which we believe will assist with understanding the performance of our business. Non-GAAP financial measures are intended to provide additional information only and do not have any standard meaning prescribed by generally accepted accounting principles. These measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP measures are not necessarily indicative of operating profit or cash flow from operations as determined under GAAP.
“Total cash costs, net of by-product credits, per payable gold ounce,” includes all direct and indirect operating cash costs associated with the physical activities that would generate doré products for sale to customers, including mining to gain access to mineral resources, mining of mineral resources and waste, milling, third-party related treatment, refining and transportation costs, on-site administrative costs and royalties. Total cash costs do not include depreciation, depletion, amortization, exploration expenditures, reclamation and remediation costs, sustaining capital, financing costs, income taxes, or corporate general and administrative costs not directly or indirectly related to the Rodeo project. By-product credits include revenues from silver contained in the products sold to customers during the period. “Total cash costs, net of by-product credits”, are divided by the number of payable gold ounces produced by the plant for the period to arrive at “Total cash costs, net of by-product credits, per payable gold ounce.”
“Cost of metals sold”, reported as a separate line item in our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, is the most comparable financial measure, calculated in accordance with GAAP, to “Total cash costs, net of by-product credits”. “Cost of metals sold” includes adjustments for changes in inventory and excludes third-party related treatment and refining costs, which are reported as part of revenue in accordance with GAAP. The following table presents a reconciliation for the year ended December 31, 2021 between the non-GAAP measure of “Total cash cost, net of by-product credits” to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, “Cost of metals sold”.
Rodeo Exploration
In October 2021, we completed an exploration drilling program at Rodeo aimed at expanding the resource. The program included about 5,648 meters in 82 shallow holes at selected near-surface targets located immediately adjacent to the current pit. In November 2021, we announced the final assay results from the drilling program, which included potentially resource-grade intercepts on the north, south and west sides of the currently planned open pit. The drill program included 47 reverse circulation (RC) holes totaling 3,187 meters and 35 core holes totaling 2,461 meters. The drill program has modestly extended the life of mine plan for Rodeo through the third quarter of 2023 based on processing material at a cut-off grade of 1.6 g/t Au. In January 2022 we began a small additional RC drill program (approximately 2,500 m) to finish delineating the mineralized area on the south side of the current pit.
Velardeña
The Velardeña Properties contain two underground mines that were last operated in late 2015, at which point mining activities were suspended when a combination of low metals prices, mining dilution and metallurgical challenges rendered operations unprofitable. We elected to preserve the asset for future use, and since that time we have evaluated and tested various mining methods and processing alternatives that could enable sustainable profitable operations.
The recent rise in precious metals prices, the advancement of alternative processing technologies in the industry, and the results of our testing activities prompted us to pursue the preparation of an updated NI 43-101 preliminary economic assessment (PEA) based partly on projected increased gold recoveries from a proposed bio-oxidation circuit to treat gold-bearing pyrite concentrates. In April 2020, we announced positive results from the updated PEA.
In June 2021 we began limited scale mining activities at our Velardeña underground mine to obtain further bulk samples for use in final optimization of the bio-oxidation plant design and for use in additional flotation separation studies that will indicate how we can best separate the gold-bearing minerals into the pyrite-arsenopyrite concentrate that is proposed for processing in the bio-oxidation circuit. We are also testing mining methods to ensure that we can effectively control mining dilution to obtain the head grades that we expect based on our PEA study. We expect to have the results of these studies in early 2022.
Yoquivo
In September 2020, we began a 3,400-meter, 15-hole drill program to test the most promising portions of certain veins in the Yoquivo property in Chihuahua, Mexico. We completed the drill program in December 2020 and identified
four separate vein systems in which surface sampling has returned grades up to 4,050 g/t silver and 27.7 g/t gold from surface. Of substantial interest was the discovery of a new vein parallel to and east of the Pertenencia vein. While the other principal veins have been partially mined from surface to the water table (up to 130 meters) in the case of San Francisco and Pertenencia, and over a much less extensive vertical interval in the case of El Dolar and Esperanza, the new vein is unmined from surface. We began a second phase drill program in October 2021. The drill program included 3,949 meters comprised of 21 holes exploring the Pertenencia, Esperanza and Dolar vein systems. In January 2022 we announced assay results from the first five holes of the 21-hole, second phase drill program. The drill program demonstrated the potential for the Pertenencia vein to host significant high-grade mineralization and hit multiple high-grade veins, suggesting there may be additional blind veins to be found on the property. We recently submitted an application with SEMARNAT for a 50-hole, 10,000 meter drill program, which we plan to commence in 2022 upon receipt of necessary permits.
.
El Quevar
In April 2020, we entered into the Earn-in Agreement with Barrick, pursuant to which Barrick has acquired an option to earn a 70% interest in the Company’s El Quevar project located in the Salta Province of Argentina (the “Option”). For a description of the Earn-In Agreement, see “Our Material Mining Properties - El Quevar” in our Annual Report Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. During the earn-in period, in addition to the exploration spending, Barrick will fund the holding costs of the property, which will qualify as work expenditures. Barrick will reimburse us for expenses related to maintaining the exploration camp, which will initially be run by us under a service agreement, and which will also qualify as work expenditures. Through December 31, 2021, approximately $0.9 million of expenses incurred by us have been or are expected to be reimbursable under the Earn-in Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, Barrick had met the minimum $1 million in work expenditures required by the Earn-in Agreement.
Sarita Este / Desierto
In December 2019 we paid $150,000 to enter into an option agreement with Cascadero Minerals Corporation (“Cascadero”) to acquire a 51% interest in the gold/copper Sarita Este concession, located in the northwest portion of the Province of Salta, Argentina, located near the Taca Taca project owned by First Quantum Minerals. The option agreement called for us to spend at least $0.3 million in exploration expenditures and complete a 2,000-meter drill program by the end of 2021, another $0.5 million by the end of 2022, and another approximately $1.6 million by 2023 for a total $2.5 million. We have spent approximately $1.4 million since entering into the agreement in December 2019.
In the fourth quarter of 2021 we completed the first drill program ever conducted at Sarita Este, which involved drilling 10 diamond drill holes totaling 2,518 meters to explore untested epithermal gold-silver and copper porphyry targets. In January 2022 we announced assay results from the drill program, including the potential of an oxidized gold system and a copper porphyry system. We have submitted new permits for trenching and additional drilling that we plan to complete during a 2022 field campaign.
Results of Operations
For the results of operations discussed below, we compare the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, to the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue from the sale of metals. We recorded $25.6 million in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, all from the sale of gold and silver bearing doré from the Rodeo Operation in Mexico. We did not record any revenue from doré sales for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Costs of metals sold. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $13.2 million of costs of metals sold. Because we did not record any revenue from doré sales during the year, we did not record any cost of metals sold during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue from oxide plant lease. We recorded revenue of $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from the lease of our Velardeña oxide plant to Hecla in the accompanying financial statements. Hecla terminated the Lease Agreement in accordance with the terms of the Third Amendment one month early, effective November 30, 2020. We did not record any plant lease related income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Oxide plant lease costs. During the years ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $2.0 million of costs related to the oxide plant lease consisting primarily of reimbursable labor and utility costs which for accounting purposes were also included in revenue from the oxide plant lease. Hecla terminated the Lease Agreement in accordance with the terms of the Third Amendment one month early, effective November 30, 2020.
Exploration Expense. Our exploration expense, including work at Rodeo, Velardeña and other properties, totaled $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our exploration expense, including work at the Rodeo, Sand Canyon, Yoquivo and other properties, totaled $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Exploration expense for both years was incurred primarily in Mexico and includes property holding costs, costs incurred by our local exploration offices, and allocated corporate administrative expenses. The higher exploration expense for 2021 is primarily related to increased exploration at our Velardeña Properties and Rodeo operation in Mexico and Sarita Este property in Argentina during the period.
Velardeña shutdown and care and maintenance costs. We recorded $1.4 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, for expenses related to care and maintenance at our Velardeña Properties as the result of the suspension of mining and processing activities in November 2015. The increased costs for 2021 are primarily related to certain increases in employee related benefits.
El Quevar Project Expense. As discussed above, during April 2020, we entered into the Earn-In Agreement with Barrick, pursuant to which Barrick has acquired an option to earn a 70% interest in the El Quevar project. During the earn in period Barrick has and will continue to reimburse us for certain holding and maintenance costs related to the project. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an expense of approximately $0.3 million primarily related to holding and evaluation costs for the Yaxtché deposit at the El Quevar project, net of costs reimbursed. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an expense of approximately $0.6 million primarily related to exploration, holding and evaluation costs for the Yaxtché deposit at the El Quevar project, net of costs reimbursed. For both years, additional nominal costs incurred in Argentina and not related to the El Quevar project are included in “Exploration Expense”, discussed above.
Administrative Expense. Administrative expenses totaled $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Administrative expenses, including costs associated with being a public company, are incurred primarily by our corporate activities in support of the Rodeo project, Velardeña Properties, El Quevar project and our exploration portfolio. The $4.8 million of administrative expenses we incurred during 2021 is comprised of $2.5 million of employee compensation and directors’ fees, $1.2 million of professional fees, and $1.1 million of insurance, rents, travel expenses, utilities and other office costs. The $3.7 million of administrative expenses we incurred during 2020 is comprised of $1.4 million of employee compensation and directors’ fees, $1.3 million of professional fees, and $1.0 million of insurance, rents, travel expenses, utilities and other office costs.
Stock based compensation. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred expense related to stock-based compensation in the amount of $1.6 million compared to $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Stock based compensation varies from period to period depending on the number and timing of shares granted, the type of grant, the market value of the shares on the date of grant and other variables.
Reclamation and accretion expense. During each of the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, we incurred $0.3 million and $0.2 million of reclamation expense, respectively, related to the accretion of an asset retirement obligation at the Velardeña Properties.
Other Operating Income, Net. We recorded $0.5 million of other operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to the amortization of deferred income related to the option agreement for the sale of the Santa Maria property, as discussed above. We recorded only a nominal amount of other operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting primarily of the sale of surplus equipment.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred depreciation, depletion and amortization expense of $0.6 million compared to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The lower depreciation recorded during 2021 was the result of various assets becoming fully depreciated during 2021.
Interest and Other expense, net. We recorded approximately $0.4 million of interest and other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to write-off of deferred costs related to the Lincoln Park Capital program. We recorded $0.1 million of interest and other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to interest incurred on the repayment of the Autlán advanced payment and the financing of certain insurance premiums.
Gain (Loss) on Foreign Currency. We recorded a $0.2 million foreign currency gain and a $0.1 million foreign currency loss for the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. Foreign currency gains and losses are primarily related to the effect of currency fluctuations on monetary assets net of liabilities held by our foreign subsidiaries that are denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars.
Income Taxes. We recorded a $462,000 income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $48,000 income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income taxes in 2021 is related to the start up of profitable operations at the Rodeo Property during 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, our aggregate cash and cash equivalents totaled $12.2 million, compared to the $9.7 million in similar assets held at December 31, 2020. The December 31, 2021 balance is due in part from the following expenditures and cash inflows for the year ended December 31, 2021. Expenditures totaled $14.1 million from the following:
● $5.3 million in exploration expenditures, including $1.4 million of exploration and mining activities at our Rodeo project along with other work at the Yoquivo, Sarita Este and other properties;
● $1.6 million in capital expenditures, including $1.4 million related to construction of the new regrind mill circuit and other projects related to the Rodeo project;
● $1.4 million in care and maintenance costs at the Velardeña Properties;
● $0.3 million in exploration and evaluation activities, care and maintenance and property holding costs at the El Quevar project, net of reimbursements from Barrick;
● $4.8 million in general and administrative expenses; and
● $0.7 million related to a net working capital increase due primarily to an increase in inventories and value added tax receivables associated with the Rodeo operation, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities, also related to the Rodeo operation.
The foregoing expenditures were offset by cash inflows of $16.6 million from the following:
● $12.3 million of net operating margin from the Rodeo operation (defined as revenue from the sale of metals less the cost of metals sold);
● $1.8 million, net of fees from the ATM Program (as further described in Note 15);
● $1.5 million from the second installment related to the sale of the Santa Maria property to Fabled (as further described in Note 8); and
● $1.0 million from the exercise of warrants issued in prior offerings (as further described in Note 15).
In addition to the $12.2 million cash balance at December 31, 2021, we expect to receive approximately $7.0 million to $9.0 million in net operating margin from the Rodeo Property (defined as revenue from the sale of metals less the cost of metals sold) during the twelve months ending December 31, 2022, assuming an average gold and silver price during that period of $1,800 and $25.00 oz respectively (our realized prices for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as shown above, were $1,793 and $24.83 for gold and silver, respectively). Our forecasted cash inflows during the twelve months ending December 31, 2022 also include the anticipated third and final installment of $2.0 million from the sale of the Santa Maria property to Fabled, scheduled to be paid in December 2022, as discussed above, as we believe it is probable this installment will be received based on Fable’s performance to date.
Our forecasted expenditures during the twelve months ending December 31, 2022, apart from Rodeo cost of metals sold, which is already included in our forecast of net operating margin, and also apart from a positive decision to move forward with the start-up of the Velardeña operation, as discussed above, total approximately $10.2 million as follows:
● Approximately $4.1 million on exploration activities and property holding costs related to our portfolio of exploration properties located in Mexico, Argentina and Nevada, including project assessment and evaluation costs relating to additional exploration at Rodeo, Yoquivo, and other properties;
● Approximately $1.2 million at the Velardeña Properties for care and maintenance;
● Approximately $0.4 million at the El Quevar project to fund care and maintenance and property holding costs, net of reimbursement from Barrick; and
● Approximately $3.7 million on general and administrative costs; and
● Approximately $0.8 million of working capital related primarily to a reduction of accounts payable and other accrued liabilities related to bonuses and other expense items accrued at December 31, 2021.
Our forecasted cash resources of approximately $21.2 to $23.2 million, which include cash on hand at December 31, 2021, the forecasted net operating margin from the Rodeo Property, and the anticipated third installment of $2.0 million from the sale of the Santa Maria property to Fabled, are greater than our forecasted expenditures of approximately $10.2 million. The actual amount of cash receipts that we receive during the period from the Rodeo operation may vary significantly from the amounts specified above due to, among other things: (i) unanticipated variations in grade, (ii) unexpected challenges associated with our proposed mining plan, (iii) decreases in commodity prices below those used in calculating the estimates shown above, (iv) variations in expected recoveries, (v) increases in operating costs above those used in calculating the estimates shown above, or (vi) interruptions in mining at Rodeo. In addition, the actual amount of cash that we receive from the anticipated third installment of $2.0 million from the sale of the Santa Maria property to Fabled is dependent on Fabled’s decision to pay the amount that is due to us under the terms of the Fabled Option Agreement on a timely basis. The actual amount of cash expenditures that we incur during the twelve-month period ending
December 31, 2022 may vary significantly from the amounts specified above and will depend on a number of factors, including variations in the anticipated care and maintenance costs at the Velardeña Properties or at El Quevar, and costs for continued exploration, project assessment, and advancement of our other exploration properties. Likewise, if cash expenditures are greater than anticipated or if cash receipts are less than anticipated, we may need to take certain actions to maintain sufficient cash balances over the next twelve months, including additional asset dispositions or raising additional equity capital through sales under the ATM Program or otherwise.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis under which an entity is considered to be able to realize its assets and satisfy its liabilities in the normal course of business. However, our continuing long-term operations may be dependent upon our ability to continue currently profitable operations and to secure sufficient funding, if needed, to generate future profitable operations. The underlying value and recoverability of the amounts shown as property, plant and equipment in our condensed consolidated financial statements are dependent on our ability to continue to generate positive cash flows from operations and to continue to fund exploration activities that would lead to additional profitable mining and processing activities or to generate proceeds from the disposition of property, plant and equipment. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in continuing to generate profitable mining and processing activities or to securing additional funding, if needed, to generate future profitable operations on terms acceptable to us or at all. We believe the cash on hand, anticipated positive net operating margins from the Rodeo operation, the potential use of the ATM Program, and the potential for additional asset dispositions make it probable that we will have sufficient cash to meet our financial obligations and continue our business strategy beyond one year from the filing of our consolidated financial statements for the period ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The selection and application of accounting policies is an important process that has developed as our business activities have evolved and as the accounting rules have changed. Accounting rules generally do not involve a selection among alternatives, but involve an implementation and interpretation of existing rules, and the use of judgment, to the specific set of circumstances existing in our business. Discussed below are the accounting policies that we believe are critical to our financial statements due to the degree of uncertainty regarding the estimates or assumptions involved and the magnitude of the asset, liability, revenue or expense being reported.
Income Recognition
We record income from farm-out agreements with third parties in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 610 and ASC 606, which generally provides that income be recognized as the Company performs its obligations according to the contract. In most instances, this will result in income being recognized ratably over a period of time relating to the receipt of periodic payments as the Company satisfies its performance obligation.
Mineral Reserves
We do not have defined mineral reserves pursuant to Regulation SK subpart 1300 (“S-K 1300”) and all of our mining properties are in the exploration stage. When and if we determine that a mining property has mineral reserves, subsequent development costs will be capitalized to those properties. When we commence extraction at our mining properties, capitalized costs are charged to operations using the units-of-production method. We cannot be certain that any part of the deposits at our properties will ever be confirmed or converted into S-K 1300 compliant reserves.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We record asset retirement obligations in accordance with ASC 410, “Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations” (“ASC 410”), which establishes a uniform methodology for accounting for estimated reclamation and abandonment costs. According to ASC 410, the fair value of a liability for an asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) is recognized in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. To the extent that the
ARO is related to fixed plant and equipment, an offsetting asset retirement cost is capitalized as part of the carrying value of the assets with which it is associated and depreciated over the useful life of the asset.
Long Lived Assets
Long lived assets are recorded at cost and per the guidance of ASC 360 we assess the recoverability of our long lived assets, including goodwill, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. If the sum of estimated future net cash flows on an undiscounted basis is less than the carrying amount of the related asset, impairment is considered to exist. The related impairment loss is measured by comparing estimated future net cash flows on a discounted basis or by comparing other market indicators to the carrying amount of the asset.
Functional Currency
Our revenue and external funding are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. Additionally, substantially all of our significant expenditures are made with reference to U.S. dollars. Accordingly, the Company and its subsidiaries use the U.S. dollar as their functional and reporting currency.