Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on October 12, 2020, as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from October 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, our IPO, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of income from the proceeds derived from the IPO. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
Our sponsor is Avalon Acquisition Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on October 5, 2021. On October 8, 2021, we closed the IPO and issued 20,700,000 units, which included full exercise by the underwriter of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 2,700,000, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $207,000,000, and incurring offering costs of $10,953,007, inclusive of $7,245,000 in deferred underwriting commissions and net of reimbursement from underwriter of $399,202.
On October 8, 2021, simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, we sold 8,100,000 warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant to our sponsor, generating proceeds of $8,100,000.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the private placement, $210,105,000 ($10.15 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, which was invested in a money market fund meeting the conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act of 1940, which invests only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of (i) the completion of a business combination or (ii) the distribution of the funds in the Trust Account as described below.
We will have until January 8, 2023 to consummate a business combination or until July 8, 2023 if the we extend the period of time to consummate an initial business combination by the full amount of time (the “Combination Period”). If the we are unable to complete a business combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay taxes (less up to $100,000 to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete a business combination within the Combination Period.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,036,693 outside of the trust account and $1,423,065 of working capital, excluding the amount of franchise tax payable.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover certain on our IPO in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and loan proceeds from the sponsor of $197,000 under a promissory note. We repaid the promissory note in full on October 15, 2021. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the net proceeds from the IPO and the private placement that are held outside of the trust account.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of our initial business combination or one year from the date of this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the liquidation, mandatory liquidation, and subsequent dissolution raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after the completion window. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 coronavirus has resulted in a widespread health crisis that has adversely affected the economies and financial markets worldwide, and potential target companies may defer or end discussions for a potential business combination with us whether or not COVID-19 affects their business operations. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our search for a business combination will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. We may be unable to complete a business combination if continued concerns relating to COVID-19 restrict travel, limiting our ability to conduct meetings to negotiate and consummate transactions in a timely manner with potential investors, target company’s personnel, or vendors and services providers.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to October 8, 2021 was related to our formation and IPO. Since the IPO, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination target. We will not generate any operating revenues until the consummation of our initial business combination. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $3,813,684, which consisted of $311,329 in general and administrative expenses, $124,138 in franchise tax expense, and $479,936 of financing costs - derivative warrant liabilities, offset by $4,725,000 gain from changes in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and $4,087 in investment income in the Trust Account.
For the period October 12, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss $1,497, which consisted solely of formation costs.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were paid an underwriting discount of $0.125 per unit, or $2,587,500 in the aggregate, upon the closing of our Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or $7,245,000 in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of our Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 2,700,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full on October 8, 2021, generating gross proceeds of $27 million.
Administrative Support Agreement
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on October 8, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in trust is comprised solely of a money market fund that invests in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, with a maturity of 185 days or less. Our investments held in the trust account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these investments are included in net gain from investments held in trust account in the accompanying statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the trust account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity.
Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of the Initial Public Offering, 20,700,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which, resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We issued 15,525,000 warrants to purchase common stock to investors in our IPO and issued 8,100,000 private placement warrants to our sponsor. All of our outstanding warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of warrants issued in connection with the IPO and the private placement warrants was initially measured at fair value by an independent valuation consultant using a market-based approach of comparable blank check company warrant pricing. At December 31, 2021, the fair value of the public warrants was based on observable closing market price for such warrants, and value of the private warrants was fair valued based on the pricing of the public warrants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.