ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled "Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements," the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and the risks discussed below and in our other SEC filings. The accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations gives effect to the four-for-one stock split effected on September 30, 2021.
Overview
We are a leading provider of AP automation software and payment solutions for middle market businesses and their suppliers. Our SaaS-based, end-to-end software and payment platform digitizes and automates the AP workflows for more than 8,000 businesses (our buyers) and we have made payments to more than 825,000 supplier customers of our buyers (suppliers) over the past five years. While acquiring new and retaining existing relationships with buyers and suppliers are important to our business, the growth of our business is ultimately dependent upon the number of transactions we process, as well as our total payment volume. We developed our technology platform through years of working to solve our buyers’ unique middle market workflow challenges. Leveraging our deep domain expertise, we purpose-built a powerful two-sided network that connects buyers and suppliers, drives digital transformation, increases efficiency and accuracy in AP workflows, accelerates payments, enables insight into critical analytics, and lowers operating costs for our buyers.
We transform the way AP works for the middle market. Our platform was purpose-built for the middle market since we wrote our first line of code, based on our desire to deal with the business process complexities of our initial customers. Our intuitive user interfaces are an entry point to a broader user experience emphasizing visibility and control. The SaaS-based technical underlayer drives digital transformation and provides the scalability to grow with our buyers. We built our business to solve this gap for the middle market and believe we have become a uniquely strategic platform for our customers’ CFOs, treasurers and finance teams by digitally transforming how they receive, manage and pay their bills. Supported by deep integrations to our customers’ middle market oriented accounting and information systems, our platform automates the end-to-end AP workflows for our buyers and enhances the payment experience for our suppliers. We provide a SaaS-based solution automating and digitizing the capture, review, approval and payment of invoices for our buyers. Our two-sided payments network then connects our buyers with their suppliers, enabling invoice payments on behalf of a buyer and according to the supplier’s business rules, payment preferences and remittance data. We support a variety of payment methods depending on the supplier’s preference, including VCC, enhanced ACH (our AvidPay Direct) and physical check, while delivering rich remittance data to streamline the reconciliation process. Finally, we provide cash management solutions to our supplier network that include tools that provide a comprehensive view of invoices and an accelerator feature (our Invoice Accelerator). These additional features, and others in our product pipeline, allow us to both monetize and increase engagement on our two-sided payments network.
Our customers operate across a variety of verticals in which we have deep domain expertise, including real estate, HOAs, construction, financial services (including banks and credit unions), healthcare facilities, social services, education, and media. Certain segments of our customers, particularly the customers we acquired through the FastPay acquisition that focus on political advertising within our media vertical, are subject to seasonal and cyclical trends. In 2021, we processed approximately 62 million transactions representing over $180 billion in spend under management across our platform and, of that, moved $52 billion in total payment volume from our buyers to their suppliers. Spend under management represents the sum of (i) the aggregate dollar amount of payments processed by us, plus (ii) the aggregate dollar amount represented by the total number of invoices processed by us, in each case, during the specified period. As described in more detail below, we generate revenue from each transaction processed on a per transaction basis and earn interchange revenue from a portion of the total payment volume.
AvidXchange was founded in 2000 to serve the AP automation needs of the middle market. In 2012, in response to customer demand for more efficient payment methods, we launched the AvidPay Network. Since 2012, we have had substantial growth, both organic and through a series of strategic acquisitions allowing us to expand the vertical markets that we serve.
Our Business and Revenue Model
We sell our solutions through a hybrid go-to-market strategy that includes direct and indirect channels. Our direct sales force leverages their deep domain expertise in select verticals and over 120 referral relationships with integrated software providers, financial institutions and other partners to identify and attract buyers that would benefit from our AP software solutions and the AvidPay Network. Our indirect channel includes reseller partners and other strategic partnerships such as Mastercard, through MasterCard’s B2B Hub, which includes Fifth Third Bank and Bank of America, and other financial institutions, such as KeyBank, and third-party software providers such as MRI Software, RealPage and SAP Concur. Our referral and indirect channel partnerships provide us greater reach across the market to access a variety of buyers.
One of the ways that we evaluate our revenue model is by looking at our net transactions processed retention rate. We calculate the net transactions processed retention rate for a current period by dividing the (i) number of total transactions processed for customers in the comparable prior period by (ii) the number of total transactions processed for the same customers in the current period. Accordingly, the net transactions processed retention rate is calculated solely based on transactions of prior period customers in the current period, regardless of whether or not the prior period customer remains a customer in the current period. Correspondingly, customers in the current period that were not customers in the prior period are excluded from the current period calculation of the net transactions processed retention rate. Net transactions processed retention rate, together with our key metric Transactions Processed (as described below in the section titled “Key Financial and Business Metrics”), enables us to both assess transaction volume attributable to retained customers in a period as well as determine transaction volume attributable to new customers during the same period. This annual metric allows us to quantify the activity of retained customers over time and illustrates both retention and expansion of the volume of total transactions processed for such customers. Our net transactions processed retention rate from 2018 to 2019 was 105%, from 2019 to 2020 it was 102%, and from 2020 to 2021 it was 107%.
We have a highly visible revenue model based on the durability of our buyer relationships and the recurring nature of the revenues we earn. Our revenues are derived from multiple sources, predominantly through software revenue from our buyers and revenue from payments made to their suppliers. The table below represents our revenues disaggregated by type of service performed (in thousands):
Software revenue, payment revenue and services revenue are described below in the section titled "Components of Results of Operations."
Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic
Notwithstanding current vaccinations and the gradual re-opening of the U.S. economy, the global COVID-19 pandemic, including the emergence of recently discovered variants that are thought to be more contagious (such as the increasingly widespread “Delta" and "Omicron" variants), continues to adversely affect commercial activity and has contributed to significant volatility in the financial markets, which may continue.
Our revenue was adversely affected in 2020 by COVID-19 due to a reduction in spending and closures or slowdowns of certain of our buyer’s businesses and other mandated restrictions on travel, social and business gatherings, schools, and the workplace. The impact was higher in certain industry verticals or segments such as HOAs and commercial real estate, with certain buyers tightly managing spend and hesitating to start new implementation projects. On the other hand, the pandemic also had the short-term impact of driving increased interest and, for certain buyers, accelerated purchasing decisions for our products and services, as buyers shifted to remote work arrangements.
In 2021, we have continued to see the impact of COVID-19 on our business and on our buyers and suppliers. We believe that, as a result of the uncertainty created by the pandemic, many buyers have been and may continue to be in the near term reluctant to invest in the purchase and implementation of our products and services, which has had a negative impact on new sales and has led to longer sales cycles. These trends have made it, and if they continue will make it, more difficult for us to acquire new buyers and have led to greater uncertainty around closing new sales opportunities, adversely impacting our future revenue.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Acquiring new buyers and suppliers
To sustain our growth, we need to continue to sell our AP software and payment solutions to new buyers. New buyers add software revenue and those that use our payment solutions will allow us to continue adding new suppliers to our network, increasing payment volume across our platform and providing us with the opportunity to generate additional revenue from the payments our buyers make to their suppliers. Our financial performance will depend in large part on the overall demand for our platform particularly from middle market buyers and their suppliers.
Expanding our relationships with existing buyers and suppliers
The growth of our software revenue is dependent upon the number of invoice and payment transactions processed across our platform. The number of transactions that our buyers submit through our platform is often based on their experience implementing and using our products and services, realized or perceived value, and confidence in the accuracy and timeliness of our services. Although we often include minimum transaction commitments in our buyer agreements, our growth is dependent on our buyers using our platform to process their invoice and payment transactions and otherwise serve their AP needs.
Payment revenue is a significant component of our overall revenue and is dependent upon the payment spend volume submitted by our buyers and processed through our AvidPay Network. Payment revenue is also dependent upon the continued acceptance by suppliers in our network of electronic payment types that result in interchange revenue. Our growth will depend on our continued ability to deliver electronic payments to existing suppliers in a manner that is consistent with their internal business rules, payment preferences, and perceived value.
We also experience growth from buyers when we cross sell existing products and services or introduce new products and services.
Investing in sales and marketing
We intend to increase our sales and marketing spend to drive awareness and generate demand to acquire new buyers and to grow our supplier network. We also intend to invest in new relationships with accounting software providers and other strategic partners. Our investments in supporting these relationships have been significant and will continue, and we expect such investments to include education and training initiatives such as webinars, industry trade show presentations, and developing sell-sheet case studies. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase as we continue to grow.
Growing our network
We will continue to add buyers and suppliers to our proprietary AvidPay Network and to invest in features and functionality to drive value across our network. We expect to add payment methods to our platform over time.
Investing in our platform and products
We are making significant investments in our technology to maintain and enhance our position as a leading provider of AP automation software and payment solutions for middle market businesses and their suppliers. To drive adoption and increase penetration within our base, we have and will continue to introduce new products and features. We believe that investment in research and development contributes to our long-term growth but may also negatively impact our short-term profitability. We will continue to leverage emerging technologies and invest in the development of more features that meet and anticipate the needs of both buyers and suppliers. As a result, we expect our expenses related to research and development to increase as we continue to grow. These efforts will require us to invest significant financial and other resources.
Pursue strategic mergers and acquisitions
We will continue to supplement our organic growth by pursuing strategic mergers and acquisitions to expand into new verticals and horizontal capabilities, capture unmonetized or under-monetized spend, and enhance and expand products and capabilities.
For example in July 2021, we acquired all of the equity interests of FastPay, a leading provider of payments automation solutions for the media industry. This acquisition expands our portfolio of automated payments technologies and services to middle market companies across the media landscape in the United States.
Key Financial and Business Metrics
We regularly review several financial and business metrics to measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, prepare financial projections, and make strategic decisions. We believe that these key business metrics provide meaningful supplemental information for management and investors in assessing our historical and future operating performance. The calculation of the key metrics and other measures discussed below may differ from other similarly-titled metrics used by other companies, securities analysts or investors.
Transactions processed
We believe that transactions processed is an important measure of our business because it is a key indicator of the use by both buyers and suppliers of our solutions and our ability to generate revenue, since a majority of our revenue is generated based on transactions processed. We define transactions processed as the number of invoice transactions and payment transactions, such as invoices, purchase orders, checks, ACH payments and VCCs, processed through our platform during a particular period.
Transaction yield
We believe that transaction yield is an important measure of the value of solutions to buyers and suppliers as we scale. We define transaction yield as the total revenue during a particular period divided by the total transactions processed during such period.
Total payment volume
We believe total payment volume is an important measure of our AvidPay Network business as it quantifies the demand for our payment services. We define total payment volume as the dollar sum of buyers’ AP payments paid to their suppliers through the AvidPay Network during a particular period.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA, is a non-GAAP key measure used by our management and board of directors to evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans and make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating adjusted EBITDA facilitates operating performance comparability across reporting periods by removing the effect of non-cash expenses and certain variable charges. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
We define adjusted EBITDA as our net loss before depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, amortization of software development costs, amortization of acquired intangible assets, impairment and write-off of intangible assets, interest income and expense, income tax expense, stock-based compensation expense, transaction and acquisition-related costs, change in fair value of derivative instrument, charitable contributions of common stock, and non-recurring items not indicative of ongoing operations for our business. Other companies may define adjusted EBITDA differently.
In the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2021, we revised our definition of adjusted EBITDA to also exclude effects of charitable contributions of common stock. This revision to the definition had no impact on our reported adjusted EBITDA for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2021.
We believe it is useful to exclude non-cash charges, impairment and write-off of intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, change in fair value of derivative instrument, and charitable contribution of stock from our adjusted EBITDA because the amount of such expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations. We believe it is useful to exclude transaction and acquisition-related costs and non-recurring items not indicative of ongoing operations for our business as these items are not components of our core business operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021, non-recurring items was primarily comprised of an approximately $50 million non-cash charge for an amended financing advisory engagement letter and transaction and acquisition-related costs included approximately $15.7 million of IPO-related costs.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as a financial measure, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditures;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect stock-based compensation and related taxes. Stock-based compensation has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest income (expense), net; or changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital;
•adjusted EBITDA excludes non-recurring items not indicative of ongoing operations for our business; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, adjusted EBITDA should be considered alongside other financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net loss and our other GAAP results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated:
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from the following sources: (i) software, (ii) payments, and (iii) services.
Software Revenue
We generate software revenue from our buyers primarily through (i) fees calculated based on the number of invoices and payment transactions processed and (ii) recurring maintenance and SaaS fees. Software revenue is typically billed to and paid by our buyers on a monthly basis. Our software offerings, many of which are built for specific verticals, address the needs of buyers and together they comprise our suite of predominately cloud-based solutions designed to manage invoices and automate the AP function. We generally sign multi-year contracts with buyers and revenue is recognized over the term of the contract. We also receive initial upfront implementation fees and software maintenance fee revenue for ongoing support, which are recognized ratably over the term of the applicable support period.
Payment Revenue
We generate revenue from the payments our buyers make to their suppliers through (i) offering electronic payment solutions to suppliers, (ii) fees charged to suppliers from our invoice factoring product, and (iii) interest on funds held for buyers pending disbursement.
Our electronic payment solutions currently include VCC and an enhanced ACH payment product, or AvidPay Direct, which eliminate paper checks and increase the speed to payment for the supplier. AvidPay Direct also provides suppliers with enhanced remittance data allowing the supplier to reconcile the payment and the underlying invoice. VCC revenues result from interchange fees applied to the spend processed and are recorded net of fees and incentives. AvidPay Direct revenue is based on a per transaction fee that we charge to suppliers that generally includes a cap and is based on the spend per payment and is recorded net of incentives.
Our invoice factoring product, Invoice Accelerator, provides certain suppliers with the opportunity to better manage cash flows and receive payments even faster by allowing suppliers to receive advance payment on qualifying invoices. Revenues are generated on a per transaction basis for each payment that is advanced. We currently fund the purchase of invoices from our balance sheet.
Interest income represents interest received from buyer deposits held during the payment clearing process. We receive interest on funds held through our contractual relationship with our buyers.
Services Revenue
Services revenue includes fees charged to process buyer change in service requests.
We expect our total revenue to increase year over year due to an increase in the number of buyers and transactions processed, and that payment revenue will comprise a greater proportion of total revenue as the volume of transactions on the AvidPay Network continues to increase.
Cost of Revenues and Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues includes personnel related costs, which include direct compensation, fringe benefits, short- and long-term incentive plans and stock-based compensation expense. Cost of revenues includes teams responsible for buyer and supplier onboarding and setup, invoice processing, payment operations, money movement execution, and customer service. Personnel
costs also include internal labor associated with the employees who monitor the performance and reliability of our buyer and supplier solutions and the underlying delivery infrastructure (i.e., application and data hosting administration, product support and escalations, payment monitoring and settlement functions).
Cost of revenues also includes external expenses that are directly attributed to the processing of invoice and payment transactions. These expenses include the cost of scanning and indexing invoices, printing checks, postage for mailing checks, expenses for processing payments (ACH, check, and wires), bank fees associated with buyer deposits held during the payment clearing process, and other transaction execution costs. Additionally, cost of revenues includes fees paid to third parties for the use of their technology, data hosting services, and customer relationship management tools in the delivery of our services or in supporting the delivery infrastructure and adjustments to the allowance for uncollectible advancements processed through Invoice Accelerator. Lastly, cost of revenues includes estimates for treasury losses that occur in treasury operations. Treasury losses include various unrecoverable internal payment processing errors that occur in the ordinary course of business, such as duplicate payments, overpayments, payments to the wrong party and reconciliation errors.
We have elected to exclude amortization expense of capitalized developed software and acquired technology, as well as allocations of fixed asset depreciation expense and facility expenses from cost of revenues.
We expect our cost of revenues as a percentage of revenue to decrease as we continue to realize operational efficiencies and shift more of our transactions to electronic payments.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing consists primarily of costs related to our direct sales force and partner channels that are incurred in the process of setting up go-to-market strategies, generating leads, building brand awareness and acquiring new buyers and suppliers, including efforts to convert suppliers from paper check payments to electronic forms of payments and efforts to enroll them into the Invoice Accelerator solution.
Personnel costs include salaries, wages, direct and amortized sales commissions, fringe benefits, short- and long-term incentive plans and stock-based compensation expense. Most of the commissions paid to the direct sales force are incremental based upon invoice and payment volume from the acquisition of a new buyer and are deferred and amortized ratably over an estimated benefit period of five years.
The partner ecosystem consists of reseller, referral and accounting system partners. Compensation paid to referral and accounting system partners in exchange for the referral and marketing efforts of the partner is classified as sales and marketing expense.
In addition, we focus on generating awareness of our platform and products through a variety of sponsorships, user conferences, trade shows, and integrated marketing campaigns. Costs associated with these efforts, including travel expenses, external consulting services, and various technology applications are included in sales and marketing as well.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars while remaining fairly consistent as a percentage of revenue as we continue to expand our market presence, grow our customer base, and continue to develop new offerings to sell to our buyers and suppliers. We are focused on the efficient deployment of marketing resources to drive our sales efforts and expect to continue to increase marketing over the coming periods.
Research and Development
Research and development efforts focus on the development of new products and business intelligence tools or enhancements to existing products and applications, as well as large scale infrastructure projects that improve the underlying architecture of our technology.
The main contributors of research and development costs are (i) personnel related expenses, including fringe benefits, short- and long-term incentive plans and stock-based compensation expense, and (ii) fees for outsourced professional services. We capitalize certain internal and external development costs that are attributable to new products or new functionality of existing products and amortize such costs to depreciation and amortization on a straight-line basis over an estimated useful life, which is generally three years.
We also incur research and development costs attributable to the use of software tools and technologies required to facilitate the research and development activities. Examples of such costs include fees paid to third parties to host lower technical environments and the associated virtual machine ware fees paid to support agile development efforts, and fees paid for software tools and licenses used in quality control testing and code deployment activities.
We expect our research and development expense to increase in absolute dollars, but to decrease as a percentage of revenue as we are able to efficiently deploy our development resources against a larger revenue base.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of our finance, human resources, legal and compliance, facilities, information technology, administration, and information security organizations. Significant cost contributors are (i) personnel expenses, including fringe benefits, short- and long-term incentive plans and stock-based compensation expense, and (ii) costs of software applications, including end user computing solutions, and various technology tools utilized by these organizations. Occupancy expenses, which include personnel, rent, maintenance and property tax costs are not allocated to other components of the statements of operations and remain in general and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses are reduced by incentives we have received from state and local government agencies as part of various local job development investment grants.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in both absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue over the next two years, as we continue to build out our infrastructure to support our operations as a public company, and to support a greater customer base. After approximately two years we expect these expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue as a large portion of this public company infrastructure investment is comprised of fixed costs.
Impairment and Write-Off of Intangible Assets
Impairment and write-off of intangible assets is the reduction from carrying value to fair value for assets or asset groups whose carrying value is not recoverable and also includes charges determined based on our estimation of the amount of obsolescence of previously capitalized software development costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense includes depreciation of property and equipment over the estimated useful life of the applicable asset, as well as amortization of acquired intangibles (i.e., technology, customer list and tradename) with a useful life between 3 and 15 years, and amortization of capitalized software development costs with an estimated benefit of 3 years.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest expense on our bank borrowings and headquarters finance leases, offset by interest income on non-customer corporate funds. Additionally, other income (expense) includes changes in the fair value of our derivative instrument, which required adjustments to fair value each reporting period until settled.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense (benefit) consists of federal and state income taxes.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented (in thousands, except share and per share data):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 30, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Total revenues increased $62.5 million or 33.6%. Software revenue increased $19.8 million, or 29.1%, primarily driven by the addition of new buyer invoice and payment transaction volume as well as the inclusion of $8.5 million of software revenue associated with the acquisitions of Core Associates, which closed in December 2020, and FastPay, which closed in July 2021. Payment revenue increased by $42.2 million, or 36.4%, driven primarily by increased electronic payments on the AvidPay Network with the addition of new buyer payment transaction volume and the inclusion of $4.8 million of payment revenue associated with the acquisition of FastPay. With the inclusion of services revenue, total revenues for 2021 include an aggregate of $13.7 million associated with the acquisitions of Core Associates and FastPay.
Cost of Revenues
The increase in cost of revenues (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) was due primarily to an increase in employee costs of $10.3 million. This increase is driven by hiring efforts to support the growth in our business as well as a $2.9 million impact related to headcount additions from our acquisitions of Core Associates and FastPay, which closed in December 2020 and
July 2021, respectively. The additional employees are supporting implementation and buyer and supplier experience services, SaaS product delivery and money movement. The remainder of the increase was primarily driven by increases in invoice and check processing fees of $3.0 million, increases in cloud hosting fees of $1.5 million related to a higher volume of transactions processed through our applications, and increases in reserves of $0.9 million for misdirected payments and Invoice Accelerator purchased invoices as we changed our estimate for the recoverability of supplier advance receivables. An additional increase of $1.3 million is attributable to impact of deferred implementation costs as amortization costs continue increase with the addition of new costs as well as more costs were deferred in the prior year.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses
The increase in sales and marketing expenses was due primarily to an increase of $8.8 million in employee costs (net of capitalized sales commissions), driven by a $3.1 million impact related to headcount additions from the acquisitions of Core Associates and FastPay plus organic headcount growth related to personnel directly engaged in acquiring new buyers and suppliers and in marketing our products and services. We experienced increases in marketing costs of $2.0 million and travel expenses of $0.5 million as events and sales-related travel increased compared to the low levels we experienced in 2020 due to the pandemic. We experienced increases in partner commissions of $3.0 million, of which $2.1 million were associated with the acquisition of Core Associates.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased primarily due to a $4.9 million increase in costs associated with engaging consultants and contractors to support the investment in our platform, and $19.7 million related to increased employee costs. The investments in our platform are intended to increase the quality, reliability and efficiency of our technology and include approximately $2.2 million of consultant and contractor costs associated with the acquisition of Core Associates which closed in December 2020. The increase in employee costs relates to both headcount and compensation increases and includes increases of $2.6 million associated with the acquisitions of Core Associates and FastPay. An additional increase of $0.6 million is attributable to recruiting costs as we expand our development teams. These increases were offset, in part, by a reduction in expense associated with capitalization of internally developed software of approximately $5.6 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in general and administrative expenses is attributable to a $17.3 million increase in employee costs and $1.2 million of professional and consulting fees and contract labor. The increases reflect the growth in our business and our preparation to operate as a public company and include $2.3 million of employee costs associated with the acquisition of FastPay which closed in July 2021. We experienced a $12.6 million increase in transaction-related costs driven primarily by expenses related to our IPO in October 2021, which include insurance premiums and deal consulting fees of $15.8 million, the value of donated common stock of $4.1 million, and termination fee of $3.8 million incurred in connection with real estate transactions executed in December 2021. The increases in transaction-related costs were partially offset by $11.0 million decrease related to vendor restructuring payment incurred in the previous year. We also experienced an increase in deal-related costs of $3.9 million associated with the FastPay acquisition and other activity during the year. An additional increase of $0.9 million is attributable to a decrease in amounts expected to receive under business incentive grants in the current period compared to the prior period.
Impairment and Write-Off of Intangible Assets
The impairment and write-off of intangible assets during 2021 and 2020 relates to internally developed software projects.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased primarily due to the amortization of intangible assets associated with the acquisition of FastPay which closed in July 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) increased primarily due to a $50 million non-cash charge related to amending a financing advisory agreement with a related party which was settled by issuing common stock. Additionally, we experienced an $18.6 million increase in expense attributable to the net revaluation of a derivative instrument that was settled in connection with our IPO and a decrease in interest income of $1.0 million.
Income Tax Expense
The provision for income taxes in 2021 relates primarily to the deferred tax benefit from deferred tax liabilities recognized in connection with the FastPay acquisition which were used to offset deferred tax assets that previously had a valuation allowance against them. In 2020, provision for income taxes primarily relates to state income taxes and noncurrent federal taxes related to the non-deductibility of goodwill in the future.
Stock-based Compensation
All of our RSUs outstanding prior to our IPO in October 2021 contained both service-based and performance-based vesting conditions. Using the accelerated attribution method in recognizing stock-based compensation expense for these RSUs, expense for each vesting tranche in an award is recognized ratably from the grant date to the vesting date for that tranche, resulting in acceleration of expense recognition as compared to recognition on a straight-line basis. The performance condition was settled in connection with our IPO which resulted in approximately $13.1 million of expense recognized immediately following the closing of our IPO in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Total revenue increased $36.3 million, or 24.3%, during the year ended December 31, 2020. Software revenue increased $17.9 million, or 35.7%, year over year driven primarily by the addition of new buyer invoice and payment transaction volume and the inclusion of $10.3 million associated with the acquisition of BankTEL, which closed in October 2019. Payment revenue increased $17.4 million, or 17.7%, year over year driven primarily by increased electronic payments on the AvidPay Network primarily from the addition of new buyer payment transaction volume.
Cost of Revenue
The increase in cost of revenue (excluding depreciation and amortization) was due primarily to an increase in employee costs of $9.0 million related to additional hiring to support the growth in our business. The additional employees are supporting implementation and buyer and supplier experience services, SaaS product-delivery and money movement. The remainder of the
increase was primarily driven by an increase in invoice and check processing and bank fees from an increase in the volume of transactions.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses
The increase in sales and marketing expenses was due primarily to a $7.7 million increase in employee costs (net of capitalized sales commissions), including the hiring of additional personnel who were directly engaged in acquiring new buyers and suppliers and in marketing our products and services.
Research and Development Expenses
The increase in research and development expenses was due primarily to an $11.6 million increase in costs associated with engaging consultants and contractors to support the investment in our platform, which are intended to increase the quality, reliability and efficiency of our technology, and $4.6 million related to increased employee costs, primarily related to compensation increases. These increases were offset, in part, by an increase in costs associated with capitalization of internally developed software of approximately $4.6 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in general and administrative expenses was due primarily to costs recognized during the year ending December 31, 2020 of approximately $11.0 million relating to a charge associated with modifying the terms of our agreement with our VCC service provider. In addition, during the 2020 period, we incurred $1.4 million of professional and consulting fees in connection with our preparation to operate as a public company. These increases were offset in part by certain costs that occurred during the 2019 period, including $2.9 million in consulting fees to secure government grants for job development, $1.7 million in debt modification costs and $0.8 million related to remaining lease payments on vacated office space.
Impairment and Write-Off of Intangible Assets
The impairment and write-off of intangible assets during the year ended December 31, 2019 relates to a new product release, which resulted in the obsolescence of previously capitalized software development costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses was due primarily to the amortization of intangible assets added through the acquisition of BankTEL. Amortization expense related to BankTEL intangible assets was $1.8 million in 2019 compared to $7.3 million in 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) increased to approximately $(25.9) million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from approximately $(16.4) million during the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a greater loss related to the revaluation of a derivative instrument of approximately $7.0 million and an increase in interest expense associated with increased borrowings under our 2019 credit facility.
Income Tax Expense
The provision for income taxes relates primarily to state income taxes.
Stock-based Compensation
All of our RSUs outstanding prior to our IPO in October 2021 contained both service-based and performance-based vesting conditions. Using the accelerated attribution method in recognizing stock-based compensation expense for these RSUs, expense for each vesting tranche in an award is recognized ratably from the grant date to the vesting date for that tranche, resulting in acceleration of expense recognition as compared to recognition on a straight-line basis. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, no compensation expense was recognized for RSUs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We do not currently generate positive cash flow through our operations. We have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily through sales of common and preferred stock and borrowings under our 2019 Credit Agreement, as defined below, and, more recently, our IPO that was completed in October 2021, which resulted in net proceeds of $621.4 million, including the exercise of the overallotment option and after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $40.4 million and offering expenses of approximately $11.8 million. As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity are our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of approximately $562.8 million and funds available under our existing term loan and revolving credit facilities, which we collectively refer to as the 2019 Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, our unused committed capacity under the 2019 Credit Agreement was $23.5 million comprised of a delayed draw term loan and a revolving commitment. Our $30.0 million additional delayed draw term loan, which was undrawn, expired by its terms on October 1, 2021.
We believe that our unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and funds available under our 2019 Credit Agreement will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements for at least the next twelve months. To the extent existing cash, cash from operations, and amounts available for borrowing under the 2019 Credit Agreement are insufficient to fund future activities, we may need to raise additional capital. In the future, we may attempt to raise additional capital through the sale of equity securities or through equity-linked or debt financing arrangements. If we raise additional capital by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, the ownership of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we raise additional capital by the incurrence of additional indebtedness, we may be subject to increased fixed payment obligations and could also be subject to additional restrictive covenants, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Our ability to raise additional debt may be limited by applicable regulatory requirements as a licensed money transmitter that require us to meet certain net worth requirements. Any future indebtedness we incur may result in terms that could be unfavorable to equity investors. There can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital. The inability to raise capital would adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives.
Cash Flows
Below is a summary of our consolidated cash flows:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Our primary source of cash provided by our operating activities is from our software and payment revenue. Our primary uses of cash in our operating activities include payments for employee salary and related costs, payments to third party service providers to execute our payment transactions, sales and marketing costs, and other general corporate expenditures.
Net cash used in operating activities increased to $68.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $44.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to IPO-related and other deal related costs and increased employee costs to support our growth and the impact of the timing of payments which decreased AP and increased prepaid assets and other current assets, offset by the increase in cash received from revenue generating activities.
Net cash used in operating activities decreased to approximately $44.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from approximately $61.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the increase in cash received from revenue generating activities, as well as reduced payroll tax payments due to deferrals allowed under the CAREs Act, offset by increased operating expenses, primarily employee salary and consulting costs.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in our investing activities consists primarily of the acquisition of acquired businesses, purchases of property and equipment, capitalization of internal-use software, contingent consideration, and supplier advances related to our Invoice Accelerator product.
Net cash used in investing activities increased to $84.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $36.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the acquisition of FastPay in July 2021 and the purchase of real estate as well as an increase in internal-use software capitalized.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased to approximately $36.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from approximately $116.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a reduction in cash expenditures related to the 2019 acquisition of BankTEL, offset in part by an increase of approximately $2.7 million related to purchases of equipment and capitalized software and $3.0 million increase in supplier advances driven by a rollout of enhancements to the Cash Flow Manager product.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by our financing activities consists primarily of an increase in restricted buyer fund deposits related to buyer payment transactions, proceeds from the issuance of preferred and common stock, exercise of stock options and borrowings under our 2019 Credit Agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased to $1.6 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $193.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to net inflows from payment service obligations as we shifted to the money transfer license model during 2021 and net proceeds from our IPO compared to inflows in 2020 primarily from the issuance of common and preferred stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased to approximately $193.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from approximately $308.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to higher net inflows from capital raise activities that occurred during 2019 including proceeds from the issuance of the series F and senior preferred stock and $25.3 million of increased borrowings under the 2019 credit facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised approximately $301.7 million in net proceeds from the issuance of series F preferred stock and common stock and used a portion of these proceeds to redeem $195.7 million of common and preferred stock and vested stock options. Additionally, restricted buyer fund deposits, or payment service obligations, provided cash of $85.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $51.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Outstanding Debt and Commitments
Below is a summary of our outstanding debt (in thousands):
Credit Facilities
On October 1, 2019, we entered into a new senior secured credit facility, which we refer to as the 2019 Credit Agreement, with Sixth Street and KeyBank. The 2019 Credit Agreement made available a facility in an aggregate amount of $163.5 million. Proceeds from the 2019 Credit Agreement were used to pay amounts outstanding under the credit agreement dated October 19, 2016, as amended and restated, and used for working capital. The 2019 Credit Agreement consists of the following:
•$95 million term loan facility, which we refer to as the 2019 term loan facility;
•$30 million additional delayed draw term loan commitment, which we refer to as the DDTL;
•$18.5 million delayed draw term loan commitment, which we refer to as the Interest DDTL; and
•$20 million revolving commitment, which we refer to as the 2019 revolver.
Interest on the loans under the 2019 Credit Agreement is equal to LIBOR or a base rate, plus a margin. The applicable margin will be between 8.0% and 9.0% for the first three years, with the lower rate applicable for quarters in which we do not borrow from the Interest DDTL, and after the third anniversary will be 7.5% or 8.0% depending on whether the cash burn rate is greater than or less than negative $2.5 million. The base rate is equal to the higher of the current prime rate, federal funds effective rate plus 0.5%, or 4.0%. We may elect an interest period of up to three months in connection with a LIBOR rate loan. In 2017, the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority warned that LIBOR may cease to be available or appropriate for use by 2021. Per the terms of the 2019 Credit Agreement, the unavailability or replacement of LIBOR would result in the use of a similar measure based upon a calculated average of borrowing rates offered by major banks in the London interbank as determined by Sixth Street. As such, we do not believe that the unavailability of LIBOR will have any material impact on our borrowing costs.
From October 1, 2019 through the third anniversary date of the 2019 Credit Agreement, we may, on a quarterly basis, borrow under the Interest DDTL to finance up to 4.5% of the interest due on the 2019 term loans. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we borrowed $3.5 million at rates of 9.0% and 10.0%.
We also had available additional DDTL which could be made in minimum increments of $5 million, and multiples of $0.5 million in excess of that amount, up to $30 million. The DDTL commitment terminated on October 1, 2021.
The maturity date for the 2019 term loans and Interest DDTL is April 1, 2024.
Borrowing increments on the 2019 revolver start at $0.5 million, and multiples of $0.1 million in excess of that amount. There was no balance outstanding under the facility as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021. The maturity date for the 2019 revolver is October 1, 2023. Borrowing availability under the 2019 revolver is reduced by the then current amount of the letter of credit dated October 1, 2019 and issued by KeyBank to secure our obligation to make payments under the lease related to our headquarters building in Charlotte, North Carolina. The current amount of the letter of credit is approximately $6.0 million.
The aggregate amount available to borrow under our 2019 Credit Agreement is $23.5 million as of December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Financial Covenants
Our 2019 Credit Agreement contains certain covenants and restrictions on actions, including limitations on the payment of dividends. In addition, the 2019 Credit Agreement requires that we comply monthly with specified ratios, including a maximum ratio of debt to recurring revenue and a minimum cash balance requirement. We are in compliance with our financial debt covenants as of December 31, 2021.
Land Promissory Notes
On November 15, 2018, we signed a promissory note in connection with the purchase of two land parcels at our Charlotte, North Carolina headquarters campus. The principal amount of $5.0 million will be repaid in $1.0 million installments, plus accrued interest at a rate of 6.75%, due on each anniversary date, with final payment due on November 15, 2023. The note is collateralized by the land parcels and any future building to be situated on, or improvements to, the land. In December 2021 in connection with the purchase of additional land and improvements, the promissory note was modified to extend its term to November 15, 2025 and reduce the annual payment to $0.5 million.
In December 2021, we executed a promissory note in connection with the purchase of land and improvements adjacent to our Charlotte, North Carolina headquarters campus. The principal amount of $21.5 million will be repaid in four annual installments of $4.3 million, plus accrued interest at a rate of 6.75%, starting on December 1, 2022 and the final payment of $4.3 million plus accrued interest due on May 15, 2026. The note is collateralized by the land and improvements on the land.
We are current with all payments under the notes.
Development Fee Agreement
We were party to a development fee agreement dated September 27, 2019 for a contemplated building on our Charlotte, North Carolina headquarters campus. This agreement required us to make payments to the seller of land purchased by us in connection
with future development of the land. In conjunction with the purchase of land and improvements in December 2021, we terminated this development fee agreement and will pay $3.8 million in cash to the counterparty on February 1, 2023.
Issuances of Common Stock
On September 30, 2021, we effected a 4-for-1 forward stock split of our common stock. In connection with the forward stock split, each issued and outstanding share of common stock, automatically and without action on the part of the holders, became four shares of common stock and each stock award and warrant was split accordingly. The par value per share of common was not adjusted. The exercise price of options and warrants was adjusted. Shares of preferred stock were not split; however, the conversion rate of each share of preferred stock was adjusted to reflect the forward split. All common share, per common share and related information presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes have been retroactively adjusted, where applicable, to reflect the effect of the stock split.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 6,301,372 shares of common stock at a weighted average price per share of $13.38, excluding common stock issued in the IPO and for conversion of preferred shares and warrants. The common shares issued included 4,080,636 shares issued in connection with the amended and restated engagement letter with a related party (see Note 13 of our Consolidated Financial Statements). Additionally, the issuances included 960,765 shares of issued upon exercise of employee stock options and 1,259,971 shares of common stock issued to the sellers of FastPay at, and soon after, closing in July 2021, see "Shares Issued in Acquisitions" below.
On June 24, 2021, our board of directors approved the reservation of 1,657,296 shares of our common stock (representing approximately 1% of our issued and outstanding common stock and common stock equivalents as of June 24, 2021) for future issuance to fund our philanthropic endeavors, including possible issuance to a philanthropic partner in connection with the establishment of a donor-advised fund, over a ten-year period. On October 1, 2021, the Company executed an agreement with a philanthropic partner pursuant to which the Company intends to provide annual ongoing grants of 10% of the pledged shares for a period of ten years, subject in each case to the approval of our board of directors. None of our officers or directors are affiliated with our philanthropic partner. On October 15, 2021, we transferred the first installment of 165,729 shares of common stock which resulted in expense of $4.1 million that was recorded in general and administrative expense in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Initial Public Offering and Conversion of Senior Preferred Stock, Redeemable Preferred Stock, and Warrants
On October 15, 2021, we closed our IPO in which we sold 26,400,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $25.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $620.4 million after deducting underwriters' discounts and incurred additional expenses in connection with the offering of approximately $11.8 million.
Upon the closing of the IPO, all shares of outstanding redeemable preferred stock automatically converted into 111,142,439 shares of common stock. Additionally, all shares of senior preferred stock were converted into redeemable preferred stock and convertible common stock. The resulting redeemable preferred stock was redeemed for $169 million. The convertible common stock was converted into 1,455,306 shares of common stock.
Additionally, upon the closing of the IPO, the warrants converted into shares of common stock in a cashless exchange. Accordingly, the 797,652 outstanding warrants converted into 740,190 shares of common stock.
On November 15, 2021, the underwriters notified us of the partial exercise of the overallotment option. Upon closing on November 18, 2021, we issued 544,928 shares of common stock at the offering price of $25.00 per share and received net proceeds of $12.8 million after deducting underwriters' discounts and commissions.
Shares Issued in Acquisitions
In July 2021, we entered into a stock purchase agreement for all of the equity interests of FastPay for total consideration of approximately $75.6 million which included shares of our common stock with an aggregate value of approximately $31.0 million. Additional amounts may be earned upon achievement of future performance goals. We initially issued 2,570,748 shares of common stock in July 2021, including 40,804 shares related to contingent consideration. Upon the closing of our IPO on October 15, 2021 and in accordance with the stock purchase agreement, we adjusted the number of shares of common stock paid to the sellers of FastPay to 1,239,973 shares of common stock and 19,998 shares of common stock related to contingent consideration that was paid in July 2021. This resulted in the return of 1,310,777 shares of common stock to us, including 20,806 shares of common stock related to the contingent consideration.
Payment Obligations
We process payments for our customers. As part of our payment product offering we have recorded payment service obligations in our consolidated balance sheets of $1,242.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and an offsetting asset of restricted funds held for customers. This balance is short-term in nature and represents our obligation to pay our customers' suppliers as directed by our customers.
Under our legacy trust model for processing payments, which we are in the process of phasing out, buyers’ funds were held in trust accounts that are maintained and operated by a trustee pending distribution. After buyers’ funds are deposited in a trust
account, we initiate payment through external payment networks whereby the buyers’ funds are distributed from the trust to the appropriate supplier. We are not the trustee or beneficiary of the trusts which hold these buyer deposits, accordingly, we do not record these assets and offsetting liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. However, we contractually earn interest on funds held for buyers with associated counterparties. The amount of buyer funds held in trust-related accounts was approximately $123.6 million, and $723.1 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. We have largely transitioned away from the trust model for processing payments, and expect the amount of buyer funds held in trust to continue to decrease as those buyers transition to our current payments model.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are the most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Capitalization of internal-use software
We have significant expenditures associated with the technological maintenance and improvement of our network and technology offerings. These expenditures include both the cost of internal employees, who spend portions of their time on various technological projects, and the use of external temporary labor and consultants. We are required to assess these expenditures and make a determination as to whether the costs should be expensed as incurred or are subject to capitalization. In making these determinations, we consider the stage of the development project, the probability of successful development and if the development is resulting in increased features and functionality. In addition, if we determine that a project qualifies for capitalization, the amount of capitalization is subject to various estimates, including the amount of time spent on the development work and the cost per hour of full-time and temporary labor.
Deferred costs
Deferred costs include deferred sales commissions and implementations costs that are incremental costs of obtaining and fulfilling buyer contracts. We amortize these costs ratably over the estimated period of our relationship with new buyers, which is generally five years. Based on historical experience, we determine the average life of our buyer relationship by taking into consideration our buyer contracts and the estimated technological life of our platform and related significant features.
Stock-based compensation
We use the grant-date fair-value-based measurements for stock-based compensation related to stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We recognize these compensation costs on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is generally the option vesting term of four years, reduced for estimated forfeitures at the date of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We estimate the forfeiture rate based on the historical experience for annual grant years where the majority of the vesting terms have been satisfied.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
Common Stock and Derivative Instrument Valuation
The valuation of our common stock is important as it is a significant input into the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and therefore impacts our stock compensation expense. In addition, our senior preferred stock had a conversion feature that qualified as a derivative financial instrument and therefore was required to be recorded at fair value each reporting period, with changes in fair value recorded in the consolidated statements of operations until it was converted in connection with the IPO.
Since our IPO in October 2021, the value of our stock is readily determinable by market prices. Prior to the IPO, we determined the equity value of our business generally using the income approach and the market comparable approach valuation methods when valuing our common stock and derivative instrument. When applicable due to a recent preferred or common stock offering, the prior sale of company stock method was also utilized.
The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate - such as cash earnings, cost savings, tax deductions, and the proceeds from disposition. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly traded companies in our industry or similar lines of business as of each valuation date and is adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in our cash flows. In addition, we also considered an appropriate discount adjustment to recognize the lack of marketability due to being a closely-held entity.
The market comparable approach estimates value based on a comparison of the subject company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple is determined which is applied to the subject company’s operating results to estimate the value of the subject company. The estimated value is then discounted by a non-marketability factor because stockholders of private companies lack access to trading markets similar to those enjoyed by stockholders of public companies which impacts liquidity. To determine our peer group of companies, we considered public enterprise cloud-based application providers and selected those that were similar to us in size, stage of lifecycle, and financial leverage.
The resulting equity value was then allocated to each class of stock using an Option Pricing Model, or OPM. The OPM treats common stock and redeemable convertible preferred stock as call options on an equity value, with exercise prices based on the liquidation preference of our redeemable convertible preferred stock. Under this method, our common stock has value only if the funds available for distribution to stockholders exceed the value of the liquidation preference at the time of a liquidity event, such as a merger or sale, assuming we have funds available to make a liquidation preference meaningful and collectible by the stockholders. The common stock is considered to be a call option with a claim at an exercise price equal to the remaining value immediately after the redeemable convertible preferred stock is liquidated.
After our IPO on October 13, 2021, we determine the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price as reported on the date of grant on the primary stock exchange on which our common stock is traded.
Business Combinations and Valuation of Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangible Assets
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired users, acquired technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives, and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
We review goodwill for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. We have elected to first assess the qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative assessment. If we determine that it is more-likely-than-not that its fair value is less than its carrying amount, then the fair value of the reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. As of December 31, 2021, no impairment of goodwill has been identified.
Acquired finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which is generally 3 to 15 years. We evaluate the recoverability of our intangible assets for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification 740, Income Taxes, or ASC 740. Under ASC 740, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates expected to apply in the years in which we expect the temporary differences to be recovered or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets for the amount expected to be realized by considering all available positive and negative evidence.
Pursuant to ASC 740, we must consider all available positive and negative evidence regarding the realization of deferred tax assets. ASC 740 provides for four sources of taxable income for realization of deferred tax assets: (i) taxable income in prior carryback years, (ii) reversals of future taxable temporary differences, (iii) tax planning strategies and (iv) projected future taxable income. As of December 31, 2021, we have no taxable income in prior carryback years, limited future reversals of taxable temporary differences and no prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. The recoverability of our deferred tax assets is dependent upon generating future taxable income.
We have maintained a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets, having determined it was more likely than not that the deferred tax assets would not be realized. The determination of releasing the valuation allowance is made, in part, pursuant to our assessment as to whether it is more likely than not that we will generate sufficient future taxable income to realize the deferred tax assets. Significant judgement is required in making estimates of our ability to generate future taxable income. As of December 31, 2021, our forecasted future taxable income is not sufficient to support the future realization of the deferred tax assets, and our historical losses operations have produced significant losses.
The application of income tax law is inherently complex. Laws and regulations in this area are often ambiguous. Under ASC 740, the impact of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return must be recognized in the financial statements at the largest amount that is more likely than not to be sustained upon audit by the relevant taxing authority. An uncertain tax position will not be recognized in the financial statements unless it is more likely than not to be sustained.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of December 31, 2021.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We elected to use this extended transition period for compliance with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our Consolidated Financial Statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. During 2020, we early adopted ASU 2016-02, Leases (ASC Topic 842) as the JOBS Act does not preclude an emerging growth company from early adopting a new or revised accounting standard earlier than the time that such standard applies to private companies. We expect to use the extended transition period for any other new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company.