Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section in Part 1, Item 1A of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a commercial stage, oncology-focused biopharmaceutical company committed to delivering medicines that provide a better life for patients with cancer. We currently market FOTIVDA® (tivozanib) in the United States. FOTIVDA is our first commercial product and was approved by the FDA for marketing and sale in the United States on March 10, 2021 for the treatment of adult patients with RCC, following two or more prior systemic therapies. We continue to develop tivozanib in immuno-oncology combinations in RCC and other indications, and we have other investigational programs in clinical development.
FOTIVDA is an oral, next-generation VEGFR TKI. The FDA approval of FOTIVDA is based on our pivotal Phase 3 randomized, controlled, multi-center, open-label clinical trial comparing tivozanib to an approved therapy, Nexavar® (sorafenib), in RCC patients whose disease had relapsed or become refractory to two or three prior systemic therapies, which we refer to as the TIVO-3 trial. The approval is also supported by three additional trials in RCC and includes safety data from over 1,000 clinical trial subjects.
FOTIVDA became commercially available in the United States on March 22, 2021 and is available to patients through a network of specialty pharmacies and distributors. We commercialize FOTIVDA in the United States through the support of approximately 65 field-based employees, which includes approximately 50 oncology sales professionals. The field sales force is supported by the AVEO ACE Patient Support program, which is an extensive patient and healthcare provider support program designed to optimize patient access and help patients navigate their treatment journey. To date, we believe we have been very successful in securing payor coverage. Furthermore, the NCCN Guidelines® recommend FOTIVDA as a subsequent therapy for patients with relapsed or refractory advanced RCC with clear cell histology who received two or more prior systemic therapies.
Restrictions related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic have posed challenges for gaining in-person access to customers, prescribers and other healthcare professionals and certain institutions remain closed to industry representatives. Notwithstanding these challenges, as of December 31, 2021, prescriptions for FOTIVDA and product revenues have increased quarter over quarter since the beginning of our commercial launch. We aim to continue to deliver quarter over quarter net revenue and underlying prescription demand growth as we continue to execute on our commercial strategy to support the adoption of FOTIVDA in appropriate patients.
We believe there is significant commercial opportunity for FOTIVDA in RCC in the United States. We estimate that the current U.S. market for relapsed or refractory advanced RCC therapy is more than $1.7 billion, including $1.3 billion in the second line and $480.0 million in the third and fourth lines. As the TIVO-3 trial is the first positive Phase 3 clinical trial in RCC patients whose disease had relapsed or become refractory to two or three prior systemic therapies as well as the first Phase 3 clinical trial in RCC to investigate a predefined subpopulation of patients who received prior immunotherapy, a predominant standard of care for earlier lines of therapy, we believe that FOTIVDA could become a standard of care in the United States in the third and fourth line relapsed or refractory advanced setting. Further, we intend to pursue opportunities in the second line relapsed or refractory advanced RCC setting. We and our collaboration partners are developing tivozanib with ICIs and in combination with a HIF2α inhibitor to support tivozanib's potential utility in this earlier line of RCC therapy.
Based on FOTIVDA’s demonstrated anti-tumor activity, tolerability profile and reduction of regulatory T-cell production, we and our collaboration partners are developing tivozanib in additional cancer indications with significant unmet medical needs including, HCC, and tumors that are resistant to immunotherapy, or immunologically cold tumors, in combination with ICIs. In addition, we are evaluating tivozanib as a monotherapy in ovarian cancer and CCA. We and our collaboration partners or independent investigators sponsor the development of tivozanib through preclinical studies and clinical trials conducted under collaboration agreements and IST agreements or our CRADA with NCI-SOP.
We are also seeking to advance our pipeline of four wholly owned IgG1, monoclonal antibody product candidates, ficlatuzumab, AV-380, AV-203 and AV-353. We aim to leverage our existing collaborations and partnerships and enter into new strategic collaborations and partnerships to continue to advance each of our product candidates.
Recent Developments
On March 8, 2022, we entered into a Loan Amendment with Hercules, or the 2022 Loan Amendment. The 2022 Loan Amendment, among other things, makes the $5.0 million Tranche Four funding available upon achieving $30.0 million in trailing three-month net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA by no later than December 15, 2022, instead of being available at the discretion of the Lenders by no later than June 30, 2022. Please see “Part II, Item 9b. Other Information - 2022 Amendment to 2020 Credit Facility” of this Annual Report for a further discussion of the 2022 Loan Amendment.
Financial Overview
We do not have a history of generating operating profits and, as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $674.5 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur significant operating expenses for the foreseeable future as we seek to successfully commercialize FOTIVDA in the United States and continue our planned development activities for our clinical and preclinical stage assets.
We may require substantial additional funding to continue to advance our pipeline of clinical and preclinical stage assets, and the timing and nature of these activities will be conducted subject to the availability of sufficient financial resources, principally product sales of FOTIVDA in the United States. Please see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources -Liquidity and Going Concern” of this Annual Report for a further discussion of our funding requirements.
Revenue
Prior to the commercial launch of FOTIVDA in March 2021, our revenues were historically generated primarily through collaborative research, development and commercialization agreements. Payments to us under these arrangements typically include one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; option exercise fees; funding of research and/or development efforts; milestone payments; and royalties on future product sales. In November 2017, we began earning sales royalties upon EUSA’s commencement of the first commercial launch of FOTIVDA.
On March 10, 2021, the FDA approved FOTIVDA in the United States for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory advanced RCC following two or more prior systemic therapies. We commenced commercial sales of our first product FOTIVDA in the United States on March 22, 2021. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter and year to year as a result of the timing and amount of the payments that we receive upon the sales of FOTIVDA and any future products, to the extent any are successfully commercialized, and license fees, research and development reimbursements, milestones, royalties and other payments received under our strategic partnerships. If we or our collaboration partners fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or to obtain or maintain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses have historically consisted of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. These expenses consist primarily of:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation and research-related overhead;
•external development-related expenses, including clinical trials, preclinical studies, consultants and other outsourced services;
•costs of acquiring and manufacturing drug development related materials and related distribution;
•costs associated with our regulatory and quality assurance operations and medical affairs;
•upfront license payments, milestones, sublicense fees and royalties related to in-licensed products and technology; and
•allocated expenses for facilities and information technology.
Research and development expenses is net of amounts reimbursed under our agreement with AstraZeneca for their respective share of development costs incurred by us under our joint development plans.
We anticipate that research and development expenses will increase in 2022, principally related to the enrollment of the TiNivo-2 Trial for the treatment of RCC patients who have progressed following one or two lines of prior immunotherapy, one of which must include an ICI, the manufacturing of ficlatuzumab clinical drug supply for a potential registrational clinical trial in HPV negative R/M HNSCC patients that we plan to initiate in the first half of 2023, a Phase 1b clinical trial in AV-380 in cancer patients that we plan to initiate in the second half of 2022 and the related manufacturing of AV-380 clinical drug supply, and co-funding pursuant to the NiKang Agreement for a Phase 2 clinical trial to evaluate tivozanib in combination with NKT2152 in ccRCC patients who have not responded to or relapsed from prior therapies. These increases in 2022 will be partially offset by lower costs, principally related to the TIVO-3 Trial that closed in the second half of 2021 following the FDA’s approval of FOTIVDA on March 10, 2021. We anticipate that research and development expenses will be in the range of $60.0 million to $70.0 million in 2022 in support of our existing pipeline plans. The timing and nature of contemplated activities in 2022 will be conducted subject to the availability of sufficient financial resources.
Currently, we track direct external development expenses and direct salary on a program-by-program basis and allocate general-related expenses, such as indirect compensation, benefits and consulting fees, to each program based on the personnel resources allocated to such program. Facilities, IT costs and stock-based compensation are not allocated amongst programs and are considered overhead.
Uncertainties of Estimates Related to Research and Development Expenses
The process of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain FDA approval for each of our product candidates is costly and time-consuming. The probability of success for each product candidate and clinical trial may be affected by a variety of factors, including, among others, the risk benefit profile of the product candidates’ clinical activity, investment in the program, competition, manufacturing capabilities and commercial viability.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, specific timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of our product candidates, or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows may commence from sales of any approved products. This uncertainty is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic partnerships, the terms of those strategic partnerships and the success of those strategic partnerships, if any, including the timing and amount of payments that we might receive from strategic partners;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of preclinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for any product candidate;
•the progress and results of our clinical trials;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the emergence of competing technologies and products and other adverse market developments;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•additional manufacturing requirements.
As a result of the uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including those discussed above, we are unable to determine the exact duration and completion costs of current or future clinical stages of our product candidates, or when, or to what extent, we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates for which we may obtain regulatory approval. Development timelines, probability of success and development costs vary widely. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which additional programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific and clinical success, if any, of each product
candidate, as well as ongoing assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future in order to fund the development of our preclinical and clinical product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of compensation, benefits and travel for employees in executive, finance, legal, human resource and commercial functions. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include professional fees for audit, tax, general legal, patent legal, investor relations, commercial, consulting services and directors’ fees, as well as facility and information technology-related costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
We anticipate that selling, general and administrative expenses associated with the commercialization of FOTIVDA, principally related to our sales force, our marketing, market access and commercial capabilities, and general and administrative support will increase in 2022, principally reflective of a full year of commercialization following the launch of FOTIVDA on March 22, 2021. We anticipate that selling, general and administrative expenses will be approximately $70.0 million, including approximately $50.0 million in commercial expenses and approximately $20.0 million in general and administrative expenses.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense consists of interest, amortization of debt discount and amortization of deferred financing costs associated with our loans payable, and is shown net of interest income, which consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. The primary objective of our investment policy is capital preservation.
Income Taxes
We generated tax losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and since we maintain a full valuation allowance on all of our deferred tax assets, we have recorded no income tax provision or benefit during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, the assessment of our ability to continue as a going concern, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Significant items subject to such estimates and assumptions include revenue recognition, clinical trial costs and contract research accruals, measurement of trade receivables net, measurement of stock-based compensation and estimates of our capital requirements over the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. Changes in estimates are recorded or reflected in our disclosures in the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ from our estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate. Our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Prior to the commercial launch of FOTIVDA in March 2021, our revenues had historically been generated primarily through collaborative research, development and commercialization agreements. The terms of these agreements generally contain multiple promised goods and services, which may include (i) licenses, or options to obtain licenses, to our technology, (ii) research and development activities to be performed on behalf of the collaborative partner, and (iii) in certain cases, services in connection with the manufacturing of preclinical and clinical material. Payments to us under these arrangements typically include one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; option exercise fees; funding of research and/or development efforts; milestone payments; and royalties on future product sales.
Collaboration Arrangements Within the Scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements
We analyze our collaboration arrangements to assess whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities and are therefore within the scope of ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements, or ASC 808. This assessment is performed throughout the life of the arrangement based on changes in the responsibilities of all parties in the arrangement.
For collaboration arrangements that are deemed to be within the scope of ASC 808, we first determine which elements of the collaboration are deemed to be within the scope of ASC 808 and those that are more reflective of a vendor-customer relationship and therefore within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. Our policy is generally to recognize amounts received from collaborators in connection with joint operating activities that are within the scope of ASC 808 as a reduction in research and development expense.
Arrangements Within the Scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we determine we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy our performance obligation(s). As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must make significant judgments, including identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price and allocating the transaction price to each performance obligation.
Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within the contract and determine those that are performance obligations. Arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are considered performance obligations. The exercise of a material right is accounted for as a contract modification for accounting purposes.
We assess whether each promised good or service is distinct for the purpose of identifying the performance obligations in the contract. This assessment involves subjective determinations and requires management to make judgments about the individual promised goods or services and whether such are separable from the other aspects of the contractual relationship. Promised goods and services are considered distinct provided that: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (that is, the good or service is capable of being distinct) and (ii) the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (that is, the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract). In assessing whether a promised good or service is distinct, we consider factors such as the research, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. We also consider the intended benefit of the contract in assessing whether a promised good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. If a promised good or service is not distinct, an entity is required to combine that good or service with other promised goods or services until it identifies a bundle of goods or services that is distinct.
The transaction price is then determined and allocated to the identified performance obligations in proportion to their standalone selling prices, or SSP, on a relative SSP basis. SSP is determined at contract inception and is not updated to reflect changes between contract inception and when the performance obligations are satisfied. Determining the SSP for performance obligations requires significant judgment. In developing the SSP for a performance obligation, we consider applicable market conditions and relevant entity-specific factors, including factors that were contemplated in negotiating the agreement with the customer and estimated costs. We validate the SSP for performance obligations by evaluating whether changes in the key assumptions used to determine the SSP will have a significant effect on the allocation of arrangement consideration between multiple performance obligations.
If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. We determine the amount of variable consideration by using the expected value method or the most likely amount method. We include the unconstrained amount of estimated variable consideration in the transaction price. The amount included in the transaction price is constrained to the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period of adjustment.
In determining the transaction price, we adjust consideration for the effects of the time value of money if the timing of payments provides us with a significant benefit of financing. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensees and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensees will be one year or less. We assess each of our revenue generating arrangements in order to determine whether a significant financing component exists and concluded that a significant financing component does not exist in any of our arrangements.
We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time, and if over time based on the use of an output or input method.
Licenses of Intellectual Property: The terms of our license agreements include the license of functional intellectual property, given the functionality of the intellectual property is not expected to change substantially as a result of our ongoing activities. If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from the portion of the transaction price allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises (that is, for licenses that are not distinct from other promised goods and services in an arrangement), we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Research and Development Funding: Arrangements that include payment for research and development services are generally considered to have variable consideration. If and when we assess the payment for these services is no longer subject to the constraint on variable consideration, the related revenue is included in the transaction price.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes non-refundable payments for contingent milestones, including preclinical research and development, clinical development and regulatory, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of the achievement of contingent milestones and the likelihood of a significant reversal of such milestone revenue, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect collaboration and licensing revenue in the period of adjustment. This quarterly assessment may result in the recognition of revenue related to a contingent milestone payment before the milestone event has been achieved.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
The following table summarizes the total revenues earned in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, by partner (in thousands). Refer to Note 4 “Collaborations and License Agreements” of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K regarding specific details of these collaboration and license arrangements.
Accrued Expenses and Accrued Clinical Trial Costs and Contract Research Liabilities
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued expenses. This process involves identifying services which have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service
performed and the associated cost incurred for such service as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements. Given our current business, the primary area of uncertainty concerning accruals which could have a material effect on our operating results is with respect to service fees paid to CMOs in conjunction with the production of commercial and clinical drug supplies and to CROs in connection with our clinical trials. In connection with all of the foregoing service fees, our estimates are most affected by our understanding of the status and timing of services provided. The majority of our service providers, including CMOs and CROs, invoice us in arrears for services performed. In the event that we do not identify some costs which have begun to be incurred, or we under or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of such services in a given period, our reported expenses for such period would be understated or overstated. We currently reflect the effects of any changes in estimates based on changes in facts and circumstances directly in our operations in the period such change becomes known.
Our arrangements with CROs in connection with clinical trials often provide for payment prior to commencing the project or based upon predetermined milestones throughout the period during which services are expected to be performed. We recognize expense relating to these arrangements based on the various services provided over the estimated time to completion. The date on which services commence, the level of services performed on or before a given date, and the cost of such services are often determined based on subjective judgments. We make these judgments based upon the facts and circumstances known to us based on the terms of the contract and our ongoing monitoring of service performance. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we had arrangements with multiple CROs whereby these organizations commit to performing services for us over multiple reporting periods. We recognize the expenses associated with these arrangements based on our expectation of the timing of the performance of components under these arrangements by these organizations. Generally, these components consist of the costs of setting up the trial, monitoring the trial, closing the trial and preparing the resulting data. Costs related to patient enrollment in clinical trials are accrued as patients are enrolled in the trial.
With respect to financial reporting periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the timing of our actual costs incurred have not differed materially from our estimated timing of such costs.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Revenues (in thousands)
Our total revenues increased by $36.3 million, or 603%, to $42.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $6.0 million in the same period in 2020, principally due to the commencement of sales of our first commercial product FOTIVDA in the United States on March 22, 2021 for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory advanced RCC following two or more prior systemic therapies.
Our total revenues decreased by $22.8 million, or 79%, to $6.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $28.8 million in the same period in 2019, principally due to payments earned pursuant to the amendment to the KKC Agreement for KKC’s repurchase of the non-oncology rights to tivozanib in our territory, including the $25.0 million upfront payment earned in 2019 offset by a $2.8 million development milestone earned in 2020, as well as a $0.6 million decrease in revenues from EUSA.
Partnership revenues from KKC decreased by $2.8 million, or 100%, in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020 and decreased by $22.2 million, or 89%, in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. On August 2, 2020, we earned a $2.8 million development milestone payment from KKC for the acceptance of KKC’s IND for a non-oncology formulation of tivozanib by the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency of Japan. In the third quarter of 2020, we recognized this $2.8 million development milestone as revenue in accordance with ASC 606. No milestones were earned in the year ended December 31, 2021.
On August 1, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the KKC Agreement pursuant to which KKC repurchased the non-oncology rights to tivozanib in our territory, excluding the rights we have sublicensed to EUSA under the EUSA Agreement, and KKC made a $25.0 million non-refundable upfront payment to us that we received in September 2019. In the third quarter of 2019, we recognized this $25.0 million upfront payment as revenue in accordance with ASC 606.
Partnership revenues from EUSA increased by $0.2 million, or 6%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, and decreased by $0.6 million, or 15%, in the year ended December 31, 2020, from the same period in 2019.
FOTIVDA U. S. Product Revenue, Net (in thousands)
We commenced sales of our first commercial product FOTIVDA in the United States on March 22, 2021 for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory advanced RCC following two or more prior systemic therapies.
We anticipate FOTIVDA net product revenues will be in the range of $100.0 million to $110.0 million in 2022.
Cost of Products Sold (in thousands)
We commenced sales of our first commercial product FOTIVDA in the United States on March 22, 2021 for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory advanced RCC following two or more prior systemic therapies. Cost of products sold is related to our product revenues for FOTIVDA and consists primarily of tiered royalty payments we are required to pay to KKC on all net sales of tivozanib in our North American territory, which range from the low to mid-teens as a percentage of net sales. Cost of products sold also consists of shipping and other third-party logistics and distribution costs for FOTIVDA. We consider regulatory approval of our product candidates to be uncertain and product manufactured prior to regulatory approval may not be sold unless regulatory approval is obtained. As such, the manufacturing costs for FOTIVDA incurred prior to regulatory approval were not capitalized as inventory but were expensed as research and development costs, which favorably impacted our gross margin. We anticipate that gross margins will continue to be in the mid-to-high 80th percentile in 2022.
Research and Development Expenses (in thousands)
Our total research and development expenses increased by $3.6 million, or 16%, to $26.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $22.7 million in the same period in 2020.
Our total research and development expenses increased by $4.7 million, or 26%, to $22.7 million in the year ended December 31,2020 from $18.0 million in the same period in 2019.
Tivozanib expenses decreased by $1.2 million, or 7%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, principally related to $10.2 million in total decreases for costs incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020 that were not incurred in the same period in 2021, including (i) $2.3 million in connection with the completion and review support for the tivozanib NDA for relapsed or refractory advanced RCC following two or more prior systemic therapies, (ii) the corresponding $2.9 million application user fee pursuant to the Prescription Drug User Fee Act that was due upon the filing of the tivozanib NDA on March 31, 2020, (iii) $1.7 million in connection with drug substance manufacturing prior to marketing approval of tivozanib and (iv) $3.3 million in connection with lower expenses for the TIVO-3 trial that was closed in the second half of 2021 following FDA approval of FOTIVDA on March 10, 2021. These decreases were partially offset by $8.7 million in total increases for costs incurred in the year ended December 31, 2021 that were not incurred in the same period in 2020, including (i) $6.1 million in connection with start-up activities for the TiNivo-2 Trial that was initiated in the first quarter of 2021, (ii) $2.1 million in connection with the medical affairs function in support of the commercial launch of FOTIVDA and (iii) $0.5 million in consulting and other fees.
Tivozanib expenses increased by $5.3 million, or 44%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. The $5.3 million increase was principally due to increases totaling $7.4 million, including: (i) $3.4 million related to the tivozanib NDA for RCC, including $0.5 million related to the completion of the NDA submission and ongoing support of the FDA’s review of the NDA and the $2.9 million application user fee pursuant to the PDUFA that was due upon the filing of the tivozanib NDA on March 31, 2020, (ii) $0.6 million related to the DEDUCTIVE trial that was initiated in September 2019, net of cost sharing with AstraZeneca, and (iii) $3.4 million in commercial launch-readiness initiatives incurred in 2020 that were not incurred in 2019, including $1.7 million related to the conduct of certain post-commercial launch drug supply manufacturing, $1.3 million related to the buildout of our medical affairs function and $0.4 million related to other commercial-launch readiness initiatives.
These increases were partially offset by decreases totaling $2.3 million, principally including: (i) $1.8 million related to lower expenses in connection with the TIVO-3 and TiNivo trials that were nearing completion and (ii) $0.5 million related to fluctuations in the year-to-year sublicense fees due to KKC in connection with a milestone we earned under our EUSA Agreement in 2019 that was not earned in 2020.
AV-380 expenses increased by $1.5 million, or 58%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, principally due to the conduct of the Phase 1 clinical trial of AV-380 in healthy subjects that was initiated in the first quarter of 2021 and the commencement of related clinical drug supply manufacturing, partially offset by a decrease in preclinical development costs incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020 that were not incurred in the same period in 2021.
AV-380 expenses decreased by $0.8 million, or 16%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019, principally due to the $2.3 million time-based milestone obligation due to St. Vincent’s under our license agreement with St. Vincent’s, in the first quarter of 2019 that was not incurred in 2020, partially offset by an increase of $1.5 million related to pre-clinical development costs incurred in 2020 that were not incurred in 2019.
Ficlatuzumab expenses increased by $2.5 million, or 209%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, principally related to the commencement of certain manufacturing activities in 2021 in support of planned clinical drug supply manufacturing in 2022 for a potential registrational clinical trial of ficlatuzumab in combination with cetuximab in patients with HPV negative R/M HNSCC patients in the first half of 2023, partially offset by costs incurred in the first quarter of 2020 that were not incurred in 2021 in connection with the discontinued CyFi-2 trial, net of cost sharing with Biodesix.
Ficlatuzumab expenses were flat in 2020 as compared to 2019. In March 2020, we decided to discontinue the CyFi-2 trial due to the urgent shift in priorities among clinical trial sites towards efforts to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, which had impacted the trial enrollment timeline and the feasibility of completing the study within the shelf-life of the then available ficlatuzumab clinical trial drug supply.
We anticipate that research and development expenses will increase in 2022, principally related to the enrollment of the TiNivo-2 Trial for the treatment of advanced refractory RCC, the manufacturing of ficlatuzumab clinical drug supply for a potential registrational clinical trial in HPV negative R/M HNSCC patients that we plan to initiate in the first half of 2023, a Phase 1b clinical trial in AV-380 in cancer patients that we plan to initiate in the second half of 2022 and the related manufacturing of AV-380 clinical drug supply, and co-funding pursuant to the NiKang Agreement for a Phase 2 clinical trial to evaluate tivozanib in combination with NKT2152 in ccRCC patients who have not responded to or relapsed from prior therapies. These increases in 2022 will be partially offset by lower costs, principally related to the TIVO-3 Trial that was closed in the second half of 2021 following the FDA’s approval of FOTIVDA on March 10, 2021. We anticipate that research and development expenses will be in the range of $60.0 million to $70.0 million in 2022 in support of our existing pipeline plans. The timing and nature of contemplated activities in 2022 will be conducted subject to the availability of sufficient financial resources.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (in thousands)
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $38.6 million, or 174%, to $60.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $22.2 million in the same period in 2020. The $38.6 million increase principally included: (i) $30.4 million in commercial launch initiatives incurred in the year ended December 31, 2021 that were not incurred in the same period in 2020, including $18.0 million in connection with compensation and recruiting costs related to the growth in our commercial infrastructure, including the hiring of the sales force, and $12.4 million in connection with external commercial-launch activities in marketing, market access and commercial operations, (ii) $4.2 million in other professional fees and (iii) $4.0 million in other compensation-related costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $11.0 million, or 98%, to $22.2 million in 2020 from $11.2 million in 2019. The $11.0 million increase was principally due to $11.2 million in total increases, including: (i) $8.5 million in commercial launch-readiness initiatives incurred in 2020 that were not incurred in 2019, including $3.1 million in compensation costs related to the growth in our commercial infrastructure and $5.4 million related to external commercial-launch readiness activities in marketing, market access and commercial operations, (ii) $2.3 million in other professional fees, and (iii) $0.4 million in other compensation-related costs. These increases were partially offset by $0.2 million in lower facility costs resulting from our corporate headquarters move in 2020 to 30 Winter Street in Boston, Massachusetts.
We anticipate that selling, general and administrative expenses associated with the commercialization of FOTIVDA, principally related to our sales force, our marketing, market access and commercial capabilities, and general and administrative support will increase in 2022, principally reflective of a full year of commercialization following the launch of FOTIVDA on March 22, 2021. We anticipate that selling, general and administrative expenses will be approximately $70.0 million, including approximately $50.0 million in commercial expenses and approximately $20.0 million in general and administrative expenses.
Change in Fair Value of Expired PIPE Warrant Liability (in thousands)
In May 2016, we issued PIPE warrants, or the PIPE Warrants, in connection with a private placement financing and recorded the warrants as a liability. The PIPE Warrants were exercisable for a period of five years from the date of issuance until their scheduled expiration on May 16, 2021. The PIPE Warrants were subject to revaluation at each balance sheet date and any changes in fair value were recorded as a non-cash gain or (loss) in our Statement of Operations as a component of other income (expense).
In the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an approximate non-cash gain of $0.2 million in our Statement of Operations attributable to the decrease in the fair value of the PIPE Warrant liability that resulted from the expiration of the PIPE Warrants on May 16, 2021.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an approximate non-cash gain of $4.9 million in our Statement of Operations attributable to the decrease in the fair value of the PIPE Warrant liability that resulted from a lower stock price of $5.77 on December 31, 2020 compared to the stock price of $6.20 on December 31, 2019, a decrease in our stock volatility rate and a shorter remaining term as the PIPE Warrants approach expiration in May 2021.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded an approximate non-cash gain of $11.6 million in our Statement of Operations attributable to the decrease in the fair value of the PIPE Warrant liability that principally resulted from a lower stock price of $6.20 on December 31, 2019 compared to the stock price of $16.00 on December 31, 2018.
Interest Expense, net (in thousands)
Interest expense, net increased by $2.4 million, or 152%, in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, principally due to higher loan balances under the 2020 Loan Amendment and 2021 Loan Amendment, as defined below, that were entered into with Hercules Capital Inc. and certain of its affiliates, or Hercules, on August 7, 2020 and February 1, 2021. respectively. See “Item 2. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources - Hercules Loan Facility” below for a description of the 2020 Loan Amendment and 2021 Loan Amendment.
Interest expense, net decreased by $0.2 million, or 12%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. This decrease was principally due to the decrease in interest expense resulting from the paydown of principal under our 2017 Loan Agreement with Hercules and a lower interest rate that ranged from 9.45% to 9.65% in 2020 as compared to the interest rate that ranged from 9.70% to 10.2% in 2019. Principal payments to Hercules resumed during the period from August 1, 2019 through August 1, 2020.
We anticipate that interest expense, net will increase in 2022 due to the $40.0 million loan balance as of December 31, 2021 and the extended interest-only period through March 2023 pursuant to the 2020 Loan Amendment and 2021 Loan Amendment with Hercules.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Hercules Loan Facility
On August 7, 2020, we entered into the 2020 Loan Amendment with Hercules. The 2020 Loan Amendment provided us with the 2020 Loan Facility, an additional term loan of up to $35.0 million in four tranches to be used to refinance outstanding loans under the 2017 Loan Agreement and for general working capital purposes through the commercial launch of FOTIVDA, subject to certain terms and conditions. The 2020 Loan Facility includes (i) $15.0 million in initial funding upon execution of the 2020 Loan Amendment to retire the outstanding balance of approximately $9.7 million under the 2017 Loan Agreement and to provide approximately $5.3 million in new loan funding, and (ii) up to $20.0 million in additional loan funding following FDA approval of FOTIVDA and our net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA, within certain time frames and subject to certain terms and conditions.
On February 1, 2021, we entered into the 2021 Loan Amendment with Hercules. The 2021 Loan Amendment increases the 2020 Loan Facility from up to $35.0 million to up to $45.0 million upon FDA approval of FOTIVDA. The 2021 Loan Amendment makes certain changes to the 2020 Loan Amendment, including, among other things, increasing the amount of Tranche Two funding for Performance Milestone I for FDA approval of FOTIVDA from $10.0 million to $20.0 million, thereby increasing the total amount of unfunded term loan commitments under the 2020 Loan Facility from $20.0 million to $30.0 million following FDA approval of FOTIVDA and our net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA, within certain time frames and subject to certain terms and conditions. On March 8, 2022, we entered into a Loan Amendment with Hercules, or the 2022 Loan Amendment. The 2022 Loan Amendment makes the $5.0 million Tranche Four funding available upon achieving $30.0 million in trailing three-month net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA by no later than December 15, 2022, instead of being available at the discretion of the Lenders by no later than June 30, 2022. For more information, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources -Hercules Loan Facility” below, as well as Note 6, “-Hercules Loan Facility” of the Notes to our consolidated financial statements, each included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Collaborations and License Agreements
Under our license agreement with KKC, we are required to pay tiered royalty payments on net sales we make of FOTIVDA in our North American territory, which range from the low to mid-teens as a percentage of net sales. We are also required to pay KKC 30% of certain amounts we receive from sublicensees, including upfront license fees, milestone payments and royalties, other than amounts we receive in respect of research and development funding or equity investments, subject to certain limitations. Also, under our license agreement with St. Vincent’s, we are required to make certain milestone payments upon the earlier of the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones or a specified date for the first indication, and upon the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones for the second and third indications. We are also obligated to pay Biogen a percentage of milestone payments received by us from future partnerships after March 28, 2016 and single digit royalty payments on net sales related to the sale of ErbB3 products, if any, up to a cumulative maximum amount of $50.0 million. In addition, we are obligated to pay Biodesix a low double digit royalty on future product sales and 25% of future licensing revenue (excluding contributions to research and development expenses), less approximately $2.5 million that Biodesix would be required to pay to us pursuant to the October 2016 amendment to the Biodesix Agreement. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate when or if we may be required to make other additional payments to KKC, St. Vincent’s, Biogen or Biodesix. For example, we are required to make future milestone payments to St. Vincent’s, up to an aggregate total of $14.4 million, upon the earlier of the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones or a specified date for the first indication and second indication, and upon the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones for the third indication, for licensed therapeutic products, some of which payments may be increased by a mid to high double digit percentage rate for milestone payments made after we grant any sublicense under the license agreement, depending on the sublicensed territory. For more information, see Note 6, “-Collaborations and License Agreements” of the Notes to our consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Winter Street Lease
On March 5, 2020, we entered into a sublease agreement for office space located at 30 Winter Street in Boston, Massachusetts, or the Winter Street Sublease. Under the terms of the Winter Street Sublease, we leased 10,158 square feet of office space for $47.00 per square foot, or approximately $0.5 million per year in base rent subject to certain operating expenses, taxes and annual base rent increases of approximately 3%. On November 17, 2021, we amended the Winter Street Sublease to reduce the square feet of office space from 10,158 square feet to 6,465 square feet. The amended Winter Street Sublease provided that (i) the security deposit of $0.3 million would be applied toward the remaining base rent payable to landlord to satisfy in full the base rent obligations through the expiration date of November 29, 2022 and (ii) the landlord would make renovations to improve the space. The term of the amended Winter Street Sublease remained the same and will continue through November 29, 2022.
Other Funding Commitments
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs for preclinical research studies and clinical trials. We have contracts with CROs for our DEDUCTIVE and TiNivo-2 trials, as well as our Phase 1b clinical trial of AV-380 in cancer patients. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice with no early termination fees. We also have a contract with a CMO for the manufacture tivozanib (FOTIVDA®) in the United States, which includes minimum annual purchase requirements in the range of $0.5 million to $1.4 million through 2028. In addition, we have a contract with a second CMO for the manufacture of clinical drug supply for ficlatuzumab and AV-380, for which we have manufacturing commitments in 2022 in the aggregate amount of approximately $9.0 million. Additionally, we have license fee obligations of up to $2.0 million due to a former CMO for ficlatuzumab drug manufacturing.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations to date primarily through private placements and public offerings of our common stock, license fees, milestone, royalty payments and research and development funding from strategic partners, loan proceeds and sales revenues of our first commercial product FOTIVDA in the United States. As of December 31, 2021 we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of approximately $87.3 million. See “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources -Liquidity and Going Concern” below and Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further discussion of our liquidity. Currently, our funds are invested in a United States government money market fund.
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Our operating activities used cash of $57.3 million, $38.0 million and $2.9 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in operations was principally due to our net loss adjusted for non-cash items and changes in working capital.
Our investing activities used cash of $16.9 million and $17.9 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019, respectively, and provided cash of $17.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, principally due to net changes in the purchases and maturities of marketable securities.
Our financing activities provided cash of $82.9 million, $52.3 million and $26.2 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we raised approximately $83.1 million in funding, including approximately $51.7 million in net proceeds from the sale of approximately 6.9 million shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering in March 2021, approximately $24.9 million in new loan funding pursuant to the 2020 Loan Amendment and 2021 Loan Amendment with Hercules, net of transaction costs, approximately $3.4 million in net proceeds from the sale of approximately 0.3 million shares of our common stock in March 2021 pursuant to our “at-the-market” sales agreement with SVB Leerink LLC, or SVB Leerink, which we refer to as the SVB Leerink Sales Agreement, and approximately $3.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of Offering Warrants. In July 2021, we paid approximately $0.8 million in an end-of-term loan payment pursuant to the December 2017 Loan Amendment with Hercules.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised approximately $52.2 million, including approximately $47.7 million in net proceeds from the sale of approximately 9.7 million shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering in June 2020 and approximately $5.1 million in new loan funding pursuant to the 2020 Loan Amendment with Hercules, net of transaction costs, and paid approximately $6.5 million in principal payments pursuant to our then December 2017 Loan Agreement with Hercules.
In 2019, we raised approximately $30.3 million in net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock, including $7.5 million in net proceeds from the sale of approximately 1.3 million shares of our common stock pursuant to the SVB Leerink Sales Agreement in February 2019 and approximately $22.8 million in net proceeds from the sale of approximately 2.2 million shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 2.5 million shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering in April 2019, offset in part by approximately $4.1 million in debt-related payments pursuant to our First Loan Agreement, including approximately $3.8 million in total principal payments during the period from August 2019 through December 2019 and a $0.3 million end-of-term fee in December 2019.
Hercules Loan Facility ($45 Million Loan Facility - $5 Million Committed Funding Remaining)
On May 28, 2010, the Company entered into a loan and security agreement, or the First Loan Agreement with Hercules. The First Loan Agreement was subsequently amended in March 2012, September 2014, May 2016 and amended and restated in December 2017, or the 2017 Loan Agreement.
On August 7, 2020, we entered into a first amendment to the 2017 Loan Agreement or the 2020 Loan Amendment, to provide us, subject to certain terms and conditions, with additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $35.0 million, or the 2020 Loan Facility, to be used to repay in full the 2017 Loan Agreement and for general working capital purposes. The 2020 Loan Facility is available to us in four tranches, the first of which, in the amount of $15.0 million, was made available to us immediately upon the closing of the 2020 Loan Amendment. We used the $15.0 million in proceeds of the first tranche as follows: approximately $9.7 million was used to repay the outstanding balance of the 2017 Loan Agreement in full, and approximately $5.3 million was used for general working capital purposes. In connection with the 2020 Loan Amendment, we incurred approximately $0.3 million in loan issuance costs paid directly to Hercules, which are accounted for as a loan discount. The 2020 Loan Amendment was accounted for as a loan modification in accordance with ASC 470-50.
The remaining $20.0 million of term loans is available to us under the 2020 Loan Facility subject to, among other terms and conditions, the achievement of the following milestones: (i) Tranche Two in the initial amount of $10.0 million was available through June 30, 2021 upon achieving Performance Milestone I for FDA approval of FOTIVDA, (ii) the third tranche, or Tranche Three, in the amount of $5.0 million, was initially available from July 1, 2021 through January 31, 2022 if we were to achieve $20.0 million in net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA, following FDA approval, by no later than December 31, 2021, or Performance Milestone II, and (iii) the fourth tranche, or Tranche Four, in the amount of $5.0 million, was initially available through June 30, 2022 upon the achievement of both Performance Milestone I and Performance Milestone II, and upon Hercules consent to the advancement of Tranche Four.
The 2020 Loan Amendment also amended the 2017 Loan Agreement by: (i) extending maturity of the loans from July 1, 2021 until September 1, 2023, which is extendable to September 1, 2024 upon our option if the Tranche Three funding has occurred, (ii) providing for an interest-only period beginning on the closing date of 2020 Loan Amendment and ending December 31, 2021, which period may be extended through September 30, 2022 provided we achieved Performance Milestone I, and further extendable through March 31, 2023 if the Tranche Three funding has occurred, and (iii) revising the interest rate to the greater of 9.65% and an amount equal to 9.65% plus the prime rate minus 3.25% (subject to a 15% cap). Principal payments were initially scheduled to commence on October 1, 2021, at the earliest, as described above. The interest rate as of December 31, 2021 was 9.65%.
Pursuant to the terms of the 2020 Loan Facility, principal will be repaid in equal monthly installments following the conclusion of the interest-only period. We may prepay all of the outstanding principal and accrued interest under the 2020 Loan Facility, subject to a prepayment charge up to 3.0% in the first year following the closing of the 2020 Loan Amendment, decreasing to 2.0% in year two and 1.0% in year three. We are obligated to make an end-of-term payment of (i) 6.95% of the aggregate amount of loan funding received under the Loan Agreement on the earlier of the maturity of the loans or the date on which we prepay the outstanding loan balance in full, and (ii) an approximate $0.8 million payment due on the earlier of July 1, 2021 or the date on which we prepay the outstanding loan balance in full. This payment was made on July 1, 2021.
The 2020 Loan Facility includes (i) a financial covenant that we maintain minimum unrestricted cash positions of $10.0 million through the date the Second Tranche funding is received, $15.0 million through the date the Third Tranche funding is received and $10.0 million thereafter through the maturity of the Loan Agreement, and (ii) an operating covenant that we achieve greater than or equal to 75% of our forecasted net product revenues from our sales of tivozanib over a six-month trailing period, as defined and measured on a monthly basis, commencing upon the earlier to occur of (x) the Third Tranche funding and (y) the month of April 2022. The 2020 Loan Facility also includes various other affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants to deliver certain financial reports; to maintain insurance coverage; and to
refrain from transferring assets, incurring additional indebtedness, engaging in mergers or acquisitions, paying dividends or making other distributions, making investments, creating liens, and suffering a change in control, in each case subject to certain exceptions.
On February 1, 2021, we entered into the 2021 Loan Amendment. The 2021 Loan Amendment increased the aggregate principal amount of loans available under the 2020 Loan Facility from up to $35.0 million to up to $45.0 million following FDA approval of FOTIVDA. The 2021 Loan Amendment also (i) increased Tranche Two funding upon achieving Performance Milestone I from $10.0 million to $20.0 million, (ii) increased the amount of net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA required for us to achieve Performance Milestone II from $20.0 million to $35.0 million, and changed the deadline for achieving Performance Milestone II from December 31, 2021 to April 1, 2022, and (iii) increased the amount of unrestricted cash required for us to satisfy the minimum financial covenant during the period between receiving Tranche Two funding and Tranche Three funding from $10.0 million to $15.0 million. In connection with the 2021 Loan Amendment, we incurred approximately $0.1 million in loan issuance costs paid directly to Hercules, which are accounted for as a loan discount.
On March 11, 2021, we completed the $20.0 million drawdown of Tranche Two funding under the 2021 Loan Amendment that was made available in connection with the achievement of Performance Milestone I upon FDA approval of FOTIVDA on March 10, 2021. The achievement of Performance Milestone I extended the interest-only period by twelve months from September 30, 2021 to September 30, 2022 and increased the amount of unrestricted cash required for us to satisfy the minimum financial covenant during the period between receiving Tranche Two funding and Tranche Three funding from $10.0 million to $15.0 million.
On December 22, 2021, we completed the $5.0 million drawdown of Tranche Three funding under the 2021 Loan Amendment that was made available in connection with the achievement of Performance Milestone II upon the achievement of $35.0 million in net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA. The achievement of Performance Milestone II extended the interest-only period by six months from September 30, 2022 to March 31, 2023, extended the loan maturity by one year from September 1, 2023 to September 1, 2024 and decreased the amount of unrestricted cash required for us to satisfy the minimum financial covenant from $15.0 million to $10.0 million thereafter through the maturity of the Loan Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, the total principal balance was $40.0 million, principal payments are scheduled to commence on April 1, 2023 and the corresponding end-of-term payments under the 2020 Loan Facility, in the aggregate amount of approximately $2.8 million, are due upon the current loan maturity date of September 1, 2024. As of December 31, 2021, $5.0 million remains available to us in committed funding under the 2020 Loan Facility for Tranche Four funding that was at our election and subject to the consent of Hercules. The unamortized discount to be recognized over the remainder of the loan period was approximately $2.0 million and $1.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Per the 2017 Loan Agreement, the end-of-term payment of approximately $0.8 million was due and paid on July 1, 2021.
On March 8, 2022, we entered into the 2022 Loan Amendment. The 2022 Loan Amendment (i) changed the operating covenant to decrease the achievement of greater than or equal to 75% of our forecasted net product revenues from our sales of tivozanib over a six-month trailing period to 65%, as defined and measured on a monthly basis, and extended the month of commencement from April 2022 to June 2022, (ii) added a cash waiver, at our election, in the event our actual net product revenues from our sales of tivozanib over a six-month trailing period are below the monthly minimum operating covenant of 65%, such that our unrestricted cash position is equal to or greater than the then total outstanding principal under the Loan Agreement for each day of such month, (iii) changed Tranche Four funding, in the amount of $5.0 million, that was subject to the consent of Hercules to the achievement of $30.0 million in net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA over a trailing three-month period, or Performance Milestone III, and extended the availability of Tranche Four funding from June 30, 2022 to December 15, 2022, and (iv) increased the amount of unrestricted cash required for us to satisfy the minimum financial covenant from $10.0 million to $15.0 million upon the earlier of receiving the Tranche Four funding or January 1, 2023, through the maturity of the Loan Agreement.
Obligations under the 2020 Loan Facility are secured by substantially all of our assets, excluding intellectual property. The 2020 Loan Facility provides that certain events shall constitute a default by us, including failure by us to pay amounts under the 2020 Loan Facility when due; breach or default in the performance of any covenant under the 2020 Loan Facility by us, subject to certain cure periods; our insolvency and certain other bankruptcy proceedings involving us; our default of obligations involving indebtedness in excess of $0.5 million; and the occurrence of an event or circumstance that would have a material adverse effect upon our business.
We have determined that the risk of subjective acceleration under the material adverse events clause included in the 2020 Loan Facility is remote and, therefore, have classified the outstanding principal amount in long-term liabilities based on the timing of scheduled principal payments. As of December 31, 2021, we are in compliance with all of the loan covenants and, through the date of this filing, the lenders have not asserted any events of default under the 2020 Loan Facility. We do not believe that there has been a material adverse change as defined in the 2020 Loan Facility.
Public Offering - March 2021
On March 26, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 6,900,000 shares of our common stock, including the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase an additional 900,000 shares, at the public offering price of $8.00 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $55.2 million. The net offering proceeds to us were approximately $51.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
Public Offering - June 2020
On June 19, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 9,725,000 shares of our common stock, including the partial exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase an additional 1,225,000 shares, at the public offering price of $5.25 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $51.1 million. Three stockholders each beneficially holding more than 5% of our voting securities, including an entity affiliated with New Enterprise Associates and two other stockholders purchased an aggregate of 4,503,571 shares in this offering at the same public offering price per share as the other investors. At such time, entities affiliated with New Enterprise Associates (collectively) beneficially held more than 5% of our voting securities. The net offering proceeds to us were approximately $47.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink ($22 Million Availability Future Stock Sales)
In February 2018, we entered into the SVB Leerink Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink pursuant to which we may issue and sell shares of our common stock from time to time up to an aggregate amount of $50.0 million, at our option, through SVB Leerink as our sales agent, with any sales of common stock through SVB Leerink being made by any method that is deemed an “at-the-market offering” as defined in Rule 415 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or in other transactions. Any such shares of common stock will be sold pursuant to a prospectus supplement filed under the 2020 Shelf, as defined below. We agreed to pay SVB Leerink a commission of up to 3% of the gross proceeds of any sales of common stock pursuant to the SVB Leerink Sales Agreement. We sold 470,777 shares, 1,251,555 shares, 1,070,175 shares and 330,688 shares pursuant to the SVB Leerink Sales Agreement, resulting in approximate proceeds net of commissions of $10.3 million, $7.5 million, $5.9 million and $3.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2018, February 2019, November 2020 and March 2021, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $22.2 million was available for issuance in connection with future stock sales pursuant to the SVB Leerink Sales Agreement.
Universal Shelf Registration Statement
On November 9, 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which covers the offering, issuance and sale of up to $300.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units, or the 2020 Shelf. The 2020 Shelf (File No. 333-249982) was declared effective by the SEC on November 18, 2020 and was filed to replace our then existing shelf registration statement, which was terminated. As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $213.0 million available for future issuance of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units.
Expired Offering Warrants from April 2019 Public Offering - Expiration Date of April 8, 2021
In April 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of 2,173,913 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 2,500,000 shares of our common stock, which we refer to herein as the Offering Warrants, including warrants to purchase an aggregate of 326,086 shares of our common stock sold pursuant to the underwriter’s partial exercise of its overallotment option, at the public offering price of $11.40 per share and $0.10 per warrant for gross proceeds of approximately $25.0 million. The Offering Warrants were immediately exercisable upon issuance at an exercise price of $12.50 per share, subject to adjustment in certain circumstances, and expired two years from the date of issuance on April 8, 2021. Any Offering Warrants that had not been exercised for cash prior to their expiration were to be automatically exercised via cashless exercise on the expiration date. The shares and warrants were
issued separately and were separately transferable. An entity affiliated with New Enterprise Associates purchased 434,782 shares and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 434,782 shares in this offering at the same public offering price per share as the other investors. At such time, entities affiliated with New Enterprise Associates (collectively) beneficially held more than 5% of our voting securities. The net offering proceeds to us were approximately $22.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
In March 2021, the Offering Warrants exercisable for 247,391 shares of common stock had been exercised, for approximately $3.1 million in cash proceeds. On April 8, 2021, all of the remaining 2,252,609 Offering Warrants expired and no shares of our common stock were issued via automatic cashless exercises of unexercised Offering Warrants on the date of expiration as the $12.50 exercise price was greater than our closing stock price of $7.01 on April 8, 2021.
Expired Offering Warrants from May 2016 Private Placement - Expiration Date of May 16, 2021
In May 2016, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with a select group of qualified institutional buyers, institutional accredited investors and accredited investors pursuant to which we sold 1,764,242 units, at a price of $9.65 per unit, for gross proceeds of approximately $17.0 million. Each unit consisted of one share of our common stock and a PIPE Warrant to purchase one share of our common stock. The PIPE Warrants had an exercise price of $10.00 per share and expired five years from the date of issuance on May 16, 2021. Certain of our directors and executive officers purchased an aggregate of 54,402 units in this offering at the same price as the other investors. The net offering proceeds to us were approximately $15.4 million after deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us. PIPE Warrants exercisable for 80,309 shares of common stock had been exercised for approximately $0.8 million in cash proceeds and all of the 1,683,933 PIPE Warrants that remained outstanding on May 16, 2021 expired.
Liquidity and Going Concern
We have devoted substantially all of our resources to our drug development efforts, comprised of research and development, manufacturing, conducting clinical trials for our product candidates, protecting our intellectual property and general and administrative functions relating to these operations. Our future success is dependent on our ability to commercialize FOTIVDA in the United States and develop our clinical stage assets and, ultimately, upon our ability to create shareholder value.
On March 10, 2021, the FDA approved FOTIVDA in the United States for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory advanced RCC following two or more prior systemic therapies. We anticipate that we will continue to incur significant operating expenses for the foreseeable future as we commercialize FOTIVDA in the United States and continue our planned development activities for our clinical and preclinical stage assets. Our future product revenues will depend upon the size of markets in which FOTIVDA, and any future products, have received approval, and our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, reimbursement from third-party payers and adequate market share for FOTIVDA and any future products in those markets. The likelihood of our long-term success must be considered in light of the expenses, difficulties and potential delays that may be encountered in the development and commercialization of new pharmaceutical products, competitive factors in the marketplace and the complex regulatory environment in which we operate. Absent the realization of sufficient revenues from product sales to support our cost structure, we may never attain or sustain profitability. We may require substantial additional funding to continue to advance our pipeline of clinical and preclinical stage assets, and the timing and nature of these activities will be conducted subject to the availability of sufficient financial resources, principally product sales of FOTIVDA in the United States.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received an aggregate of approximately $116.6 million in funding, including approximately $58.2 million in equity funding, approximately $24.9 million in net loan funding from Hercules, approximately $31.7 million in cash receipts from the product sales of FOTIVDA in the United States and approximately $1.8 million in partnership cost sharing payments.
The approximate $58.2 million in equity funding included the $51.7 million in net proceeds from the sale of approximately 6.9 million shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering in March 2021, approximately $3.4 million in net proceeds from the sale of approximately 0.3 million shares of our common stock in March 2021 pursuant to our SVB Leerink Sales Agreement, and approximately $3.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of Offering Warrants.
The approximate $24.9 million in net loan funding from Hercules included $25.0 million in new loan funding pursuant to the 2020 Loan Amendment and 2021 Loan Amendment upon FDA approval of FOTIVDA and upon
achievement of $35.0 million in net product revenues from sales of FOTIVDA, net of payments of approximately $0.1 million in transaction costs related to the 2021 Loan Amendment.
We believe that our $87.3 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, along with net product revenues from product sales of FOTIVDA in the United States, would enable us to maintain our current operations for more than 12 months following the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In 2022, we anticipate FOTIVDA net product revenues will be in the range of $100.0 million to $110.0 million. In 2022, we anticipate that research and development expenses will be in the range of $60.0 million to $70.0 million and selling, general and administrative expenses will be approximately $70.0 million, including approximately $50.0 million in commercial expenses and approximately $20.0 million in general and administrative expenses. We anticipate that gross margins will continue to be in the mid-to-high 80th percentile in 2022.
However, there are numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, including, without limitation, risks related to our ability to generate product revenue from sales of FOTIVDA in the United States, which became commercially available in the United States on March 22, 2021. Accordingly, our future funding requirements may vary from our current expectations and will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the cost of commercialization activities of FOTIVDA in the United States and any of our product candidates that may be approved for sale, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
•the cost of manufacturing FOTIVDA in the United States, our product candidates and any additional products we may successfully commercialize;
•the impact of COVID-19 on our operations, business and prospects;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic partnerships, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•the number and characteristics of the product candidates we pursue;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our product candidates, and of conducting preclinical and clinical trials;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, completing our clinical trials and obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
•the absence of any breach, acceleration event or event of default under our 2020 Loan Facility, or under any other agreements with third parties;
•the cost and outcome of any legal actions against us;
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, tivozanib and our future products, if any; and
•general economic, industry and market conditions.
We may require substantial additional funding to continue to advance our pipeline of clinical and preclinical stage assets. We may seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain additional credit facilities. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities may result in additional dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities or preferred stock or through additional credit facilities, these securities and/or the loans under credit facilities could provide for rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Additional funds may not be available when we need them, on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. For example, we may never achieve the milestone specified in the 2020 Loan Facility that would allow us to access the remaining $5.0 million in available credit. We also expect to seek additional funds through arrangements with collaborators, licensees or other third parties. These arrangements would generally require us to relinquish or encumber rights to some of our technologies or product candidates, and we may not be able to enter into such arrangements on acceptable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise substantial additional funding to advance our pipeline of clinical and preclinical stage assets, whether on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all or if we were to default under the 2020 Loan
Facility, and Hercules accelerated the then remaining principal payments and fees due under the loan, then we may be required to:
•delay, limit, reduce or terminate our clinical trials, preclinical studies or other development activities for one or more of our product candidates; and/or
•delay, limit, reduce or terminate our establishment of sales and marketing capabilities or other activities that may be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved.