ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk factors.”
Overview
We are a commercial-stage medical device company that designs, manufactures and sells real-time image-guided, minimally invasive catheter-based systems that are used by physicians to treat patients with peripheral artery disease, or PAD. Patients with PAD have a build-up of plaque in the arteries that supply blood to areas away from the heart, particularly the pelvis and legs. Our mission is to significantly improve the treatment of vascular disease through the introduction of products based on our Lumivascular platform, the only intravascular real-time image-guided system available in this market.
We design, manufacture, and sell a suite of products in the United States and select international markets. We are located in Redwood City, California. Our current Lumivascular platform consists of products including our Lightbox real-time imaging console, the Ocelot family of catheters, which are image-guided catheters designed to allow physicians to penetrate a total blockage in an artery, known as a chronic total occlusion, or CTO, and the Pantheris family of catheters, our image-guided atherectomy family of catheters which is designed to allow physicians to precisely remove arterial plaque in PAD patients.
We received CE Marking for our original Ocelot product in September 2011 and received from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, 510(k) clearance in November 2012. We received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for commercialization of Pantheris in October 2015. We received an additional 510(k) clearance for an enhanced version of Pantheris in March 2016 and commenced sales of Pantheris in the United States and select European countries promptly thereafter. In May 2018, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for our current next-generation version of Pantheris. In April 2019, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for our Pantheris SV, a version of Pantheris targeting smaller vessels, and commenced sales in July 2019. In September 2020, we received 510(k) clearance of Tigereye, a next-generation CTO crossing system utilizing Avinger’s proprietary image-guided technology platform. Tigereye is a product line extension of Avinger’s Ocelot family of image-guided CTO crossing catheters. In January 2022, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for our Lightbox 3 imaging console, a version of our Lightbox presenting significant reductions in size, weight and cost in comparison to the incumbent version.
Current treatments for PAD, including bypass surgery, can be costly and may result in complications, high levels of post-surgery pain, and lengthy hospital stays and recovery times. Minimally invasive, or endovascular, treatments for PAD include stenting, angioplasty, and atherectomy, which is the use of a catheter-based device for the removal of plaque. These treatments all have limitations in their safety or efficacy profiles and frequently result in recurrence of the disease, also known as restenosis. We believe one of the main contributing factors to high restenosis rates for PAD patients treated with endovascular technologies is the amount of vascular injury that occurs during an intervention. Specifically, these treatments often disrupt the membrane between the outermost layers of the artery, which is referred to as the external elastic lamina, or EEL.
We believe our Lumivascular platform is the only technology that offers real-time visualization of the inside of the artery during PAD treatment through the use of optical coherence tomography, or OCT, a high resolution, light-based, radiation-free imaging technology. Our Lumivascular platform provides physicians with real-time OCT images from the inside of an artery, and we believe Ocelot and Pantheris are the first products to offer intravascular visualization during CTO crossing and atherectomy, respectively. We believe this approach will significantly improve patient outcomes by providing physicians with a clearer picture of the artery using radiation-free image guidance during treatment, enabling them to better differentiate between plaque and healthy arterial structures. Our Lumivascular platform is designed to improve patient safety by enabling physicians to direct treatment towards the plaque, while avoiding damage to healthy portions of the artery.
During the first quarter of 2015, we completed enrollment of patients in VISION, a clinical trial designed to support our August 2015 510(k) submission to the FDA for our Pantheris atherectomy device. VISION was designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of Pantheris to perform atherectomy using intravascular imaging and successfully achieved all primary and secondary safety and efficacy endpoints. We believe the data from VISION allows us to demonstrate that avoiding damage to healthy arterial structures, and in particular disruption of the external elastic lamina, which is the membrane between the outermost layers of the artery, reduces the likelihood of restenosis, or re-narrowing, of the diseased artery. Although the original VISION study protocol was not designed to follow patients beyond six months, we worked with 18 of the VISION sites to re-solicit consent from previous clinical trial patients in order for them to evaluate patient outcomes through 12 and 24 months following initial treatment. Data collection for the remaining patients from participating sites was completed in May 2017, and we released the final 12- and 24-month results for a total of 89 patients in July 2017.
During the fourth quarter of 2017, we began enrolling patients in INSIGHT, a clinical trial designed to support a submission to the FDA to expand the indication for our Pantheris atherectomy device to include in-stent restenosis. Patient enrollment began in October 2017 and was completed in July 2021. Patient outcomes are being evaluated at thirty days, six months and one year following treatment. In November 2021, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for a new clinical indication for treating in-stent restenosis with Pantheris using the data collected and analyzed from INSIGHT. We expect this will expand our addressable market for Pantheris to include a high-incidence disease state for which there are few available indicated treatment options.
We focus our direct sales force, marketing efforts and promotional activities on interventional cardiologists, vascular surgeons and interventional radiologists. We also work on developing strong relationships with physicians and hospitals that we have identified as key opinion leaders. Although our sales and marketing efforts are directed at these physicians because they are the primary users of our technology, we consider the hospitals and medical centers where the procedure is performed to be our customers, as they typically are responsible for purchasing our products. We are designing additional future products to be compatible with our Lumivascular platform, which we expect to enhance the value proposition for hospitals to invest in our technology. Pantheris qualifies for existing reimbursement codes currently utilized by other atherectomy products, further facilitating adoption of our products.
We have assembled a team with extensive medical device development and commercialization experience in both start-up and large, multi-national medical device companies. We assemble all of our products at our manufacturing facility but certain critical processes, such as coating and sterilization, are performed by outside vendors. We expect our current manufacturing facility in California, will be sufficient through at least 2022. We generated revenues of $9.1 million in 2019 and $8.8 million in 2020 and $10.1 million in 2021. The decline in revenue in 2020 was primarily due to the adverse effects of COVID-19 on our customers as hospitals deferred elective procedures.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Update
As a result of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a significant decline in sales in the second quarter of 2020, particularly as individuals, as well as hospitals and other medical providers, deferred elective procedures in response to COVID-19. Starting in the third quarter of 2020, we experienced a rebound of sales as practitioners began to once again perform elective procedures. At present, a majority of jurisdictions have eased or are in the process of lifting restrictions on performing elective procedures, we cannot be certain that other jurisdictions in the United States will do so in the near future. Some jurisdictions have experienced and continue to experience a resurgence in COVID-19 cases, which has prompted certain hospitals and other medical providers in such areas to again defer elective procedures or further prolong or reinstate existing restrictions on such procedures. If other jurisdictions experience a resurgence in COVID-19 cases, these jurisdictions may also prolong restrictions on elective procedures. This situation has created a significant amount of volatility in the medical industry which makes future developments and results difficult to predict. While sales during 2021 increased in comparison to 2020, we believe COVID-19 has had and will continue to have an adverse effect on our ability to generate sales due to the fluctuating and unpredictable levels of capacity medical providers have to perform procedures that require the use of our products. Consequently, it is unclear whether any reduction in sales from levels experienced prior to COVID-19 is temporary and whether such sales may be recoverable in the future. In addition, we have experienced disruptions in our manufacturing and supply chain, as well as delays in site initiation and patient enrollment for our clinical studies. If we are unable to successfully complete these or other clinical studies, our business and results of operations could be harmed.
During 2020, we undertook actions to manage our available cash and other resources to help mitigate the effects of COVID-19 on our business, including by adjusting production to match demand for our products and reducing discretionary costs. For example, during the second quarter of 2020, we reduced base salaries for all of our non-manufacturing employees by 20% and reduction of hours worked by our manufacturing workers by 20%. Salaries and hours worked returned to prior levels starting in the third quarter of 2020. However, the COVID-19 pandemic and responses thereto have resulted in reduced consumer and investor confidence, instability in the credit and financial markets, volatile corporate profits, and reduced business and consumer spending, which could increase the cost of capital and/or limit the availability of capital to us in the future. These and other factors could adversely affect our ability to effectively manage our available cash and other resources.
Nasdaq Delisting Notice
On September 22, 2021, we received a letter from the Listing Qualifications Department (the “Staff”) of The Nasdaq Stock Market, LLC (“Nasdaq”) notifying the Company that the Company was not in compliance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2) (the “Minimum Bid Price Requirement”), as the minimum bid price for the Company’s listed securities was less than $1.00 for the previous 30 consecutive business days. We had a period of 180 calendar days, or until March 21, 2022, to regain compliance with the rule referred to in this paragraph. To regain compliance, the bid price of our common stock must close at $1 or more for a minimum of ten consecutive business days. The notice has no present impact on the listing of our securities on Nasdaq. On March 14, 2022, we effected a 1-for-20 reverse stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock. However, there is no guarantee that such reverse stock split will result in the bid price of our common stock closing at $1 or more for the required ten consecutive business days.
We have not yet regained compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), we provided written notice to Nasdaq requesting an additional 180 calendar days to cure the deficiency on March 17, 2022, but have not yet received a response.
In the event that we do not regain compliance with the Nasdaq Listing Rules prior to the expiration of the compliance period, we will receive written notification that its securities are subject to delisting. At that time, we may appeal the delisting determination to a hearings panel pursuant to the procedures set forth in the applicable Nasdaq Listing Rules. We intend to actively monitor the bid price of our common stock and will consider available options to resolve the deficiency and regain compliance with the Nasdaq Listing Rules, including conducting a reverse stock split.
Global Supply Chain
We are closely monitoring the impacts of COVID-19 and general economic conditions on global supply chain, manufacturing, and logistics operations. As inflationary pressures increase, we anticipate that our production and operating costs may similarly increase, including costs and availability of materials and labor. In addition, COVID-19 and other events, including port closures or labor shortages, have resulted in manufacturing and shipping constraints generally. While we have had sufficient inventory on-hand to meet our production requirements and customer demand, we have experienced some constraints with respect to the availability of certain materials and extended lead times from certain key suppliers. We have also experienced some delays in shipping products to our customers. Any significant delay or interruption in our supply chain could impair our ability to meet the demands of our customers and could harm our business.
Reverse Stock Split
On March 11, 2022, our Board of Directors approved an amendment to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation to effect a 1-for-20 reverse stock split of our issued and outstanding common stock. The reverse stock split became effective on March 14, 2022. The par value of the common stock and preferred stock was not adjusted as a result of the reverse stock split. All common stock, stock options, and restricted stock units, and per share amounts in the financial statements have been retroactively adjusted for all periods presented to give effect to the reverse stock splits.
Financing
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net loss and comprehensive loss was $17.4 million and $19.0 million, respectively. We have not been profitable since inception, and as of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $384.8 million. Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through private and public placements of our preferred and common securities and, to a lesser extent, debt financing arrangements.
In September 2015, we entered into a Term Loan Agreement, or Loan Agreement, with CRG Partners III L.P. and certain of its affiliated funds, collectively CRG, under which we were able to borrow up to $50.0 million on or before March 29, 2017, subject to certain terms and conditions. We borrowed $30.0 million on September 22, 2015 and an additional $10.0 million on June 15, 2016 under the Loan Agreement. Contemporaneously with the execution of the Loan Agreement, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with CRG, pursuant to which CRG purchased 44 shares of our common stock on September 22, 2015 at a price of $111,928 per share, which represents the 10-day average of closing prices of our common stock ending on September 21, 2015. Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, we filed a registration statement covering the resale of the shares sold to CRG and must comply with certain affirmative covenants during the time that such registration statement remains in effect.
On February 14, 2018, we entered into a Series A preferred stock Purchase Agreement (the “Series A Purchase Agreement”) with CRG, pursuant to which it agreed to convert $38.0 million of the outstanding principal amount of its senior secured term loan (plus the back-end fee and prepayment premium applicable thereto) under the Loan Agreement into a newly authorized Series A preferred stock. As discussed in the section of this report titled “Dividend Policy,” the holders of Series A preferred stock are entitled to receive annual accruing dividends at a rate of 8%, payable in additional shares of Series A preferred stock or cash, at our option. The shares of Series A preferred stock have no voting rights and rank senior to all other classes and series of the Company’s equity in terms of repayment and certain other rights.
We have entered into several amendments to the Term Loan Agreement (the “Amendments”) with CRG since September 2015, the most recent of which, was entered into on January 22, 2021. The Amendments, among other things: (1) extended the interest-only period through December 31, 2023; (2) extended the period during which we may elect to pay a portion of interest in payment-in-kind, or PIK, interest payments through December 31, 2023 so long as no default has occurred and is continuing; (3) permitted us to make our entire interest payments in PIK interest payments for through December 31, 2023 so long as no default has occurred and is continuing; (4) extended the maturity date to December 31, 2025; (5) reduced the minimum liquidity requirement to $3.5 million at all times; (6) eliminated the minimum revenue covenant for 2018, 2019 and 2020; (7) reduced the minimum revenue covenant to $8 million for 2021, $10 million for 2022; (8) added minimum revenue covenants for of $12 million for 2023, $14.5 million for 2024 and $17 million for 2025; (9) changed the date under the on-going stand-alone representation regarding no “Material Adverse Change” to December 31, 2020; (10) amended the on-going stand-alone representation and stand-alone event of default regarding Material Adverse Change such that any adverse change in or effect upon the revenue of us and our subsidiaries due to the outbreak of COVID-19 will not constitute a Material Adverse Change; and (11) provided CRG with board observer rights.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenues
All of our revenues are currently derived from sales of our various PAD catheters in the United States and select international markets, Lightbox consoles, and related services. We expect our revenues to increase in 2022 due to the availability of our Tigereye product launch in late 2020 and easing of restrictions on elective procedures due to the diminishing impact of COVID-19. For the year ended December 31, 2021, there was one customer that represented 10% of revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no customers that represented 10% or more of revenues.
Revenues may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to a variety of factors including capital equipment purchasing patterns that are typically increased towards the end of the calendar year and decreased in the first quarter. In addition, during the first quarter, our results can be harmed by adverse weather and by resetting of annual patient healthcare insurance plan deductibles, both of which may cause patients to delay elective procedures. In the third quarter, the number of elective procedures nationwide is historically lower than other quarters throughout the year, which we believe is primarily attributable to the summer vacations of physicians and their patients. Additionally, we believe COVID-19 has had and will continue to have an adverse effect on our ability to generate sales due to the fluctuating and unpredictable levels of capacity medical providers have to perform procedures that require the use of our products.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues consists primarily of costs related to manufacturing overhead, materials and direct labor. We expense all warranty costs and inventory provisions as cost of revenues. We periodically write-down inventory for estimated excess, obsolete and non-sellable inventories based on assumptions about future demand, past usage, changes to manufacturing processes and overall market conditions. A significant portion of our cost of revenues currently consists of manufacturing overhead costs. These overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, material procurement, inventory control, facilities, equipment and operations supervision and management. We expect overhead costs as a percentage of revenues to become less significant as our production volume increases. Cost of revenues also includes depreciation expense for production equipment, depreciation and related maintenance expense for placed Lightboxes held by customers and certain direct costs such as those incurred for shipping our products.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenues. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily production volumes, manufacturing costs, product yields, headcount, charges for excess and obsolete inventories and cost-reduction strategies. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which we believe will reduce costs and increase our gross margin. In the future, we may seek to manufacture certain of our products outside the United States to further reduce costs. Our gross margin will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we continue to introduce new products and sales channels, and as we adopt new manufacturing processes and technologies.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of engineering, product development, clinical and regulatory affairs, consulting services, materials, depreciation and other costs associated with products and technologies in development. These expenses include employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, supplies, materials, quality assurance expenses allocated to R&D programs, consulting, related travel expenses and facilities expenses. Clinical expenses include clinical trial design, clinical site reimbursement, data management, travel expenses and the cost of manufacturing products for clinical trials. We expect R&D expenses to vary over time depending on the level and timing of our new product development efforts, as well as our clinical development, clinical trial and other related activities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist primarily of compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation, selling and marketing functions, physician education programs, business development, finance, information technology and human resource functions. Other SG&A expenses include commissions, training, travel expenses, educational and promotional activities, marketing initiatives, market research and analysis, conferences and trade shows, professional services fees, including legal, audit and tax fees, insurance costs and general corporate expenses. We expect SG&A expenses to increase as we expand our commercial efforts.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest incurred on our outstanding indebtedness and non-cash interest related to the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs associated with our various debt agreements.
Other Income, net
Other income, net primarily consists of gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of foreign exchange transactions and other miscellaneous income and expenses.
Results of Operations (in thousands):
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues.
Revenues increased $1.4 million, or 16%, to $10.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increased revenues reflect the impact of the commercial release of our Tigereye product in January 2021 and the rebounding of sales from COVID-19 as practitioners once again started to perform elective surgical procedures in certain jurisdictions. As mentioned previously, we have experienced fluctuating demand resulting from uncertainties due to the impact of COVID-19 on capacity limitations in hospitals. However, the capacity limitations experienced during the year ended December 31, 2021 were not as pervasive, and haven’t had as profound an impact on revenues, in comparison to the prior fiscal year. We anticipate that COVID-19 could continue to impact hospital capacities, and related demand for our products, for the foreseeable future.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin.
Cost of revenues increased $0.6 million, or 9%, to $6.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to the increase in revenues. Stock-based compensation expense within cost of revenues totaled $0.1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 34% compared to 30% in the prior year. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to the rebound of revenues from the significant decline experienced during the three months ended June 30, 2020 due to COVID-19 and the economies of scale experienced in 2021 relating to increased levels of production.
Research and Development Expenses.
R&D expenses increased $0.2 million or 4%, to $5.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is primarily due to increases in compensation expense resulting from the cessation of cost reduction measures taken due to COVID-19 in the third quarter of 2020 and higher project spending for next generation products such as Lightbox 3. Stock-based compensation expense within R&D totaled $0.3 million and $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect R&D expense to remain flat.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses.
SG&A expenses increased $1.3 million, or 9%, to $15.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily due to increases in compensation expense resulting from the cessation of cost reduction measures taken due to COVID-19 in the third quarter of 2020 and increased variable compensation resulting from the rebounding of sales as practitioners have once again started to perform elective surgical procedures. Stock-based compensation expense within SG&A totaled $0.6 million and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest Expense, net.
Interest expense, net is comprised of interest expense net of interest income. Interest expense remained flat compared to the prior year primarily due to the amendment of the CRG loan, pursuant to which we extended the maturity date of the loan thereby resulting in lesser interest expense in the near term. This was partially offset by lower interest income as compared to the prior year, due to the decline in money market interest rates during the period.
Other income, net.
Other income, net primarily consists of gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of foreign exchange transactions and other miscellaneous income and expenses. Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $2.3 million in comparison to the prior year as the PPP loan was fully forgiven resulting in a gain on extinguishment of that debt. Both periods included remeasurement gains and losses from foreign exchange transactions which are typically a small percentage of transaction volume, usually resulting in nominal changes between periods.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $19.5 million and an accumulated deficit of $384.8 million, compared to cash and cash equivalents of $22.2 million and an accumulated deficit of $367.3 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $19.5 million at December 31, 2021, together with the approximately $6.7 million net proceeds from the January 2022 equity financing (see Equity Financings below), expected revenues, debt and financing activities and funds from operations will be sufficient to allow us to fund our current operations through the second quarter of 2023.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through net proceeds from the issuance of our preferred stock and debt financings, our “at-the-market” program, our initial public offering, or IPO, our follow-on public offerings and warrant issuances. We do not know when or if our operations will generate sufficient cash to fund our ongoing operations. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any additional debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders and require significant debt service payments, which divert resources from other activities. Additional financing may not be available at all, or if available, may not be in amounts or on terms acceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to delay the development, commercialization and marketing of our products and we may be required to significantly scale back our business and operations.
In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and responses thereto have resulted in reduced consumer and investor confidence, instability in the credit and financial markets, volatile corporate profits, restrictions on elective medical procedures, and reduced business and consumer spending, which could increase the cost of capital and/or limit the availability of capital to us. While we have taken certain actions to manage our available cash and other resources to mitigate the effects of COVID-19 on our business, there can be no assurance that such strategies will be successful in mitigating the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity and capital resources.
Equity Financings
On January 31, 2020, we completed a public offering of 321,429 shares of common stock at an offering price of $14.00 per share. As a result, we received net proceeds of approximately $3.9 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses. Due to anti-dilution provisions, the conversion price of the outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock, which was issued in our February 2018 offering, was reduced to $14.00 per share.
On April 30, 2020, we completed a public offering of 630,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $5.00 per share. On May 6, 2020, we issued an additional 94,500 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $3.0 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses. Due to anti-dilution provisions, the conversion price of the outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock, which was issued in our February 2018 offering, was reduced to $5.00 per share.
On June 26, 2020, we completed a public offering of 1,000,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $5.40 per share. On July 9, 2020, we issued an additional 150,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering resulting in $0.7 million of additional net proceeds. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $5.5 million including the overallotment option and after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On August 6, 2020, under our universal shelf registration statement filed on March 7, 2019 (the “Shelf Registration Statement,”), we completed a public offering of 789,474 shares of common stock at an offering price of $7.60 per share. On August 11, 2020, we issued an additional 118,421 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.2 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On August 25, 2020, under the Shelf Registration Statement, we completed a public offering of 553,192 shares of common stock at an offering price of $9.40 per share. On September 1, 2020, we issued an additional 50,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $5.1 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On February 2, 2021, under the Shelf Registration Statement, we completed a bought deal offering of 500,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $28.80 per share. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $13.0 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
January 2022 Offering
On January 14, 2022, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with several institutional investors pursuant to which the Company agreed to sell and issue, in a registered direct offering (“January 2022 offering”), an aggregate of 7,600 shares of the Company’s Series D Convertible Preferred Stock, par value of $0.001 per share, at an offering price of $1,000 per share. Concurrently, the Company agreed to issue to these investors warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 807,500 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Common Warrants”). As a result, the Company received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.7 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
In connection with the January 2022 offering and in accordance with the securities purchase agreement, we held a special meeting of stockholders on March 11, 2022 to consider a proposal (the “Proposal”) to amend to the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, as amended (the “Charter”) to effect a reverse split of the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock at a ratio between 1-for-5 and 1-for-20 (the “Reverse Split Amendment”). Our stockholders approved the Reverse Split Amendment at the special meeting. On March 11, 2022, following receipt of stockholder approval, our Board of Directors approved a reverse split ratio of 1-for-20 and we filed an amendment to our Charter to effect such reverse stock split, effective as of 5:00 pm Eastern Time on March 14, 2022.
Pursuant to the purchase agreement, the Company filed a certificate of designation (the “Certificate of Designation”) with the Secretary of State of Delaware designating the rights, preferences and limitations of the shares of Series D preferred stock, which became effective on January 14, 2022. The Certificate of Designation provided, in particular, that the Series D preferred stock will have no voting rights, other than the right to vote as a class on certain matters, except that each share of Series D preferred stock had the right to cast 37,500 votes per share of Series D preferred stock on the Proposal (the “Supermajority Voting Rights”); provided, that the votes cast by the holders of the Series D preferred stock must be counted in the same proportion as the aggregate shares of common stock voted on the Proposal. Because the Proposal was approved by our stockholders at the special meeting held on March 11, 2022, the Series D preferred stock no longer has Supermajority Voting Rights.
The holders of the Series D preferred stock are entitled to dividends, on an as-if converted basis, equal to dividends actually paid, if any, on shares of Common Stock. The Series D preferred stock is convertible into shares of common stock at a conversion price of $8.00 per share, as adjusted for the most recent reverse stock split. The conversion price can be adjusted pursuant to the Certificate of Designation for stock dividends and stock splits, subsequent rights offerings, pro rata distributions of dividends or the occurrence of a fundamental transaction (as defined in the Certificate of Designation). The Series D preferred stock can be converted at the option of the holders at any time. In addition, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, we may cause the holders of the Series D preferred stock to convert their shares of Series D preferred stock; provided, that shares of Series D preferred stock cannot be converted to common stock if the applicable holder would beneficially own in excess of 4.99% (or, upon election by such holder prior to the issuance of any shares of Series D preferred stock, 9.99%) of our outstanding common stock. A holder of Series D preferred stock may, upon notice to us, increase or decrease such beneficial ownership limitation, but not in excess of 9.99%. In March 2022, after the effectiveness of the Reverse Split Amendment, 5,200 shares of Series D preferred stock were converted into an aggregate of 650,000 shares of common stock.
The Common Warrants have an exercise price of $9.60 per share and become exercisable beginning July 14, 2022. The Common Warrants will expire five years following the time they become exercisable, or July 14, 2027. The Company also issued to the Placement Agent or its designees warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 66,500 shares of common stock (the “Placement Agent Warrants”). The Placement Agent Warrants are subject to the same terms as the Common Warrants, except that the Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price of $10.00 per share and a term of five years from the commencement of the sales pursuant to the January 2022 Offering, or January 12, 2027.
As a result of the issuance of the Common Warrants and Placement Agent Warrants issued in connection with our January 2022 offering, we expect a significant non-cash charge which will reduce our net income in the first quarter of 2022.
PPP Loan
On April 23, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds of $2.3 million (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act. The PPP Loan, which was in the form of a promissory note, dated April 20, 2020 (the “Promissory Note”), between the Company and Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”) as the lender, was set to mature on April 20, 2022 and bore interest at a fixed rate of 1% per annum, payable monthly commencing six months from the date of the PPP Loan. The Company may voluntarily prepay the borrowings in full with no associated penalty or premium.
As previously disclosed, the PPP was administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”). The SBA was given the authority under the PPP to forgive loans if all employees were kept on the payroll for a required period and the loan proceeds were used for payroll, rent and utilities. The Company applied for debt forgiveness in December 2020.
On April 17, 2021, the Company was notified by SVB that its PPP Loan had been fully forgiven by the SBA and that there was no remaining balance on the PPP Loan. The Company recorded the forgiveness as other income in April 2021 in the amount of $2.4 million, of which approximately $23,000 was accrued interest.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal obligations consist of the operating lease for our facility, our Loan Agreement with CRG and non-cancelable purchase commitments. The following table sets out, as of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations due by period (in thousands):
(1)
Operating lease obligations primarily consist of leased office, laboratory, and manufacturing space under a non-cancelable operating lease. In addition to the minimum future lease commitments presented above, the lease requires the Company to pay property taxes, insurance, maintenance, and repair costs. The lease will expire on November 30, 2024.
(2)
The total CRG Loan amount, shown as borrowings on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, is $12.3 million. The contractual obligation in the table above of $19.4 million under the CRG Loan includes future interest to be accrued but not paid in cash as well as a $2.2 million back-end fee to be paid in December 2025 upon maturity of the CRG Loan which is being accreted. Refer to Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Footnote 7 for additional details.
(3)
Noncancelable purchase commitments consist of agreements to purchase goods and services entered into in the ordinary course of business.
CRG Loan
On March 2, 2020, we and CRG further amended the Loan Agreement to change the date upon which cash payments for interest would commence from the first quarter of 2020 to the third quarter of 2021. No cash payments for principal would be made until the final two years of the loan, which would mature in June 2023 at the time. On May 12, 2020, we and CRG entered into another amendment to waive the requirement that we comply with the minimum required revenue covenant for 2020 and granted us the ability to optionally prepay in whole or in part the outstanding principal amount of the Loan for the Redemption Price. On January 22, 2021, we and CRG entered into yet another amendment to extend the maturity date of the Loan Agreement from June 30, 2023 to December 31, 2025 while also extending the interest only payment period and the period we can make interest payments in PIK to December 31, 2023. This amendment also established minimum revenue covenants of $12 million for 2023, $14.5 million for 2024, and $17.5 million for 2025, among other things. The total CRG Loan amount, shown as long-term borrowings on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, is $12.3 million. However, upon maturity of the debt in December 2025, we will be obligated to pay $19.4 million under the CRG Loan, which includes future interest to be accrued but not paid in cash as well as a $2.2 million back-end fee to be paid in December 2025 upon maturity of the CRG Loan which is being accreted to the maturity date. Refer to Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Footnote 7 for additional details.
Lease Agreements
Our operating lease obligations primarily consist of leased office, laboratory, and manufacturing space under a non-cancelable operating lease. In addition to the minimum future lease commitments presented below, the lease requires us to pay property taxes, insurance, maintenance, and repair costs. The lease includes a rent holiday concession and escalation clauses for increased rent over the lease term. Rent expense is recognized using the straight-line method over the term of the lease. We record deferred rent calculated as the difference between rent expense and the cash rental payments.
The lease will expire on November 30, 2024. We are obligated to pay a total approximately $5.8 million in base rent payments through November 2024, beginning on December 1, 2019. The weighted average remaining lease term as of December 31, 2021 is 2.9 years.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $15.7 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $17.4 million and a decrease in net operating assets of approximately $0.4 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $1.3 million. We recognized a non-cash gain on extinguishment of debt due to the forgiveness of the PPP Loan of $2.4 million. This gain was partially offset by non-cash charges related to stock-based compensation of $1.0 million, non-cash interest expense of $1.6 million, and depreciation of $0.7 million. The decrease in net operating assets was primarily due to an increase in accounts payable and other long-term liabilities; partially offset by the increase in inventory and a decrease in accrued compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $14.8 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $19.0 million and an increase in net operating assets of approximately $0.6 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $4.7 million. Non-cash charges largely related to stock-based compensation of $1.5 million, non-cash interest expense and other charges of $1.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.9 million and provisions for excess and obsolete inventory of $0.5 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily due to the increase in inventory and a decrease in accrued compensation.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $34,000 consisted of purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $65,000 consisting of proceeds from the sale of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 of $13.0 million relates to proceeds from the issuance of common stock in our February 2021 public offering, net of various issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 of $26.0 million primarily relates to $23.6 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in our public offerings, net of various issuance costs and proceeds of $2.3 million from borrowings pursuant to the PPP Loan under the CARES Act.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s revenues are derived from (1) sale of Lightbox consoles, (2) sale of disposables, which consist of catheters and accessories, and (3) sale of customer service contracts and maintenance. The Company sells its products directly to hospitals and medical centers as well as through distributors. The Company accounts for a contract with a customer when there is a legally enforceable contract between the Company and the customer, the rights of the parties are identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability of the contract consideration is probable. The Company’s revenues are measured based on consideration specified in the contract with each customer, net of any sales incentives and taxes collected from customers that are remitted to government authorities. For all sales, the Company uses either a signed agreement or a binding purchase order as evidence of an arrangement. The Company’s revenue recognition policies generally result in revenue recognition at the following points:
1.
Lightbox console sales: Provided all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met, the Company recognizes revenue for Lightbox console sales directly to end customers when delivery and acceptance occurs, which is defined as receipt by the Company of an executed form that the installation process is complete.
2.
Sales of disposables: Disposable revenues consist of sales of the Company’s catheters and accessories and are recognized when the product has shipped, risk of loss and title has passed to the customer and collectability is reasonably assured.
3.
Service revenue: Service contract revenue consists of preventative maintenance, upgrades, and service contracts. Service contracts are recognized ratably over the term of the service period and maintenance contract revenue is recognized as work is performed. To date, service revenue has been insignificant.
The Company offers its customers the ability to purchase or lease the Lightbox console. In addition, the Company provides a Lightbox under a limited commercial evaluation program to allow accounts to install and utilize the Lightbox for a limited trial period. When a Lightbox is placed under a lease agreement or under a commercial evaluation program, the Company retains title to the equipment and it remains capitalized on its balance sheet under property and equipment. Depreciation expense on these placed Lightboxes is recorded to cost of revenues on a straight-line basis. The costs to maintain these placed Lightboxes are charged to cost of revenues as incurred.
The Company evaluates its lease and commercial evaluation program agreements and accounts for these contracts under the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 842, Leases and ASU No. 2014 09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). The guidance requires arrangement consideration to be allocated between a lease deliverable and a non-lease deliverable based upon the relative selling-price of the deliverables.
The Company assessed whether the embedded lease is an operating lease or sales-type lease. Based on the Company’s assessment of the guidance and given that any payments under the lease agreements are dependent upon contingent future sales, it was determined that collectability of the minimum lease payments is not reasonably predictable. Accordingly, the Company concluded the embedded lease did not meet the criteria of a sales-type lease and accounts for it as an operating lease. The Company recognizes revenue allocated to the lease as the contingent disposable product purchases are delivered and are included in revenues within the statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
For sales through distributors, the Company recognizes revenue when control of the product transfers from the Company to the distributor. The distributors are responsible for all marketing, sales, training and warranty in their respective territories. The standard terms and conditions contained in the Company’s distribution agreements do not provide price protection or stock rotation rights to any of its distributors. In addition, its distributor agreements do not allow the distributor to return or exchange products, and the distributor is obligated to pay the Company upon invoice regardless of its ability to resell the product.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out method for all inventories. The Company’s policy is to write down inventory that has expired or become obsolete, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its expected net realizable value, and inventory in excess of expected requirements. At each balance sheet date, management evaluates inventories for excess quantities, and obsolescence. This evaluation by management includes analysis of historical sales levels by product, projections of future demand, the risk of technological or competitive obsolescence for products, general market conditions, as well as the feasibility of reworking or using excess or obsolete products or components in the production or assembly of other products that are not obsolete or for which there are not excess quantities in inventory. To the extent that management determines there are excess or obsolete inventory, management adjusts the carrying value to estimated net realizable value. When quantities on hand exceed sales forecasts, a write-down is recorded for such excess inventories along with a corresponding charge to cost of revenues. The estimate of excess quantities is subjective and primarily dependent on the estimates of future demand for a particular product. Specifically, the future demand is derived based on our historical experience, from discussion with users of our products and general market conditions. Changes in assumptions of product demand could have a significant impact on the amount of write-down recorded. Inventory used in clinical trials is expensed at the time of production and recorded as research and development expense. We also regularly review the cost of inventories against estimated market value and record a lower of cost or market reserve for inventories that have a cost in excess of estimated market value, which could have a material impact on our gross margin and inventory balances based on additional write-downs to net realizable value or a benefit from inventories previously written down.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation for the Company includes amortization related to all stock options, restricted stock units (“RSU”), based on the grant-date estimated fair value. The Company measures the fair value of RSUs using the closing stock price of a share of the Company’s common stock on the grant date and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award. As allowed under ASU No. 2016-09, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting, the Company accounts for forfeitures as they occur. There haven’t been any recent grants of stock options.