ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Business Overview
We develop, market, sell, and support software and integrated solutions for video and audio content creation, management and distribution. We are a leading technology provider that powers the media and entertainment industry. We do this by providing an open and efficient platform for digital media, along with a comprehensive set of tools and workflow solutions. Our solutions are used in production and post-production facilities; film studios; network, affiliate, independent and cable television stations; recording studios; live-sound performance venues; advertising agencies; government and educational institutions; corporate communications departments; and by independent video and audio creative professionals, as well as aspiring professionals. Projects produced using our tools, platform, and ecosystem include feature films, television programming, live events, news broadcasts, sports productions, commercials, music, video, and other digital media content. With over one million creative users and thousands of enterprise clients relying on our technology platforms and solutions around the world, Avid enables the industry to thrive in today’s connected media and entertainment world.
Our mission is to empower media creators with innovative technology and collaborative tools to entertain, inform, educate, and enlighten the world. Our clients rely on Avid to create prestigious and award-winning feature films, music recordings, television shows, live concerts, sporting events, and news broadcasts. Avid has been honored for technological innovation with 18 Emmy Awards, one Grammy Award, two Oscars, and the first ever America Cinema Editors Technical Excellence Award.
Operations Overview
Our strategy for connecting creative professionals and media enterprises with audiences in a powerful, efficient, collaborative, and profitable way leverages our creative software tools, including Pro Tools for audio and Media Composer for video, and our MediaCentral Platform - the open, extensible, and customizable foundation that streamlines and simplifies content workflows by integrating all Avid or third-party products and services that run on top of it. The platform provides secure and protected access, and enables fast and easy creation, delivery, and monetization of content.
We work to ensure that we are meeting customer needs, staying ahead of industry trends, and investing in the right areas through a close and interactive relationship with our customer base. The Avid Community Association was established to be an innovative and influential media technology community. It represents thousands of organizations and over 30,000 professionals from all levels of the industry including inspirational and award-winning thought leaders, innovators, and storytellers. The Avid Community Association fosters collaboration between Avid, its customers, and other industry colleagues to help shape our product offerings and provide a means to shape our industry together.
A key element of our strategy is our transition to a recurring revenue-based model through a combination of subscription offerings, maintenance contracts, and long-term agreements. We started offering subscription licensing options for some of our products and solutions in 2014 and by the end of 2021 had approximately 410,000 paid subscriptions. Starting in the third quarter of 2021, subscription count includes all paid and active seats under multi-seat licenses. These licensing options offer choices in pricing and deployment to suit our customers’ needs. We expect to increase subscription sales to media enterprises going forward as we expand offerings and move through customer upgrade cycles, which we expect will further increase recurring revenue on a longer-term basis. Our long-term agreements are comprised of multi-year agreements with large media enterprise customers to provide specified products and services, including SaaS offerings, and agreements with channel partners and resellers to purchase minimum amounts of products and service over a specified period of time.
During the third quarter of 2021, Avid began implementing a digital transformation which focuses on optimizing systems, processes, and back-office functions with the objective of improving our operations related to our digital and subscription
business. Over the next four years, we plan to significantly invest in transforming our enterprise-wide infrastructure and technologies to benefit customers and drive enhanced performance across the company.
A summary of our revenue sources for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, is as follows (in thousands):
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant global economic uncertainty, and adversely impacted the business of our customers and partners. The pandemic adversely impacted our business and results of operations for the year ended 2020.
However, our results throughout 2021, reflected a gradual recovery in spending levels with the continuing positive signs of recovery from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic driven by vaccination and government stimulus programs, particularly in the United States. At the same time, certain countries continue to face challenges and there remains uncertainty relating to the ongoing spread and severity of the virus and its variants. While we are encouraged by the trends we have seen during 2021, to the extent that the pandemic continues to have negative impacts on economies, our results could be affected and uneven. Consequently, we will continue to evaluate our financial position in light of future developments, particularly those relating to COVID-19. For further discussion of these issues, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We regularly reevaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to the following: revenue recognition and allowances for sales returns and exchanges; stock-based compensation; and income tax assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the amounts of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates most significantly affect the portrayal of our financial condition and involve our most difficult and subjective estimates and judgments.
Revenue Recognition
We often enter into contractual arrangements that have multiple performance obligations, one or more of which may be delivered subsequent to the delivery of other performance obligations. These arrangements may include a combination of products, maintenance, training, and professional services. We allocate the transaction price of the arrangement based on the relative estimated standalone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation.
Our process for determining SSP for each performance obligation involves significant management judgment. In determining SSP, we maximize observable inputs and consider a number of data points, including:
• the pricing of standalone sales (in the limited instances where available);
• the pricing established by management when setting prices for deliverables that are intended to be sold on a standalone
basis;
• contractually stated prices for deliverables that are intended to be sold on a standalone basis;
• other pricing factors, such as the geographical region in which the products are sold and expected discounts based on
the customer size and type.
Determining SSP for performance obligations which we never sell separately also requires significant judgment. In estimating the SSP in these circumstances, we consider the likely price that would have resulted from established pricing practices had the deliverable been offered separately and the prices a customer would likely be willing to pay.
We only include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. We reduce transaction prices for estimated returns and other allowances that represent variable consideration under ASC 606, which we estimate based on historical return experience and other relevant factors, and we record a corresponding refund liability as a component of accrued expenses and other current liabilities. Other forms of contingent revenue or variable consideration are infrequent.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation at fair value. The vesting of stock options and restricted stock awards may be based on time, performance, market conditions, or a combination of time, performance, and market conditions. In the future, we may grant stock awards, options, or other equity-based instruments allowed by our stock-based compensation plans, or a combination thereof, as part of our overall compensation strategy.
We generally use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option grants with time-based vesting. The Black-Scholes option pricing model relies on a number of key assumptions to calculate estimated fair values which are assessed annually. Our assumed dividend yield of zero is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and we have no present intention to pay cash dividends. Our expected stock-price volatility assumption is based on actual historic stock volatility for periods equivalent to the expected term of the award. The assumed risk-free interest rate is the U.S. Treasury security rate with
a term equal to the expected life of the option. The assumed expected life is based on company-specific historical experience, considering the exercise behavior of past grants and models the pattern of aggregate exercises.
We have also issued stock option grants or restricted stock unit awards with vesting based on market conditions. Performance-based restricted stock units will vest based on achievement of our relative total shareholder return against the Russell 2000 Index over a three-year period. The fair values and derived service periods for all grants that include vesting based on market conditions are estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation method. For stock option grants that include vesting based on performance conditions, the fair values are estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. For restricted stock unit awards that include vesting based on performance conditions, the fair values are estimated based on the intrinsic values of the awards at the date of grant as these awards have a purchase price of $0.01 per share. A significant change in any or a combination of the assumptions used to estimate the fair value of our stock option grants and restricted stock units could have an impact on the stock based compensation expense recorded in the statement of operations.
Income Tax Assets and Liabilities
We record deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the net tax effects of tax credits, operating loss carryforwards, and temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes compared to the amounts used for income tax purposes. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability with consideration for such factors as historical losses, projected future taxable income, and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences. A valuation allowance is recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Management believes the U.S deferred tax assets, based largely on the history of U.S. tax losses, warrant a full valuation allowance based on the weight of available negative evidence. We also determined that a full valuation allowance is warranted on a portion of our foreign deferred tax assets.
Our assessment of the valuation allowance on our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets could change in the future based on our levels of pre-tax income and other tax-related adjustments. Reversal of the valuation allowance in whole or in part would result in a non-cash reduction in income tax expense during the period of reversal. To the extent some or all of our valuation allowance is reversed, future financial statements would reflect an increase in non-cash income tax expense until such time as our deferred tax assets are fully utilized.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in our financial statements by applying a two-step process to determine the amount of tax provision or benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. If the tax position is deemed more likely than not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of provision or benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of provision or benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Our provision for income taxes includes the effects of any resulting tax reserves, referred to as unrecognized tax benefits, that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth certain items from our consolidated statements of operations as a percentage of net revenues for the periods indicated:
Net Revenues
Our net revenues are derived mainly from sales of subscription software solutions, maintenance contracts, and integrated solutions for digital media content production, management and distribution, and related professional services. We commonly sell large, complex solutions to our customers that, due to their strategic nature, have long lead times where the timing of order execution and fulfillment can be difficult to predict. In addition, the rapid evolution of the media industry is changing our customers’ needs, businesses, and revenue models, which is influencing their short-term and long-term purchasing decisions. As a result of these factors, the timing and amount of product revenue recognized related to orders for large, complex solutions, as well as the services associated with them, can fluctuate from quarter to quarter and cause significant volatility in our quarterly and annual operating results. See the risk factors discussed in Part I - Item 1A under the heading “Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth the percentage of our net revenues attributable to geographic regions for the periods indicated:
Subscription Revenue
Subscription revenues have increased over the past two years, in line with expectations, as a result of new customers adopting our solutions and customers transitioning from our perpetual product licenses to our subscription-based model. The Company anticipates this trend to continue throughout the next few years as we continue to add new customers and transition to subscription and SAAS based solutions for our offerings.
Maintenance Revenue
Maintenance revenues have declined slightly over the past two years, in line with our expectations as some of our customers transition from our perpetual based licenses to our subscription licenses. We expect maintenance revenues to continue to remain relatively consistent in the coming years as customers with perpetual licenses continue to renew their maintenance contracts, offset by customers who are on maintenance contracts who migrate to our subscription and SAAS based solutions.
Integrated Solutions and other Revenues
2021 Compared to 2020
The increase in integrated solutions and other revenue was largely due to increased customer activity as a result of improvements in the economy in 2021. Purchases of our hardware products continued to increase, as businesses and live events began to resume normal operations. This also impacted professional services revenue, as project based work was able to resume for some of our larger customized solutions
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in integrated solutions and other revenue was largely due to the impacts of COVID-19. Purchases of our hardware products drastically declined as business and live events were cancelled globally due to COVID-19. This also impacted professional services revenue as there were project delays due to travel restrictions impacting the ability for our teams to be on site.
Revenue Backlog
At December 31, 2021, we had revenue backlog of approximately $412.8 million, of which approximately $226.0 million is expected to be recognized in the next 12 months, compared to $435.5 million of revenue backlog at December 31, 2020. Revenue
backlog, as we define it, consists of firm orders received and includes both (i) orders where the customer has paid in advance of our performance obligations being fulfilled, and (ii) orders for future product deliveries or services that have not yet been invoiced by us. Revenue backlog associated with arrangement consideration paid in advance primarily consists of deferred revenue related to (i) the undelivered portion of annual maintenance contracts and (ii) Implied Maintenance Release PCS performance obligations. Revenue backlog associated with orders for future product deliveries and services where cash has not been received primarily consists of (i) product orders received but not yet shipped, (ii) professional services not yet rendered, and (iii) future years of multi-year maintenance agreements not yet billed. Our definition of backlog includes contractual commitments with customers that specify minimum future purchases, however, since these contractual arrangements do not specify which specific products and services must be purchased to fulfill these commitments, they do not meet the definition of an unfulfilled remaining performance obligation under GAAP.
Orders included in revenue backlog may be reduced, canceled, or deferred by our customers. The expected timing of the recognition of revenue backlog as revenue is based on our current estimates and could change based on a number of factors, including (i) the timing of delivery of products and services, (ii) customer cancellations or change orders, or (iii) changes in the estimated period of time Implied Maintenance Release PCS is provided to customers. As there is no industry standard definition of revenue backlog, our reported revenue backlog may not be comparable with other companies. Revenue backlog as of any particular date should not be relied upon as indicative of our net revenues for any future period.
Cost of Revenues, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin Percentage
Cost of revenues consists primarily of costs associated with:
•procurement of components and finished goods;
•assembly, testing, and distribution of finished products;
•warehousing;
•customer support related to maintenance;
•royalties for third-party software and hardware included in our products;
•amortization of technology; and
•providing professional services and training.
Gross Margin Percentage
Gross margin percentage, which is net revenues less costs of revenues divided by net revenues, fluctuates based on factors such as the mix of products sold, the cost and proportion of third-party hardware and software included in the systems sold, the offering of product upgrades, price discounts and other sales-promotion programs, the distribution channels through which products are sold, the timing of new product introductions, sales of aftermarket hardware products such as disk drives, and currency exchange-rate fluctuations.
2021 Compared to 2020
Subscription margin for 2021 decreased 4.4% from 2020, due to increased customer care costs being allocated to subscription, an increase in digital solution spending, as well as increased revenue on our lower margin cloud offerings. The maintenance margin decreased 1.4% from 2020 due to cost savings measures, primarily furloughs, in 2020. The margin for integrated solutions increased as a result of improved economic conditions in 2021.
2020 Compared to 2019
The increase in the total gross margin percentage was due to a change in the mix of products sold. During 2020 we sold significantly more high margin subscription software and had a decrease in our integrated solutions revenue as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses and Operating Income
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses include costs associated with the development of new products and the enhancement of existing products, and consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits, facilities costs, depreciation, costs for consulting and temporary employees, and prototype and other development expenses. The table below provides further details regarding the changes in components of R&D expense.
2021 Compared to 2020
The increase in personnel-related expenses for 2021, compared to 2020, was primarily due to an increase in salary expense as a result of no furloughs in 2021, as well as an increase in variable related compensation as a result of the Company’s strong performance. The increase in facilities and information technology expenses is largely due to an increase in headcount in our R&D departments. Information technology expenses have increased during 2021, and the increase in R&D headcount results in more information technology related expenses being allocated to the R&D group. The increase in all other expense categories for 2021 compared to the same periods in 2020 were primarily due to increased activity as a result of improved economic conditions in 2021.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in personnel-related expenses for 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to a decrease in salary expense as a result of our temporary furloughs and pay cuts and reduced travel expenses in 2020 as a result of COVID-19. The decrease in all other expense categories for 2020 compared to the same periods in 2019 were primarily due to our initiatives to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs as a response to COVID-19.
Marketing and Selling Expenses
Marketing and selling expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits for selling, marketing, and pre-sales customer support personnel, commissions, travel expenses, advertising and promotional expenses, web design costs, and facilities costs. The table below provides further details regarding the changes in components of marketing and selling expense.
2021 Compared to 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net foreign-exchange losses, which are included in marketing and selling expenses, were $1.3 million, compared to losses of $0.4 million for 2020. The foreign-exchange losses result from foreign currency denominated transactions and the revaluation of foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities. The increase in personnel-related expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to increases in salary expense as a result of no furlough program in 2021 and reduced travel expenses in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in our advertising expenses was largely due to increased activity as a result of the improved economic conditions in 2021. The decrease in consulting and outside services for 2021 compared to 2020 was due to the cancellation of certain trade shows and internal meetings in 2021, which events still took place during the first quarter of 2020 before the COVID-19 pandemic began. This was offset by increases in other consulting spend as our business continues to grow during 2021. The decrease in facilities and information technology and other was primarily the result of a one-time bad debt expense in 2020 and a decrease in our facilities related costs as we continue to decrease our footprint as part of our corporate strategy.
2020 Compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net foreign-exchange losses, which are included in marketing and selling expenses, were $0.4 million, compared to losses of $0.6 million for 2019. The foreign-exchange losses result from foreign currency denominated transactions and the revaluation of foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities. The decrease in personnel-related expenses for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to decreases in salary expense as a result of our temporary furloughs and pay cuts and reduced travel expenses as a result of COVID-19. The decrease in all other expense categories for 2020 compared to 2019 were primarily due to our initiatives to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs as a response to COVID-19.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative, or G&A, expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits for administrative, executive, finance, and legal personnel, audit, legal, and strategic consulting fees, and insurance, information systems, and facilities costs. Information systems and facilities costs reported within G&A expenses are net of allocations to other expenses categories. The table below provides further details regarding the changes in components of G&A expense.
2021 Compared to 2020
The increase in personnel-related expenses for 2021, compared to 2020, was primarily due to an increase in salary expense as a result of no furloughs in 2021, as well as an increase in variable related compensation as a result of the Company’s strong performance. The decrease in facilities is a result of cost saving initiatives made to reduce our property footprint as more employees are working remotely. The increase in all other expense categories for 2021 compared to the same periods in 2020, were primarily due to resuming our programs that were previously paused in 2020 due to COVID-19. In addition, we have incurred expenses in 2021 related to our share repurchase program, business development activities, and our digital transformation initiative.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in personnel-related expenses for 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to a decrease in salary expense as a result of our temporary furloughs and pay cuts and reduced travel expenses as a result of COVID-19. The decrease in all other expense categories for 2020 compared to the same periods in 2019, were primarily due to our initiatives to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs as a response to COVID-19.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Intangible assets result from acquisitions and include developed technology, customer-related intangibles, trade names, and other identifiable intangible assets with finite lives. These intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of such assets, which are generally two years to 12 years. Amortization of developed technology is recorded within cost of revenues. Amortization of customer-related intangibles, trade names, and other identifiable intangible assets is recorded within operating expenses.
As of June 30, 2019, intangible assets were fully amortized.
Restructuring Costs, Net
In February 2016, we committed to a restructuring plan that encompassed a series of measures intended to allow us to more efficiently operate in a leaner, more directed cost structure. These included reductions in our workforce, consolidation of facilities, transfers of certain business processes to lower cost regions, and reductions in other third-party services costs. In October 2020, we committed to a restructuring plan in order to reorganize the business to better support the company’s strategy and overall performance.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $1.1 million of severance costs for 24 positions that were eliminated during 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $4.9 million of severance costs for 93 positions that were eliminated during 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded restructuring costs of $0.6 million. The restructuring charges for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $0.6 million of severance costs related to approximately 54 positions eliminated during 2019.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Interest and other expense, net, generally consists of interest income and interest expense.
2021 Compared to 2020
The decrease in interest expense for 2021 compared to 2020 was due to a lower interest rate on borrowings under the Credit Agreement signed in January 2021, compared to borrowings under our prior term loan. See Note Q, Long-Term Debt and Credit Agreement, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information. The increase in other income (expense), net was due to the forgiveness of our PPP loan offset by the loss due to extinguishment of debt.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in interest expense for 2020 compared to 2019 was due to the repayment of our outstanding convertible notes on June 15, 2020 as well as savings on our term loan interest under our prior credit facility due to the decrease in the LIBOR rate
over 2020. See Note Q, Long-Term Debt and Credit Agreement, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate, which represents our tax provision as a percentage of income before tax, was 5.8%, 11.0%, and (201.0)%, respectively, for 2021, 2020, and 2019.
The increase in our 2021 provision was primarily driven by the increase in our profit before tax augmented by a non-recurring benefit in our 2020 provision due to release of a reserve for an uncertain tax position in our Israel subsidiary due to an audit settlement.
The increase in our 2020 provision was primarily driven by a non-recurring benefit in our 2019 provision. Our 2019 provision included the removal of valuation allowances on some of our foreign net operating loss carryforwards. During the year ended December 31, 2019 we determined that our Irish subsidiary had reached a level of sustained profitability sufficient enough to release a significant portion of the valuation allowance on its net operating loss carryforward. Accordingly, we recorded a $6.0 million benefit related to a valuation allowance against the Irish net operating loss carryforward deferred tax asset. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2019 we completed a legal entity reorganization that reduced the number of our German subsidiaries. This reorganization allowed us to remove a valuation allowance on the net operating loss carryforward deferred tax asset of one of the surviving German entities. Accordingly, we recorded a benefit of $1.5 million, which is net of a reserve for a related uncertain tax position. The year over year increase driven by the non-recurring combined benefit was partially offset by a decrease in the provision due to release of a reserve for an uncertain tax position in our Israel subsidiary due to an audit settlement and changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings.
We have significant accumulated deferred tax assets including the tax effects of net operating losses and tax credit carryovers. The realization of the net deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of sufficient future taxable income in the applicable tax jurisdictions. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability with consideration for such factors as historical losses, projected future taxable income, the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences, and tax planning strategies. ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, requires us to record a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Management believes the remaining deferred tax assets, based largely on the history of U.S. tax losses, warrant a valuation allowance based on the weight of available negative evidence. We have also determined that a full valuation allowance is warranted on a portion of our foreign deferred tax assets.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Act, or CARES Act, includes several income tax provisions such as net operating loss, or NOL, carryback and carryforward benefits and other tax deduction benefits. As noted previously, the U.S. deferred tax asset has a full valuation; accordingly, these NOL and other benefit provisions had no impact on our financial statements for the periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The CARES Act accelerates the alternative minimum tax, or AMT, credit refund originally enacted by the Tax Cut and Jobs Act in 2017. As of December 31, 2020, we received the cash from the IRS associated with this refund receivable which had been recorded as a long-term asset at December 31, 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity and Sources of Cash
Our principal source of liquidity is cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $56.8 million as of December 31, 2021. We have generally funded operations in recent years through the use of existing cash balances, supplemented from time to time with the proceeds of long-term debt and borrowings under our credit facilities.
Our cash requirements vary depending on factors such as the growth of the business, changes in working capital, and capital expenditures. We expect to operate the business and execute our strategic initiatives principally with funds generated from operations, remaining net proceeds from the term loan borrowings under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (“A&R Credit Agreement”), and draws of up to a maximum of $70.0 million under the A&R Credit Agreement’s revolving credit facility described below. We anticipate that we will have sufficient internal and external sources of liquidity to fund operations and anticipated working capital and other expected cash needs for at least the next 12 months from the filing of our annual report as well as for the foreseeable future. Refer to the contractual obligations discussion below, for our anticipated cash requirements related to contractual obligations.
In quarter ended September 30, 2021, we committed to a digital transformation initiative focused around modernizing our enterprise-wide infrastructure and technologies to benefit our customers and drive enhanced performance across the company. Over the next four years we plan to invest significant funds and resources towards implementing these new technologies. These expenditures will be a mix of capital expenditures which will flow through our investing operations as well as SAAS based software solutions which will increase our use of cash from operations.
Credit Agreement
On January 5, 2021, we entered into the Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as the administrative agent, or the Agent, and the lenders party thereto, or the Lenders. Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, the Lenders agreed to provide us with (a) a term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $180.0 million, (or the Term Loan) and (b) a revolving credit facility of up to a maximum of $70.0 million in borrowings outstanding at any time, (or the Credit Facility). We borrowed the full amount of the $180.0 million Term Loan on the closing date, but did not borrow any amount under the Credit Facility on the closing date. The borrowings under the Term Loan and cash on hand were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the Company’s prior financing agreement with Cerberus Business Finance, LLC, which was then terminated. Prior to the maturity of the Credit Facility, any amounts borrowed under the Credit Facility could be repaid and, subject to the terms and conditions of the Credit Agreement, reborrowed in whole or in part without penalty.
Financial terms and prepayments. Under the Credit Agreement, interest accrued on outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan and the Credit Facility at a rate of the Adjusted LIBO Rate, the Adjusted EURIBO Rate or the Alternate Base Rate (each as defined in the Credit Agreement), at the option of the Company, plus a spread of 2.00% to 3.25% for Adjusted LIBO Rate and Adjusted EURIBO Rate loans, with a 0.25% LIBOR floor, and 1.00% to 2.25% for Alternate Base Rate loans, in each case depending on our total net leverage ratio. In addition, we had to pay the Lenders, on a quarterly basis, a commitment fee at a rate of 0.20% to 0.50%, depending on our leverage ratio, on the average daily amount equal to (1) the total revolving commitments under the Credit Facility less (2) total amount of the outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility during the immediately preceding three month period. During the term of the Credit Facility, we were entitled to reduce the maximum amounts of the Lenders’ commitments under the Credit Facility. We were also able to prepay all or any portion of the borrowings under the Credit Agreement prior to the stated maturity, subject to the payment of certain break funding amounts, if applicable. In addition, subject to exceptions we were required to prepay the Term Loan with proceeds we receive from specified events, including sales of assets, insurance proceeds and condemnation awards and the incurrence of certain indebtedness. The Term Loan required quarterly principal payments commencing in March 2021 equal to 5.0% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan in years 1 and 2, 7.5% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan in year 3, and 10% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan in years 4 and 5, with the remaining aggregate principal amount due at maturity.
Collateral and guarantees. We and our subsidiary, Avid Technology Worldwide, Inc., or Avid Worldwide, granted a security interest in substantially all of our assets to secure the obligations of all obligors under the Term Loan and the Credit Facility. Avid Worldwide provided a guarantee of all our obligations under the Credit Agreement. Our future subsidiaries (other than foreign subsidiaries and certain immaterial subsidiaries) were also required to become a party to the applicable security agreements and guarantee the obligations under the Credit Agreement.
Representations and restrictive covenants. The Credit Agreement contained representations, warranties and restrictive covenants that are customary for an agreement of that kind, including, for example, covenants that limited or restricted us from incurring additional indebtedness, granting liens, making investments and restricted payments, making acquisitions, entering into swap agreements, paying dividends, making payments of or amending the terms of certain subordinated indebtedness, engaging in sale and leaseback transactions, and engaging in transactions with affiliates.
Events of default. The Credit Agreement contained customary events of default under which our payment obligations could be accelerated. These events of default included, among others, failure to pay amounts payable under the Credit Agreement when due, breach of representations and warranties, failure to perform covenants, a change of control, default or acceleration of material indebtedness, certain judgments and certain impairments to the collateral.
Financial covenants. The Credit Agreement contained two financial covenants. The Company was required to maintain a maximum total net leverage ratio, generally defined as the ratio of (x) consolidated total indebtedness minus liquidity maintained in the United States up to $25 million to (y) consolidated EBITDA, not to exceed 4.00 to 1:00 as of the end of the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2021 through June 30, 2021; 3.75 to 1.00 as of the end of the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2021 through December 31, 2021; 3.50 to 1.00 as of the end of the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2022 through June 30, 2022; 3.25 to 1.00 as of the end of the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2022 through December 31, 2022; and 3.00 to 1.00 as of the end of fiscal quarters ending on or after March 31, 2023. The Company was also required to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio not less than 1.20 to 1.00 at the end of each fiscal quarter ending on or after March 31, 2021. The Credit Agreement’s fixed charge coverage ratio was generally defined as the ratio of (x) consolidated EBITDA minus unfinanced capital expenditures, cash tax expense and certain restricted payments to (y) consolidated fixed charges.
Credit Agreement Amendment. On February 25, 2022, the Company executed the A&R Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and the Lenders. The A&R Credit Agreement extended the term of the Term Loan by approximately one year to February 25, 2027, reduced the applicable interest rate margins by 0.25%, removed the LIBOR floor, moved the reference rate from LIBOR to SOFR, reset the principal amortization schedule, and eliminated the fixed charge coverage ratio. The A&R Credit Agreement also requires the Company to maintain a total net leverage ratio of no more than 4.00 to 1.00 initially, with step downs thereafter. Other terms of the A&R Credit Agreement remain substantially the same as the Credit Agreement.
The Term Loan, as amended, has an interest rate of SOFR plus an applicable margin of 2.25%, with no floor. The applicable margin for SOFR loans under the A&R Credit Agreement ranges from 1.75% to 3.0%, depending on the Company’s total net leverage ratio. The A&R Credit Agreement contains a financial covenant to maintain a total net leverage ratio, as defined in the A&R Credit Agreement, of no more than 4.00 to 1.00 initially, with step downs thereafter. Both the Term Loan and the revolving Credit Facility mature on February 25, 2027.
Our ability to satisfy the maximum total net leverage ratio covenant in the future depends on our ability to increase bookings and billings above levels experienced over the last 12 months. In recent quarters, we have experienced volatility in bookings and billings resulting from, among other things, (i) our transition towards subscription and recurring revenue streams and the resulting decline in traditional upfront product sales, (ii) dramatic changes in the media industry and the impact it has on our customers, (iii) the impact of new and anticipated product launches and features, and (iv) volatility in currency rates.
In the event bookings and billings in future quarters are lower than we currently anticipate, we may be forced to take remedial actions which could include, among other things (and where allowed by the Lenders), (i) further cost reductions, (ii) seeking replacement financing, (iii) raising additional debt or equity funding or (iv) disposing of certain assets or businesses. Such remedial actions, which may not be available on favorable terms or at all, could have a material adverse impact on our business. If we are not in compliance with the maximum total net leverage ratio and are unable to obtain an amendment or waiver, such noncompliance may result in an event of default under the A&R Credit Agreement, which could permit acceleration of the outstanding indebtedness under the A&R Credit Agreement and require us to repay such indebtedness before the scheduled due date. If an event of default were to occur, we might not have sufficient funds available to make the payments required. If we are unable to repay amounts owed, the Lenders may be entitled to foreclose on and sell substantially all of our assets that secure our borrowings under the A&R Credit Agreement.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On May 11, 2020, we received $7.8 million of proceeds from a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Interest payments were deferred until a forgiveness decision was returned by the SBA. On July 6, 2021, the Company received notification that the SBA approved the Company’s PPP loan forgiveness application for the entire PPP loan balance plus all accrued interest. The forgiveness of the PPP loan was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 within other income on our Statement of Operations.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities aggregated $62.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The improvement compared to prior years was primarily attributable to cash flow generated by our increased net income.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the net cash flow used in investing activities reflected $6.8 million used for the purchase of property and equipment. Our purchases of property and equipment largely consist of computer hardware and software to support R&D activities, and leasehold improvements.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash flows used in financing activities were primarily the result of our stock repurchase program and our common stock repurchases for tax withholdings for net settlement of equity awards. In addition, we paid down $21 million on our term loan as part of our refinancing activity in January 2021 and paid down an additional $9 million in principal payments throughout the year.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The following table outlines our contractual payment obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Other contractual arrangements that may result in cash payments consisted of the following at December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
We entered into a long-term agreement to purchase a variety of information technology solutions from a third party in the second quarter of 2020, which included an unconditional commitment to purchase a minimum of $32.2 million of products and services over the initial five years of the agreement. We have purchased $11.4 million of products and services pursuant to this agreement as of December 31, 2021.
We have letters of credit that are used as security deposits in connection with our leased Burlington, Massachusetts headquarters office space. In the event of default on the underlying leases, the landlords would, at December 31, 2021, be eligible to draw against the letters of credit to a maximum of $0.7 million in the aggregate.
In addition, we have letters of credit in connection with security deposits for other facility leases totaling $0.6 million in the aggregate, as well as letters of credit totaling $1.9 million that otherwise support our ongoing operations. These letters of credit have various terms and expire during 2022 and beyond, while some of the letters of credit may automatically renew based on the terms of the underlying agreements.
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncement
See Note B, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of the Form 10-K for a description of recently adopted accounting standards.
Recent Accounting Pronouncement to be Adopted
See Note B, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of the Form 10-K for a description of certain issued accounting standards that have not been adopted and may impact our financial statements in future reporting periods.