ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and other parts of this annual report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “predicts,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include but are not limited to those discussed in the subsection entitled Forward-Looking Statements and Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition below. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto included in this report. Our fiscal year end is December 31.
Discussion and Analysis
Our present activities are focused on evaluating business opportunities that are sufficient to support operations and increase stockholder value. While this process remains in the discovery phase, the Company will look to its stockholders and creditors for sufficient financial support to sustain operations. We will require a minimum of $50,000 in funding over the next 12 months. Funding will likely take the form of unsecured debt or equity financing, provided by stockholders, creditors and third parties. We have no assurance that our stockholders or creditors will respond positively to these efforts and have no financing committed at this time. Given these uncertainties, there is substantial doubt as to whether the Company will be able to sustain operations in the near term.
Results of Operations
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company satisfied periodic public disclosure requirements, settled debt, secured forgiveness of debt, relied on the statutory discharge of debt, secured a loan from our controlling stockholder to sustain operations, anticipated the now abandoned acquisition of a media platform, and continued its search for a suitable business enterprise.
Our operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized in the following table.
Net Income (Loss)
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $12,116,448 as compared to net loss of $477,596 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net loss in the current twelve month period is attributed to a loss on debt settlements as the values for stock issued in settlement were less than the market value of the stock on the respective settlement dates, and the increase in professional fees due to the preparation of coincident settlement documentation, due diligence, and documentation tied to the abandoned acquisition, offset by other income from debt forgiveness agreements and the statutory discharge of debts, a foreign exchange gain due to a decrease in the value of foreign currencies against the US dollar, and a decrease in general administrative and interest expenses.
We did not generate revenue during this period and expect to continue to incur losses over the next twelve months until such time as we are able to secure a business opportunity that generates income.
Capital Expenditures
The Company expended no amounts on capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, the Company has experienced significant changes in liquidity, capital resources, and stockholders’ deficit.
The Company had assets of $3,340 as of December 31, 2021, that consisted solely of cash and a working capital deficit of $101,585, as compared to assets of $4,994 as of December 31, 2020, that consisted solely of cash and a working capital deficit of $2,051,060 as of December 31, 2020. Net stockholders' deficiency in the Company was $101,585 at December 31, 2021, as compared to a net stockholders' deficiency in the Company of $2,051,060 at December 31, 2020.
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2021 was $33,579 as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $37,352 for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in operating activities in the current period can be attributed to a number of book expense items that do not affect the total amount relative to actual cash used, such as unrealized foreign exchange loss, other income, loss on debt settlements, other income and interest expense. Balance sheet accounts that actually affect cash, but are not income statement related that are added or deducted to arrive at cash used in operating activities, include accounts payable and amounts due to related parties.
We expect to continue to use net cash in operating activities over the next twelve months or until such time as the Company can generate sufficient revenue to transition to providing net cash from operations.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, was $nil.
We do not expect to use net cash in investing activities until such time as a transaction is concluded through merger, acquisition or development of viable business opportunity.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flow provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $31,925, as compared to $40,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash flows provided from financing activities in the current period consist of loans from a controlling stockholder.
We expect to continue to use net cash provided by financing activities to maintain operations.
The Company’s current assets are insufficient to conduct its plan of operation over the next twelve (12) months as it will need at least $50,000 to sustain operations while seeking a suitable business opportunity. While the Company will look to its stockholders and creditors to provide debt or equity financing to secure those amounts necessary, it has no definitive commitments or arrangements for financial support. The Company’s inability to secure funding will have a material adverse effect on its ability to sustain operations.
The Company does not intend to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The Company had no lines of credit or other bank financing arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
The Company had no commitments for future capital expenditures at December 31, 2021.
The Company has no defined benefit plan or contractual commitment with any of its officers or directors.
The Company has no current plans for the purchase or sale of any plant or equipment.
The Company has no current plans to make any changes in the number of employees.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Future Financings
We will continue to rely on debt or equity sales of our common stock and the foreberance of existing creditors to continue our business even though we have secured no commitments to date for future financial support.
Critical Accounting Policies
In Note 2 to the audited financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, included in our Form 10-K, the Company discusses accounting policies that are considered to be significant in determining results of operations and the currency of its financial position. The Company believes that the accounting principles utilized by it conform to Accounting Principles Generally Accepted in the United States (GAAP).
The preparation of financial statements requires Company management to make significant estimates and judgments that affect reported assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. By their very. nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. On an on-going basis, the Company evaluates its estimates based on historical experience and other facts and circumstances that are believed to be reasonable. The results of each evaluation form the basis upon which management makes judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. The actual results may differ from these estimates recorded here under different assumptions or conditions.
Going Concern
Management has expressed an opinion as to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern given an accumulated deficit of $36,088,972 and negative cash flows from operating activities as of December 31, 2021. Our ability to continue as a going concern requires that we procure funding from outside sources. Management’s plan to address the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern includes obtaining funding from the private placement of equity or debt financing, converting existing debt to equity, and otherwise settling outstanding amounts due in agreement with its creditors. Management believes that it will remain a going concern through the methods discussed above pending closure with an income generating business opportunity though there can be no assurances that continuation as a going concern will prove successful.
Forward-Looking Statements and Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition
The statements contained in this section titled Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and elsewhere in this current report, with the exception of historical facts, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements reflect current expectations and beliefs regarding future results of operations, performance, and achievements subject to risks and uncertainties based upon assumptions and beliefs that may not materialize, including but are not limited to, statements concerning:
• our financial performance and business plan;
• the sufficiency of existing capital resources;
• our ability to raise capital to fund cash requirements;
• uncertainties related to future business prospects;
• the volatility of the stock market; and
• general economic conditions.
We wish to caution readers that our operating results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those discussed or anticipated. We also wish to advise readers not to place any undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this report, which reflect our beliefs and expectations only as of the date of this report. We assume no obligation to update or revise these forward-looking statements to reflect new events or circumstances or any changes in our beliefs or expectations, other than as required by law.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see Note 2 to our financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.