Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Avalo Therapeutics, Inc. (the “Company,” “Avalo” or “we”) is a leading clinical-stage precision medicine company that discovers, develops, and commercializes targeted therapeutics for patients with significant unmet clinical need in immunology and rare genetic diseases. We have built a diverse portfolio of innovative therapies to deliver meaningful medical impact for patients in urgent need. Our clinical candidates commonly have a proven mechanistic rationale, biomarkers and/or an established proof-of-concept to expedite development and increase the probability of success.
The Company’s focus in 2021 was on progressing the pipeline and executing financing activities to fund pipeline development. These will also be the primary areas of focus in 2022, with a broader focus on both non-dilutive and dilutive funding opportunities and potential business development related opportunities such as the out-license or partnering of assets. Management’s primary evaluation of the success of the Company is the ability to progress its pipeline assets forward towards commercialization or opportunistically out-license rights to indications or geographies. This success depends on not only the operational execution of the programs, but also the ability to secure sufficient funding to support the programs. We believe the ability to achieve the anticipated milestones as presented in the section entitled “Business” in Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K represents our most immediate evaluation points.
In 2021, we believe that we made significant progress in advancing our pipeline as reported during the year highlighted by the data release of the first two cohorts of the AVTX-002 Phase 1b trial in Crohn’s Disease, data release of the AVTX-002 Phase 2 proof-of-concept trial in COVID-19 ARDS and subsequent receipt of fast-track designation (“FTD”), receipt of FTD for AVTX-803 and enrollment of the first patient in the AVTX-007 Phase 1b open-label proof-of-concept trial in adult onset Still’s Disease. We also believe our licensing activity in the first half of 2021, including in-licenses of immunology and immuno-oncology assets (including the expanded license agreement for AVTX-002 and the license agreement of AVTX-008) and out-licenses of non-core assets, enhances our focus on the development of innovative therapies in areas of high unmet need within the fields of immunology and rare genetic disorders. Additionally, we executed financings in 2021 for total net proceeds of approximately $105 million, which served to strengthen and extend our financial resources to advance our clinical pipeline towards key development milestones.
Recent Updates
In February 2022, Dr. Garry Neil and Chris Sullivan were promoted to Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, respectively. In early 2022, management has been focused on developing and beginning to execute an optimal strategy of prioritizing our most promising programs. As a result, we are winding down internal development efforts of AVTX-006 and AVTX-007 in multiple myeloma (previously announced in January 2022) and pausing current development efforts of AVTX-802. We plan to pursue strategic alternatives for AVTX-006. Regarding AVTX-802, current development has been paused due to an impasse related to FDA regulatory requirements of the trial design and feasibility based upon investigator feedback and will re-evaluate development plans in the event of an alignment with the FDA on the trial design. Additionally, we will not proceed with the extension of the Phase 1b, open-label trial in a cohort of ulcerative colitis (“UC”) patients with moderate to severe UC who are refractory to biologic therapy given the positive data we previously received in Crohn’s disease patients and the similarity of the conditions. Alternatively, we will consider a possible randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in moderate to severe refractory patients with IBD. Finally, we will conduct a new Phase 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of AVTX-002 for the treatment of moderate to severe Non-eosinophilic Asthma and expect top-line data in the fourth quarter of 2022.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
As of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have not experienced significant financial impact directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic, however we have experienced some disruptions to clinical operations and manufacturing of drug supply for use in clinical trials. For example, we have experienced a slower pace of patient enrollment at many of our clinical trial sites than our initial projections. Some of our clinical sites have experienced challenges in conducting trial activities while they focus resources on COVID-19 patients and due to facility restrictions, remote work requirements and other precautions. Additionally, we have experienced manufacturing delays of drug product due to the limited available capacity of certain of our manufacturers due to staffing shortages, production slowdowns because of overall increased manufacturing in the biotechnology industry, as well as increased
manufacturing of COVID-19 vaccines. We have worked (and will continue to work) closely with our third-party contractors, investigators and manufacturers to ensure our ongoing clinical trials proceed safely and efficiently. We will continue to assess the potential impact of COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including our clinical operations and manufacturing activities.
2021 Financial Operations Overview
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 significantly increased as compared to the prior year, which was driven by the advancement of our maturing pipeline. Notably, we incurred significant expenses related to the clinical development of AVTX-002, which included increased drug manufacturing to support clinical trials. We also recognized a $10 million upfront license fee related to the expanded indication license agreement for AVTX-002 entered into with KKC during the year. In addition, there were moderate increases to program costs for AVTX-007, AVTX-006 and AVTX-803 as we progressed the therapies toward pivotal trials. There was also a moderate increase to general and administrative expense related to the infrastructure needed to support the Company’s expansion of its research and development efforts. Such increases were the main drivers to our net loss of $84.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, our net cash used in operations increased by $30.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was also driven by the advancement of our maturing pipeline. We do not expect a similar increase to operating expenses in 2022. Rather, it is likely we will incur similar operating expenses to begin 2022 as we finished 2021. Expenses beyond the start of 2022 are difficult to predict given it will be highly dependent on study outcomes, business development initiatives and access to capital. Furthermore, it is possible the recent and continued portfolio prioritization may result in decreases to research and development expenses and supporting general and administrative and marketing expenses in the intermediate future, while also potentially driving increases to expenses such as severance and wind down costs in the short term.
As of December 31, 2021, Avalo had $54.6 million in cash and cash equivalents, representing a $35.7 million increase as compared to December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by financings executed during the year partially offset by operating expenditures. We plan to use our current cash on hand along with cash inflows from investing and/or financing activities to support the ongoing clinical development of our maturing pipeline and for general corporate purposes to support such pipeline development.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Product Revenue, net
Net product revenue was $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. While gross sales were higher in 2021 as compared to 2020, there was a decrease in net sales driven by a significant increase in sales return allowance due to a full return allowance on sales of short-dated inventory sold in the first quarter of 2021 and due to a $0.5 million accounts receivable write-off of remaining uncollected balances on sales managed by Aytu Bioscience, Inc. (“Aytu”).
The Company began managing commercial operations of Millipred® in the third quarter of 2021. Aytu, to which the Company sold its rights, title and interest in assets relating to certain commercialized products in 2019, managed Millipred® commercial operations until August 31, 2021. The transition may have caused disruptions to the sales channel potentially impacting units sold in the fourth quarter, thus contributing to the decrease in net product revenue.
License Revenue
License revenue was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which relates to upfront fees received as a result of the out-license and assignment, respectively, of the Company’s rights to its non-core neurology pipeline assets, AVTX-301 and AVTX-406 to Alto Neurosciences, Inc. (“Alto”) and ES Therapeutics, LLC (“ES”), respectively. ES is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Armistice, which is a significant stockholder of the Company and whose chief investment officer, Steven Boyd, and managing director, Keith Maher, currently serve on the Board of the Company. The transaction with ES was approved in accordance with Avalo’s related party transaction policy. There was no license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Avalo is eligible to receive additional payments upon achievement of specified development, regulatory and sales-based milestones for both AVTX-301 and AVTX-406 and is also entitled to royalty payments based on net sales of AVTX-301.
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales were $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the Company’s requirement to pay its supplier fifty percent of the net profit of the Millipred® product following each calendar quarter beginning on July 1, 2021, subject to a $0.5 million quarterly minimum payment. We expect cost of product sales to increase as compared to historic periods prior to the profit share beginning.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and development expenses increased $27.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The overall increase was driven by an increase in research and development activities in 2021 as the Company continues to develop its maturing pipeline assets.
The increase was driven by a $10 million upfront license fee, related to the expanded indication license agreement for AVTX-002 entered into with KKC in March 2021. Additionally, CMC expenses increased $9.4 million due to increased manufacturing to support development of the progressing pipeline and in anticipation of drug supply to support clinical trials. Clinical expenses increased $3.3 million due to costs incurred to advance the pipeline as we approach multiple clinical data read outs across our pipeline. Finally, salaries, benefits and related costs increased by $3.4 million mainly due to an increase in headcount to grow our research and development activities to support our maturing pipeline.
We do not expect a similar increase to research and development expenses in 2022. Rather, it is likely we will incur similar expenses to begin 2022 as we finished 2021. Research and development expenses beyond the start of 2022 are difficult to predict given it will be highly dependent on study outcomes, business development initiatives and access to capital.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expenses
In the first quarter of 2020, the Company consummated its merger with Aevi, resulting in us acquiring $25.5 million of in-process research and development (“IPR&D”). The fair value of the IPR&D was immediately recognized as acquired in-process research and development expense given such asset has no other alternate use due to the stage of development. There was no acquired in-process research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
General and administrative expenses increased $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was largely driven by a $3.4 million increase in legal, consulting and other professional expenses. The largest driver was higher legal expenses in the current period, including costs to execute the KKC expanded indication license agreement and the other licensing agreements executed in the year. Additionally, there were increases to information technology services, consulting and director and officer insurance. Such increases were partially offset by a legal settlement in the prior period that did not repeat in the current period. Stock-based compensation expense increased $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was attributable to new grants, including the annual stock option grant, and modifications to certain existing awards.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
The following table summarizes our sales and marketing expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of expenses related to initiatives to support the go-to-market strategy of our pipeline assets. Sales and marketing expense increased $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, which was largely driven by market research projects for multiple programs and indications and marketing expense related to the corporate name change to Avalo Therapeutics, Inc.
Amortization Expense
The following table summarizes amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, amortization expense consisted of the amortization of our intangible assets including product marketing rights acquired as part of a previous acquisition and an assembled workforce acquired as part of a previous merger. The product marketing rights asset was fully amortized in the fourth quarter of 2021, thus driving the decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year.
We expect amortization expense to decrease as compared to historical periods given the product marketing rights asset was fully amortized in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the assembled workforce will be fully amortized in the first quarter of 2022.
Other (Expense) Income, net
The following table summarizes our other (expense) income, net from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Other expense, net was comprised of interest expense of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The interest expense recognized related to the venture debt financing agreement entered into in June 2021. We expect interest expense to increase in 2022 as a result of recognizing a full year of interest.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income, net was mainly comprised of a $5.2 million gain on change in the fair value of an investment. As consideration of the Company’s sale of its rights, title and interest in assets relating to certain commercialized products to Aytu in 2019, the Company received 9.8 million shares of Aytu preferred stock (the “Investment in Aytu”), which was remeasured at fair value each reporting period. In 2020, the Company sold the underlying Aytu common stock for net proceeds of $12.8 million, which represented a gain of $5.2 million from its fair value as of the period prior to the sale.
Income Tax Benefit
The Company recognized an income tax benefit of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The income tax benefit recognized in the current year was the result of the receipt of the Company’s federal refund in 2021 along with an additional $0.2 million related to additional interest received. The tax benefit recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a result of a tax law change and the ability of the Company to carry back certain losses related to the CARES Act and related state provisions. The annual effective tax rate was 0.22% and 4.21% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources, including Capital Expenditure and Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, Avalo had $54.6 million in cash and cash equivalents. In 2021, the Company closed three equity offerings for net proceeds of approximately $72.0 million (see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for more information). In June 2021, the Company entered into a $35 million venture debt financing agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Horizon Technology Finance Corporation (“Horizon”) and Powerscourt Investments XXV, LP (“Powerscourt”, together with Horizon, the “Lenders”). As of December 31, 2021, the Company had received the full $35 million. The Loan Agreement contains certain covenants and certain other specified events that could result in an event of default, which if not cured or waived, could result in the immediate acceleration of all or a substantial portion of the notes. As of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company was not aware of any breach of covenants, occurrence of material adverse change, nor had it received any notice of event of default from the Lenders (see Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for more information).
In order to meet its cash flow needs, the Company applies a disciplined decision-making methodology as it evaluates the optimal allocation of the Company's resources between investing in the Company's existing pipeline assets and acquisitions or in-licensing of new assets. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Avalo generated a net loss of $84.4 million and negative cash flows from operations of $70.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, Avalo had an accumulated deficit of $262.2 million.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern; however, losses are expected to continue as the Company continues to invest in its core research and development pipeline assets. The Company will require additional financing to fund its operations and to continue to execute its business strategy at least one year after the date the financial statements included herein were issued. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
To mitigate these conditions and to meet the Company’s capital requirements, management plans to use its current cash on hand along with some combination of the following: (i) dilutive and/or non-dilutive financings, (ii) federal and/or private grants, (iii) other out-licensing or strategic alliances/collaborations of its current pipeline assets, and (iv) out-licensing or sale of its non-core assets. If the Company raises additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, the Company might have to relinquish valuable rights to its technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates. Subject to limited exceptions, our venture debt financing agreement prohibits us from incurring certain additional indebtedness, making certain asset dispositions, and entering into certain mergers, acquisitions or other business combination transactions without prior consent of the Lenders. If the Company requires but is unable to obtain additional funding, the Company may be forced to make reductions in spending, delay, suspend, reduce or eliminate some or all of its planned research and development programs, or liquidate assets where possible. Due to the uncertainty regarding future financing and other potential options to raise additional funds, management has concluded that substantial doubt exists with respect to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K were issued.
Over the long term, the Company’s ultimate ability to achieve and maintain profitability will depend on, among other things, the development, regulatory approval, and commercialization of its pipeline assets, and the potential receipt and sale of any priority review vouchers it receives.
Uses of Liquidity
The Company uses cash to primarily fund the ongoing development of our research and development pipeline assets and costs associated with its organizational infrastructure.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $70.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $84.4 million, which was driven by increased research and development activities as the Company continued to fund its maturing pipeline of development assets, and non-cash adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities including stock-based compensation of $8.2 million. Additionally, changes in net liabilities increased by $2.8 million. The increase was mainly driven by a $3.2 million increase in accrued expenses and $1.1 million decrease in accounts receivable, partially offset by an increase of $1.5 million in other receivables.
We expect to continue to use significant amounts of cash related to operating activities as we advance our pipeline.
Net cash used in operating activities was $40.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $63.5 million and non-cash adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities including the $5.2 million realized gain related to the change in fair value of the Investment in Aytu. This decrease was offset mainly by a non-cash acquired IPR&D expense of $25.5 million and non-cash stock-based compensation of $6.8 million.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $12.8 million from the sale of Aytu common stock underlying the Company’s previous Investment in Aytu, slightly offset by transaction costs incurred as part of the Aevi Merger.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $106.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting primarily of net proceeds of $104.9 million from equity and debt financings. Specifically, the Company received net proceeds of $37.7 million from an underwritten public offering closed in January 2021, net proceeds of $32.9 million from the Loan Agreement entered into in the second quarter of 2021 and net proceeds of $29.0 million from an underwritten public offering that closed in September 2021.
We expect to continue to engage in financing activities to support clinical development.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $35.4 million from an underwritten public offering of common stock. The Company also received net proceeds of $5.1 million from a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors, which included Armistice, that closed in February 2020, and net proceeds of $3.9 million from a private placement of equity securities with Armistice in March 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions
In preparing the financial statements, the Company makes estimates and assumptions that have an impact on assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information disclosed by us, including information about contingencies, risk and financial condition. The Company believes, given current facts and circumstances, our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, adhere to GAAP and are consistently applied. Inherent in the nature of an estimate or assumption is the fact that actual results may differ from estimates, and estimates may vary as new facts and circumstances arise.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to the audited consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policy is critical to the understanding of our financial condition and results.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company applies the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to employees, including employee stock options, in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
For stock options issued to employees and members of the board of directors for their services, the Company estimates the grant date fair value of each option using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires management to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the common stock consistent with the expected life of the option, risk-free interest rates and expected dividend yields of the common stock. Additionally, the stock price on the date of grant is utilized in the Black-Scholes option pricing model. For awards subject to service-based vesting conditions, including those with a graded vesting schedule, the Company recognizes stock-based compensation expense equal to the grant date fair value of stock options on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting term. Forfeitures are recorded as they are incurred as opposed to being estimated at the time of grant and revised.
The assumptions we used to determine the fair value of stock options granted to employees and members of the board of directors are as follows:
The estimates involved in the valuations include inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates when valuing our stock options, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different. We recognize compensation expense for only the portion of awards that are expected to vest.
Debt Financing Agreement and Warrants
In the June 2021, the Company entered into a $35 million venture debt financing agreement, under which the Company borrowed $20 million at closing and borrowed an additional $15 million upon the achievement of certain predetermined milestones. Pursuant to the Loan Agreement, the Company issued warrants to the Lenders to purchase an aggregate of 403,844 shares of the Company’s common stock with an exercise price of $2.60 (the “Warrants”).
We applied judgement in evaluating the identification of each instrument and feature requiring separate accounting recognition and determination of whether each should be classified as a liability or in stockholders’ equity. The issuance of debt and Warrants in one transaction resulted in estimating the fair values of each instrument and feature.
We allocated consideration received to the debt and Warrants (which we concluded met equity classification criteria and therefore recognized as a component of permanent stockholders’ equity within additional paid-in-capital) based on the relative fair value allocation method. We valued the Warrants at issuance, which resulted in a discount on the debt, and allocated proceeds proportionately to the debt and to the Warrants.
The debt is recorded on the balance sheet at carrying value, which is the gross balance, less the unamortized debt discount and issuance costs. All fees, costs paid to the Lenders, and all direct costs incurred by the Company are recognized as a debt discount and are amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method of the life of the loan.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable SEC rules and regulations.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting standards please see Note 2 to consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.