Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward Looking Statements
Certain information contained in this MD&A includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors” as well as elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies, and expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “could,” “scheduled,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” “seek,” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
Overview
We are a real estate investment and management company focused on acquisition, construction, selling and managing rentals of residential vacation home communities in desirable travel destinations. We seek to create value through the targeting and acquisition, development, and up-cycling, rebranding, and repositioning of currently undervalued operating and shovel ready residential/resort communities in global travel destinations, with the intention to relaunch these assets under the “Awaysis” brand with the goals of creating a network of residential and resort enclave communities that will optimize both sales and rental revenues, providing attractive returns to owners and exceptional vacation experiences to travelers. At least initially, our target acquisitions are resorts that have not been completed nor have a prior operational history. As such we intend to purchase the real estate and finish the development, then we would sell the finished units and put them in a rental pool.
The Company seeks to own and grow a stable, cash generating, diversified portfolio of single-family and luxury resort/residence properties in the Caribbean, Europe, South America, and the United States.
Our business strategy entails targeting and identifying undervalued assets in emerging markets located in proximity to high demand travel destinations. The Company intends to focus these efforts on shovel-ready properties and/or other assets that we believe can be used to optimize sales and rental revenues. We have currently identified five properties in the country of Belize, all of which are expected to constitute our initial real estate portfolio. To that effect, on June 30, 2022, we closed on the acquisition of certain real estate assets in San Pedro, Belize (the “Casamora Awaysis Assets”), pursuant to our previously announced series of Agreements of Purchase and Sale, all dated April 15, 2022. The total consideration paid by us for the properties subject to the agreements was at the appraisal value of $11.4 million (excluding transaction costs and fees) and was settled in a combination of a Purchase Money Mortgage of $2.6 million at 0% interest rate, payable on demand, a Purchase Money Mortgage of $280,000 at 0% interest rate that was paid on August 8, 2022 and 56.8 million shares of the Company’s common stock based on a per share price equal to the market price on the date of appraisal of $0.150. As the first acquisition by the Company in Belize and an important milestone, the Company expects to rebrand the Casamora Awaysis Asset, so it is easily identifiable as an Awaysis Property and fit perfectly with its strategy of creating a countrywide network of Awaysis residential enclave communities in the country for owners and guests to travel, work and play.
Cost of Revenues
The company had no revenues as of June 30, 2022, and no cost of revenues.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions and other personnel-related expenses, which may include share-based compensation, for employees engaged in sales, marketing and support of our products and services, promotional and public relations expenses and management and administration expenses in support of sales and marketing.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative costs include payroll, employee benefits, and other personnel-related costs, which include share-based compensation, associated with administrative and support staff, as well as legal and accounting costs, insurance costs, and other administrative fees.
Results of Operations - Fiscal Years Ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021
We had no significant activity during our fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. We commenced activities and started to incur material costs in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 as a result of our change in control transaction in November 2021 and commencement in February 2022 of our business strategy of acquiring, developing, and managing residential vacation home communities in desirable travel destinations.
We have incurred recurring losses to date. Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and, accordingly, do not include adjustments relating to the recoverability and realization of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue in operation.
We expect we will require additional capital to meet our long-term operating requirements. We expect to raise additional capital through, among other things, the sale of equity or debt securities.
Revenues
We recognized no revenue during the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, as we had no revenue generating activities during these periods.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
During the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, we incurred sales and marketing expenses of $49,269 and $0, consisting of marketing and support of our products and services, promotional and public relations expenses and management and administration expenses in support of sales and marketing.
General and Administrative Expenses
During the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, we incurred general and administrative expenses of $190,582 and $12,023, consisting of audit and accounting fees, travel and entertainment, payroll and employee benefits, legal fees, filing fees and transfer agent fees, all relating to both sustaining the corporate existence of the Company and public company-related expenses and transitioning from being a shell company to an operating company under its new management.
Operating Loss
During the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, we recognized operating losses of $(239,851) and $(12,023), respectively. These losses were primarily attributable to the Company transitioning from being a shell company to an operating company under its new management and brand.
Other Income (Expenses)
During the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, we incurred interest expenses of $0 and $2,488, respectively.
Net Loss
During the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021 we recognized net losses of $(239,851) and $(14,511), respectively. These losses were primarily attributable to accounting, marketing, legal, filing fees and transfer agent fees to sustaining the corporate existence of the Company and public company related expenses, and transitioning from being a shell company to an operating company under its new management and brand.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of June 30, 2022, we had cash of $481,965 and had a positive working capital of $8,959,498, of which was mainly from the issuance of shares for real estate inventory and sale of shares from private placement. We have sufficient cash or commitments for funding to satisfy our basic operations for at least 12 months, and expect the anticipated cost of development of our first properties to come from pre-sales and not cash-on-hand. We will need to raise additional cash to satisfy our long-term requirements.
Presently, our principal shareholder has indicated its intention to provide such funds as may be required for the Company to become, and remain, a fully reporting public company while seeking to create value for shareholders by pursuing our business plan to reinvent the Company as a real estate investment and management company. Such intentions do not represent a binding commitment by the principal shareholder and there is no guarantee that our principal shareholder will be able to provide the funding necessary to achieve this objective.
If we are unable to obtain the necessary funding from our principal shareholder, we anticipate facing major challenges in raising the necessary funding to affect our business plan. Raising debt or equity funding for small publicly quoted, penny stock companies is extremely challenging. We can provide no assurance that financing will be available in the amounts it needs or on terms acceptable to it, if at all. If we are not able to secure adequate additional working capital when it becomes needed, it may be required to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible and/or suspend or curtail planned acquisitions and developments. Any of these actions could materially harm our planned business.
Our plan for satisfying our cash requirements and to remain operational beyond the next 12 months or to further expand our asset base is through the sale of shares of our capital stock to third parties. While we intend in the short term to seek to raise up to $25 million through the sale of our common stock, we cannot assure you we will be successful in raising any or all of such capital and in meeting our working capital needs. Through June 30, 2022, we have raised an aggregate of $1,818,000 in such private placement and can give no assurance that we will be successful in raising the remaining funds being sought. The capital raises from issuances of equity securities could result in additional dilution to our shareholders. In addition, to the extent we determine to incur indebtedness, our incurrence of debt could result in debt service obligations and operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities for the years ended June 30, 2022, or 2021. Net cash flows used in operating activities were $(200,381) and $(5,923) for the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, respectively.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, net cash flow used for investing activities was $22,145 and $0, respectively.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In 2021, we financed our operations primarily by way of advances from notes payable from a former director and former majority shareholder, and in 2022 through June 30, 2022, we have financed our operations by way of advances from our current majority shareholder, issuance of shares and debt for real estate inventory, and cash raised from the private placement offering. The Company offered up to $25 million worth of restricted shares of common stock to a limited number of accredited investors, at a price per share of $1.00.
For the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, net cash from financing activities was $704,491 and $5,923, respectively.
We are dependent upon the receipt of capital investment or other financing to fund our ongoing operations and to execute our business plan to become a real estate investment and management company. In addition, we are dependent upon our controlling shareholder to provide continued funding and capital resources. If continued funding and capital resources are unavailable at reasonable terms, we may not be able to implement our plan of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The company applies judgment and estimates that may have material effect in the eventual outcome of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, accounts receivable, inventory and goodwill. The following explains the basis and the procedure where judgment and estimates are applied.
Inventories
New real estate inventory is carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The cost of finished inventories determined on the specific identification method is removed from inventories and recorded as a component of cost of sales at the time revenue is recognized. In addition, an allocation of depreciation and amortization is included in cost of goods sold. Under the specific identification method, if finished real estate inventory can be sold for a profit there is no basis to write down the inventory below the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Going Concern
Our financial statements are prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. As reflected in the financial statements, we had an accumulated deficit at June 30, 2022 and 2021, a net loss and net cash used in operating activities for the reporting periods then ended. As of year, ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, we had cash in the amount of $481,965 and -0-, respectively. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had executed subscription pending funding in the amount of $1,193,000 and -0-, respectively.
The Company is commencing operations and seeking to generate sufficient revenue and have received sufficient subscriptions and funding to support its current basic operations for at least the next 12 months; however, the Company’s cash position may not be sufficient to support the Company’s long-term strategy. While the Company believes in the viability of its strategy to commence operations and generate sufficient revenue to further develop its first properties through presales, there can be no assurances to that effect. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to further implement its business plan, generate sufficient revenue through presales or otherwise, and its ability to raise additional funds by way of private offering or debt. The financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.