ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes thereto, included on pages through of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and “Risk Factors”, which are discussed in Item 1A. The statements below contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. See "Forward-Looking Statements" on page 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Our core mission is to transform the state of women’s health, globally, starting with ovarian cancer. We aim to eradicate late-stage detection of ovarian cancer and to ensure that our solutions will meet the needs of women of all ages, races, ethnicities and stages of the disease. Our core patient goal is to develop a lifelong relationship with each patient, ensuring each woman has access to best-in-class diagnostics.
Our plan is to broaden our commercial focus from ovarian cancer to differential diagnosis of women with a range of gynecological diseases. We plan to continue commercializing our new generation of technology as well as distribute our technology through our decentralized technology transfer service platform, known as “Aspira Synergy”. We also intend to raise public awareness regarding the diagnostic superiority of OVA1 as compared to cancer antigen 125 (“CA125”) for all women, but especially for Black women with adnexal masses, as well as the importance of machine learning algorithm development in ethnic populations. We also plan to advocate for legislation and professional society guidelines to provide broad access for our products and services.
We are focused on commercializing our products both inside and outside the U.S. In 2018 and early 2019, we established medical and advisory support and a Key Opinion Leader Network aligned with our territories in the U.S. In addition, we added to our direct salesforce, and in 2021, we put OVA1 on our global testing platform, Aspira Synergy. This platform allows tests to be deployed internationally as well as run by clients in the United States at major customer sites. In 2022, we plan to continue our efforts to commercialize OVA1plus by utilizing select partnerships for distribution, expand our managed care coverage and contracts in select markets, grow our sales force, increase adoption in our existing customer base, and further deploy of our Aspira Synergy technology transfer platform. We also plan to develop a LDT series of diagnostic algorithms that will include not only biomarkers, but also genetics, clinical risk factors, other diagnostics and patient history data in order to boost predictive value. In 2021, we expanded access to our tests among Medicaid patients as part of our corporate mission to make the best care available to all women. Our first LDT algorithm, branded as OVAWatch, focuses on monitoring women with pelvic masses. We plan to launch the OVAWatch test as an LDT in two stages. Phase I will be a single use point in time test, and Phase II will allow for serial monitoring. We will focus on advancing to the commercial phase of the OVAWatch launch plan including driving provider adoption during the second half of 2022. We believe the single-use product has the potential to triple the addressable market over OVA1plus our current ovarian cancer test. The launch of the serial monitoring test remains targeted for 2023 upon publication of data from the ongoing prospective serial monitoring clinical study. We expect that our second diagnostic algorithm, EndoCheck, will be an aid in the diagnosis of endometriosis. We also plan to expand our portfolio of products to include OVAInherit, which aims to identify risk of malignancy in those patients who are genetically predisposed to ovarian cancer. This algorithm will include genetics, proteins and other modalities to assess such risk. All of our products are focused on gynecologic diseases that cannot be assessed through a traditional biopsy, making our non-invasive blood biopsy more efficient and patient friendly.
To continue our commercialization objectives and reach our financial and operational goals, we require skilled sales individuals with familiarity in our industry. We have from time to time experienced, including as a result of labor shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic, and may in the future experience, shortages of certain types of qualified employees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1, Basis for Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting and Reporting Policies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Preparation of the financial statements requires us to make critical judgments, estimates, and assumptions that affect the amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and revenues and expenses during the reporting periods (and related disclosures). We believe the policies discussed below are the Company’s critical accounting policies, as they include the more significant, subjective, and complex judgments and estimates made when preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize product revenue in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”); all revenue is recognized upon completion of the OVA1, OVERA, OVA1plus or Aspira GenetiX test based on estimates of amounts that will ultimately be realized. In determining the amount to accrue for a delivered test result, we consider factors such as historical payment history and amount, payer coverage, whether there is a reimbursement contract between the payer and us, and any current developments or changes that could impact reimbursement. These estimates require significant judgment by management. We also review our patient account population and determine an appropriate distribution of patient accounts by payer (i.e., Medicare, patient pay, other third-party payer, etc.) into portfolios with similar collection experience. When evaluated for collectability, this results in a materially consistent revenue amount for such portfolios as if each patient account were evaluated on an individual contract basis.
Stock-Based Compensation
We record the fair value of non-cash stock-based compensation costs for stock options and stock purchase rights related to the 2010 and 2019 Plans. We estimate the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes option valuation model. This model requires the input of subjective assumptions including expected stock price volatility, expected life and estimated forfeitures of each award. We use the straight-line method to amortize the fair value over the vesting period of the award. These assumptions consist of estimates of future market conditions, which are inherently uncertain, and therefore are subject to management’s judgment.
The expected life of options is based on historical data of our actual experience with the options we have granted and represents the period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding. This data includes employees’ expected exercise and post-vesting employment termination behaviors. The expected stock price volatility is estimated using our historical volatility in deriving the expected volatility assumption. We made an assessment that our historic volatility is most representative of future stock price trends. The expected dividend yield is based on the estimated annual dividends that we expect to pay over the expected life of the options as a percentage of the market value of our common stock as of the grant date. The risk-free interest rate for the expected life of the options granted is based on the United States Treasury yield curve in effect as of the grant date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information set forth in Note 2 in our consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is hereby incorporated by reference.
Recent Developments
Leadership Updates
On October 30, 2021, Sandra Brooks, M.D., M.B.A., a director of the Company’s board of directors, resigned from the Company’s board of directors for personal reasons.
Effective February 23, 2022, the independent directors of the Company’s board of directors appointed James T. LaFrance as Lead Independent Director, effective as of March 1, 2022, and the Company’s board of directors appointed Celeste Fralick, Ph.D. to the Company’s board of directors and its Audit Committee.
Also, on February 23, 2022, the Company’s board of directors appointed Valerie B. Palmieri as its Executive Chair, effective as of March 1, 2022 and appointed Nicole Sandford, a current director on the board of directors, as the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer, each effective as of March 1, 2022.
On February 23, 2022, the Company’s board of directors appointed James T. LaFrance as Audit Committee Chair, effective as of March 1, 2022
Business, Product and Coverage Updates
Government Strategy Updates
In the first quarter of 2021, we presented at a Congressional Briefing “Advancing Health Outcomes for Women and Minorities.” We delivered a call to action for OVA1 as the standard of care for ovarian cancer risk assessment for Caucasian and non-Caucasian women and the need for funding large race and ethnicity-based trials.
In the first quarter of 2021, we submitted to the FDA a Breakthrough Device designation request with respect to EndoCheck. The FDA’s Breakthrough Devices Program provides patients and health care providers with timely access to medical devices and device-led combination products that provide for more effective treatment or diagnosis of life-threatening or irreversibly debilitating diseases or conditions by speeding up their development, assessment and review. We have been in communications with the FDA regarding our request, and the FDA has demonstrated interest in continuing to work with us on EndoCheck, and we plan to continue our discussions with the agency on Breakthrough Device Program designation. There is no assurance that the FDA will grant our request for EndoCheck to be designated as a Breakthrough Device. If our device is granted a Breakthrough Device designation, we plan to move forward with interacting with the FDA through a variety of options including sprint discussions, a request for a discussion on a data development plan, and a request for clinical protocol agreement, and any final submission will be a de novo submission. As of late October 2021, the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health issued an updated guidance for the content of Premarket Submission for Software Contained in Medical Devices, specific to “Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learnings-Based Software as a Medical Device Action Plan” which will provide a much-needed framework for our future EndoCheck devices. We are currently working to ensure our EndoCheck development process is aligned with the proposed framework. We plan to proceed on a parallel path with the Breakthrough Device process as well as with the LDT development process. This dual track approach pursues the commercialization of an EndoCheck LDT, whereby real-world clinical validity data will be developed that also will support the data needed for an FDA marketing authorization, subsequent to FDA’s Breakthrough designation decision.
On September 27, 2021, we participated in a Congressional Briefing to discuss the gaps in ovarian health diagnostics and treatments as well as solutions to successfully address them. Immediate and innovative actions regarding education, research investment, detection, and insurance coverage were highlighted, in addition to the dire consequences of racial and ethnic disparities and inequities endemic to this malignancy.
Coverage Updates
On January 28, 2021, we announced that we had become a participating laboratory network provider for all Pennsylvania and West Virginia commercial health insurance products of Highmark.
On March 15, 2021, we announced coverage by New York State Medicaid - one of the larger Medicaid populations in the U.S., covering an estimated 6.5 million lives in the state.
On May 13, 2021, we announced the execution of an Aspira Synergy agreement with one of the largest women’s health networks whereby the OVA1plus testing will be performed in its laboratory with data interpretation by Aspira. The health network employs over 300 physicians and is responsible for 500,000 patient visits per year.
On July 8, 2021, the Company announced that AIM Specialty Health, which represents more than 50 million lives in the United States, one of the nation’s largest Laboratory Benefits Management firms owned by Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield, published guidelines indicating that OVA1 is considered medically necessary per the test’s FDA-cleared label. This allows all Anthem and other BCBS plans to modify their own OVA1 coverage policies to reflect this coverage.
On January 31, 2022, we announced that we entered into agreements to provide our testing services to Medicaid plan members in the state of New Hampshire and Washington, D.C equaling nearly a half million covered lives. The state of New Hampshire covers 200,000 lives and Washington D.C. covers 265,000 lives under their respective Medicaid programs. With the addition of these plans, Aspira is now credentialed to provide its OVA1 testing to nearly 80% of the Medicaid population in the U.S., totaling approximately 60 million lives.
Abstract / Study Updates
On May 13, 2021, we announced the initiation of a large prospective study with The Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research, the science arm of Northwell Health, the largest private healthcare provider in New York State. Northwell Health treats over 2 million patients annually and employs over 16,000 credentialled physicians. The study will further support longitudinal studies for the use of OVAWatch as a serial monitoring test for high-risk women predisposed for hereditary ovarian cancer.
In June 2021, we presented an abstract for the American Society for Clinical Oncology 2021 conference and then subsequently submitted the full analytical validation for publication in the third quarter of 2021, which is currently pending acceptance. We plan to publish the clinical validation in late 2022 or early 2023, once the prospective clinical trial has closed and the data has been analysed.
Collaboration Updates
On March 25, 2021, we announced that we entered into an agreement with Harvard Dana-Farber Cancer Institute , Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Medical University of Lodz to evaluate their jointly developed novel microRNA technology in combination with current Aspira technologies, for the development of a highly sensitive and specific early detection test for women with ovarian cancer.
On June 25, 2021, ObsEva S.A. entered into an agreement with the Company to provide certain serum samples to be used in clinical trials. The Company plans to use the samples in its EndoCheck product validation trial.
On October 7, 2021, we announced a partnership with Genoox Ltd., the world’s largest community-driven genomic data platform, to develop solutions to advance women’s health with rapid results, diagnosis, and insights. Currently, the majority of genetic sequencing information can be found across multiple databases which can limit the ability for medical professionals to access and analyze this important data. Without advanced data aggregation and analytics that inform machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms, it is more difficult to detect early-stage diseases as well as monitor and treat patients effectively. Genoox’s global platform brings together onto a single platform information available in the public domain, allowing for the complete analysis of the data and better patient care. We plan to leverage this knowledge base to expand on our proprietary algorithm development across multiple product lines.
We expect our collaboration work with Harvard Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Medical University of Lodz Phase 1 Proof of Concept to continue to be successful. The Phase 1 evaluation surpassed all required metrics and based on the outcome data, the Aspira innovation team along with the collaborators from the aforementioned institutions have begun implementing Phase 2 of the study. In Phase 2, the team is evaluating the combined potential impact of our protein biomarker algorithms and the investigators’ miRNA technology in the development of this assay and platform, which we refer to as OVAInherit.
In connection with our Strategic Research Collaboration Agreement for the development and commercialization of a Micro RNA high risk ovarian cancer early-detection test with Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Medical University of Lodz, during March 2022, we exercised the option for an exclusive world-wide license of this cutting-edge miRNA technology and plans to continue development of a novel combined assay utilizing a new platform with our collaborators.
During the first quarter of 2022, we executed a reorganization and strategic refresh resulting in the separation of a number of employees. The changes were aimed at enhancing our national sales force and driving the accelerated adoption of OVA1plus as the standard of care for early risk detection of ovarian cancer in women who have been planned for surgery. The organizational changes will result in the recording of one-time severance, separation, and settlement payments as well as legal costs in the first quarter of approximately $1,258,000 including estimated future payouts, partially offset by insurance reimbursement of $523,000.
On January 5, 2022, we announced that we entered into a commercial enterprise agreement with Axia Women’s Health, one of the nation’s largest and leading independent women’s healthcare groups. Axia Women’s Health is an innovative and progressive community of more than 400 providers and 150 women’s health centers across New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Indiana, Ohio, and Kentucky. Axia Women’s Health providers offer services across the care continuum including obstetrics, gynecology, mammography, urogynecology, fertility, and other sub-specialties.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, a pandemic, and on March 13, 2020, the United States declared a national emergency with respect to the coronavirus outbreak. This outbreak has severely impacted global economic activity, and many countries and many states in the United States have reacted to the outbreak by instituting quarantines, mandating business and school closures and restricting travel. Our commercial efforts to enter into decentralized arrangements with large healthcare networks and supergroups have continued to move forward. Additionally, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to contain it, our test volume, and resulting revenue, decreased significantly through the beginning of the third quarter of 2020. Volumes started trending back to pre-COVID levels during the late third quarter of 2020. However as various COVID-19 variants evolved, we experienced fluctuating testing volumes. In order to reduce the impact of limitations on visiting physician offices due to closures and quarantines, we implemented other mechanisms for reaching physicians such as virtual sales representative meetings, Key Opinion Leader presentations, and increased digital sales and marketing. Patient enrollment for our planned clinical research studies has been slower than originally planned due to the impact of clinic closures and patients not seeking medical care in some states, which has led to delays in the completion of such studies.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to contain it, the majority of our non-laboratory employees had been working remotely since March 2020. In the third quarter of 2021, non-laboratory employees returned to the office on a hybrid schedule for two to three days per week. We expect to continue to have a hybrid working schedule for non-laboratory employees. In terms of business continuity, our lab operations require on site essential employees. As previously disclosed, we have put in place staffing and reagent contingency plans to ensure there is no down time at our lab. We believe the lab could continue to operate in the event any isolated infection were to impact a portion of the workforce. In addition, as of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K, we have approximately two months of reagents, one of our key testing supplies, in stock, depending on volume of tests performed, and we are working with the manufacturer to ensure a consistent supply over the next six months.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, our test volume increased by 10% compared to the third quarter of 2021. Although we experienced an increase in volume, we believe given the potential for future resurgences of COVID-19 cases and the variety of federal and state actions taken to contain them, we are unable to estimate the potential future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations or cash flows as of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve as of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2021 as compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The Company’s selected summary financial and operating data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Product Revenue. Product revenue was $6,568,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4,543,000 for the same period in 2020. Revenue for ASPiRA LABS is recognized when the OVA1, OVERA, or OVA1plus test is completed based on estimates of what we expect to ultimately realize. The 45% product revenue increase is due to an increase in OVA1 test volume compared to the prior year, in addition to a higher average revenue per test, which increased from $334 in 2020 to $378 in 2021. This increase contributed to the total gross profit margin increasing from 26.6% in 2020 to 45.0% in 2021. We expect revenue to continue to improve in 2022 due to test volumes exceeding pre COVID-19 levels, provided that the COVID-19 pandemic does not further escalate and result in new quarantines and state closures. The duration of the pandemic and efforts to contain it remains uncertain.
The number of OVA1plus tests performed increased 28% to approximately 17,359 OVA1plus tests during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately 13,557 OVA1plus tests for the same period in 2020. The volume increase was primarily due to our commercialization investment, partially offset by decreases in test volume during certain periods of 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to contain it.
The revenue per OVA1plus test performed increased from approximately $334 in 2020 to approximately $378 in 2021. This increase was primarily driven by increased volume of tests performed for higher revenue-per-test-performed payers, such as those for Medicare and insurance carriers, along with decreased volume of tests performed for lower revenue-per-test-performed payers, such as patient payers. Through insourcing our billing function, which we completed in February 2020, we expect to increase the collections from patient payers. We expect that the broader economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to have an effect on our collections from patient payers.
Genetics Revenue. Genetics revenue was $244,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $108,000 for the same period in 2020. Revenue for Aspira GenetiX is recognized when the Aspira GenetiX test is completed based on estimates of what we expect to ultimately realize. The 126% genetics revenue increase is primarily due to an increase in Aspira GenetiX test volume, as well as a higher revenue per test. We expect revenue to improve in 2022 due to continued commercialization investment for the Aspira GenetiX product, provided that the COVID-19 pandemic does not further escalate and result in new quarantines and state closures. The duration of the pandemic and efforts to contain it remains uncertain.
The number of genetics tests performed increased 64% to approximately 505 Aspira GenetiX tests during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately 307 Aspira GenetiX tests for the same period in 2020. The volume increase was primarily due to our commercialization investment, partially offset by decreases in test volume during certain periods of 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to contain it.
Cost of Revenue - Product. Cost of product revenue was $3,016,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2,517,000 for the same period in 2020, representing an increase of $499,000, or 20%, due primarily to increased lab supply and shipping costs due to the increase in tests performed compared to the prior year.
Cost of Revenue - Genetics. Cost of Aspira GenetiX revenue, which consisted primarily of personnel costs, consulting and licensing expenses was $734,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $898,000 for the same period in 2020, representing a decrease of $164,000, or 18%, due primarily to one-time costs related to transitioning of outsourced genetics testing services in 2020 of $250,000.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to develop our technology and carry out clinical studies, and include personnel-related expenses, regulatory costs, reagents and supplies used in research and development laboratory work, infrastructure expenses, contract services and other outside costs. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $3,210,000, or 153%, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily due to clinical validity and product development costs related to OVAWatch, our third-generation product, as well as investments in Aspira Synergy and consulting expenses associated with EndoCheck regulatory clearance. We expect research and development expenses to moderately increase in 2022, as a result of increased projects and clinical studies.
Sales and Marketing Expenses. Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, education and promotional expenses. These expenses include the costs of educating physicians and other healthcare professionals regarding OVA1, OVERA, OVA1plus and Aspira GenetiX. Sales and marketing expenses also include the costs of sponsoring continuing medical education, medical meeting participation, and dissemination of scientific and health economic publications. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $8,243,000, or 93%, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily due to increased personnel, recruiting costs, consulting costs, commissions, and promotional marketing expense. We expect sales and marketing expenses to moderately increase in 2022, due to investing in key strategic hires and product portfolio expansion.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, professional fees and other costs, including legal, finance and accounting expenses and other infrastructure expenses. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $4,987,000, or 60%, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily due to increased personnel expenses of $1,725,000, consulting expenses of $766,000, legal expenses of $961,000, recruiting expenses of $374,000, stock compensation expenses of $750,000, as well as director and officer insurance expenses of $288,000. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase slightly in 2022.
Interest Income (Expense, net). The Company had interest income of $10,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $48,000 in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021. The change in the net balance from interest income to interest expense was primarily due to an increase in the loan contemplated under the DECD Loan Agreement (as defined below) and corresponding additional interest expense.
Other Income, net. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $915,000, compared to the same period in 2020, which consists primarily of forgiveness during the second quarter of 2021 of the Paycheck Protection Program loan (the “PPP Loan”), which the company obtained from BBVA USA in the aggregate amount of approximately $1,006,000 in May 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We plan to continue to expend resources selling and marketing OVA1, OVERA, OVA1plus and Aspira GenetiX and developing additional diagnostic tests and service capabilities.
The Company has incurred significant net losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception, and as a result has an accumulated deficit of approximately $471,728,000 as of December 31, 2021. The Company also expects to incur a net loss and negative cash flows from operations for 2022.
As discussed in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements, in March 2016, the Company entered into a loan agreement (as amended on March 7, 2018 and April 3, 2020, the “DECD Loan Agreement”) with the State of Connecticut Department of Economic and Community Development (the “DECD”), pursuant to which it may borrow up to $4,000,000 from the DECD.
The loan may be prepaid at any time without premium or penalty. An initial disbursement of $2,000,000 was made to the Company on April 15, 2016 under the DECD Loan Agreement. On December 3, 2020, the Company received a disbursement of the remaining $2,000,000 under the DECD Loan Agreement, as the Company had achieved the target employment milestone necessary to receive an additional $1,000,000 under the DECD Loan Agreement and the DECD determined to fund the remaining $1,000,000 under the DECD Loan Agreement after concluding that the required revenue target would likely have been achieved in the first quarter of 2020 in the absence of the impacts of COVID-19.
Under the terms of the DECD Loan Agreement, we may be eligible for forgiveness of up to $1,500,000 of the principal amount of the loan if we achieve certain job creation and retention milestones by December 31, 2022. Conversely, if we are either unable to retain 25 full-time employees with a specified average annual salary for a consecutive two-year period or do not maintain our Connecticut operations through March 22, 2026, the DECD may require early repayment of a portion or all of the loan plus a penalty of 5% of the total funded loan. For additional information, see Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements.
On April 10, 2020, the Company received a stimulus check of approximately $89,000 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”).
As discussed in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements, on May 1, 2020, the Company obtained the PPP Loan from BBVA USA in the aggregate amount of approximately $1,006,000. The application for these funds required the Company to certify, in good faith, that the described economic uncertainty at the time made the loan request necessary to support the ongoing operations of the Company. This certification further required the Company to consider its current business activity and its ability to access other sources of liquidity sufficient to support ongoing operations in a manner that was not significantly detrimental to the business. Under the terms of the CARES Act and the PPP Loan, all or a portion of the principal amount of the PPP Loan was subject to forgiveness so long as, over the 24-week period following the Company’s receipt of the proceeds of the PPP Loan, the Company used those proceeds for payroll costs, rent, utility costs or the maintenance of employee and compensation levels. The PPP Loan, which was granted pursuant to a promissory note, was set to mature on May 1, 2022. The Company applied for forgiveness of the PPP Loan in March 2021, and, effective May 27, 2021, the SBA confirmed the waiver of the Company’s repayment of the PPP Loan. The Company recognized a gain on forgiveness of debt of approximately $1,006,000 and reduced long- and short-term indebtedness by the same amount. The Company remains subject to an audit of the PPP loan. There is no assurance that the Company will not be required to repay all or a portion of the PPP Loan as a result of the audit.
As discussed in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements, during June 2020, all of the 2,810,338 warrants from the Company’s 2017 private placement were exercised. The Company received $5,060,000 in aggregate proceeds from the exercise of the warrants.
As discussed in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements, on July 20, 2020, the Company completed a private placement of 3,150,000 Aspira common stock, par value $0.001 per share, for net proceeds of $10,641,000, after deducting expenses related to the private placement.
As discussed in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements, on February 8, 2021, the Company completed a public offering (the “2021 Offering”) resulting in net proceeds of approximately $47,858,000, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
In connection with a private placement offering of common stock and warrants we completed in May 2013, we entered into a stockholders agreement which, among other things, gives two of the primary investors in that offering the right to participate in any future equity offerings by the Company on the same price and terms as other investors. In addition, the stockholders agreement prohibits us from taking certain material actions without the consent of at least one of the two primary investors in that offering. These material actions include:
Making any acquisition with a value greater than $2 million;
Offering, selling or issuing any securities senior to Aspira’s common stock or any securities that are convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable for securities ranking senior to Aspira’s common stock;
Taking any action that would result in a change in control of the Company or an insolvency event; and
Paying or declaring dividends on any securities of the Company or distributing any assets of the Company other than in the ordinary course of business or repurchasing any outstanding securities of the Company.
The foregoing rights terminate for a primary investor when that investor ceases to beneficially own less than 50% of the shares and warrants (taking into account shares issued upon exercise of the warrants), in the aggregate, that were purchased at the closing of the 2013 private placement.
As mentioned, the Company has incurred significant net losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. At December 31, 2021 we had an accumulated deficit of $471,728,000 and stockholders’ equity of $30,172,000. As of December 31, 2021, we had $37,180,000 of cash and cash equivalents, and $7,840,000 of current liabilities. Working capital was $32,165,000 at December 31, 2021. There can be no assurance that we will achieve or sustain profitability or positive cash flow from operations. In addition, while we expect to grow revenue through ASPiRA LABS, there is no assurance of our ability to generate substantial revenues and cash flows from ASPiRA LABS’ operations. We expect revenue from our products to be our only material, recurring source of cash in 2022. In the event that the Company’s existing cash on hand is not sufficient to fund operations, meet its capital requirements or satisfy the anticipated obligations as they become due, the Company expects to take further action to protect its liquidity position. Such actions may include, but are not limited to:
Raising capital through an equity offering either in the public markets or via a private placement offering (however, no assurance can be given that capital will be available on acceptable terms, or at all);
Reducing executive bonuses or replacing cash compensation with equity grants;
Reducing professional services and consulting fees and eliminating non-critical projects;
Reducing travel and entertainment expenses; and
Reducing, eliminating or deferring discretionary marketing programs.
We expect to incur a net loss and negative cash flows from operations in 2022. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to contain it on our liquidity for 2022 cannot be estimated as of the date of this filing.
However, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months.
Our future liquidity and capital requirements will depend upon many factors, including, among others:
resources devoted to sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
the rate of OVA1, OVERA, OVA1plus and Aspira GenetiX product adoption by physicians and patients;
the rate of product adoption by healthcare systems and large physician practices of the decentralized distribution agreements for OVA1, OVERA and OVA1plus;
the insurance payer community’s acceptance of and reimbursement for our products;
our plans to acquire or invest in other products, technologies and businesses;
the potential need to add study sites to access additional patients to maintain clinical timelines; and
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions taken to contain it, as discussed above.
Net cash used in operating activities was $27,395,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting primarily from the net loss reported of $31,662,000, which includes forgiveness of the PPP Loan in the amount of approximately $1,006,000, primarily offset by non-cash expenses in the amount of $3,539,000 related to stock compensation expense and $302,000 related to depreciation and amortization, and offset by changes in accounts payable, accrued and other liabilities of $2,248,000.
Net cash used in operating activities was $14,734,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting primarily from the net loss reported of $17,905,000, which includes non-cash expenses in the amount of $1,548,000 related to stock compensation
expense and $265,000 related to depreciation and amortization, primarily offset by changes in accounts payable, accrued and other liabilities of $1,594,000.
Net cash used in investing activities was $184,000 and $490,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which consisted primarily of property and equipment purchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $48,378,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which resulted primarily from the 2021 Offering, resulting in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $47,858,000, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. Net cash provided by financing activities was $20,152,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted primarily from the proceeds from the PPP Loan of approximately $1,006,000 in May 2020, the proceeds from the exercise of the stock options of $1,637,000 in June 2020, the proceeds from the exercise of warrants of approximately $5,060,000 in June 2020, the proceeds from the private placement of approximately $10,641,000 in July 2020, after deducting expenses related to the private placement, and the proceeds from the DECD loan of $2,000,000 in December 2020.
We have significant NOL carryforwards as of December 31, 2021 for which a full valuation allowance has been provided due to our history of operating losses. Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (“Section 382”), as well as similar state provisions may restrict our ability to use our NOL credit carryforwards due to ownership change limitations occurring in the past or that could occur in the future. These ownership changes may also limit the amount of NOL credit carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively.
Legislation commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was enacted in December 2017. As a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, federal NOLs arising before January 1, 2018, and federal NOLs arising after January 1, 2018, are subject to different rules. The Company's pre- 2018 federal NOLs will expire in varying amounts from 2022 through 2037, if not utilized; and can offset 100% of future taxable income for regular tax purposes. Any federal NOLs arising after January 1, 2018, can generally be carried forward indefinitely and can offset up to 80% of future taxable income. State NOLs will expire in varying amounts from 2022 through 2037 if not utilized. Our ability to use our NOLs during this period will be dependent on our ability to generate taxable income, and the NOLs could expire before the Company generates sufficient taxable income. The Company’s ability to use NOL carryforwards may be restricted due to ownership change limitations occurring in the past or that could occur in the future, as required by Section 382, as well as similar state specific provisions. These ownership changes may also limit the amount of NOL carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively.
Our management believes that Section 382 ownership changes occurred as a result of our follow-on public offerings in 2011, 2013 and 2015. Any limitation may result in the expiration of a portion of the NOL carryforwards before utilization and any NOL carryforwards that expire prior to utilization as a result of such limitations will be removed from deferred tax assets with a corresponding reduction of our valuation allowance. Due to the existence of a valuation allowance, it is not expected that such limitations, if any, will have an impact on our results of operations or financial position.