ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read together with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on management’s current expectations, estimates and projections about the Company’s business, operations and financial performance. The cautionary statements made in this Form 10-K should be read as applying to all related forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Form 10-K. The Company’s actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those that are discussed under “Forward-Looking Statements,” Item 1A - Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The Company has a disclosure committee consisting of members of senior management and other key employees involved in the preparation of the Company’s SEC reports. The disclosure committee is actively involved in the review and discussion of the Company’s SEC filings. For a discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial statements for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, please refer to Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Overview
American Water is the largest and most geographically diverse, publicly-traded water and wastewater utility company in the United States, as measured by both operating revenues and population served. The Company employs approximately 6,400 professionals who provide drinking water, wastewater and other related services to over 14 million people in 24 states. The Company’s primary business involves the ownership of utilities that provide water and wastewater services to residential, commercial, industrial, public authority, fire service and sale for resale customers, collectively presented as the “Regulated Businesses.” The Company’s utilities operate in approximately 1,700 communities in 14 states in the United States, with 3.4 million active customers with services provided by its water and wastewater networks. Services provided by the Company’s utilities are subject to regulation by PUCs. The Company also operates other market-based businesses that provide water, wastewater and other services to residential and smaller commercial customers, the U.S. government on military installations, as well as municipalities and utility customers, collectively presented as the “Market-Based Businesses.” These Market-Based Businesses are not subject to economic regulation by state PUCs. See Item 1 - Business for additional information.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
American Water continues to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and has taken steps since the beginning of the pandemic to mitigate adverse impacts to the Company. The Company has three main areas of focus as part of its response to COVID-19: the care and safety of its employees; the safety of its customers and the communities it serves; and the execution of its business continuity plan. American Water continues to work with its vendors to prevent disruptions in its supply chain, and, at this time, has not experienced, and does not anticipate, any material disruptions. The Company also continues to monitor the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the capital markets, including impacts that could increase its cost of capital.
The Company has experienced financial impacts since the beginning of the pandemic resulting from lower revenues from the suspension of late fees and foregone reconnect fees in certain states, certain incremental O&M expenses, an increase in uncollectible accounts expense and additional debt costs. These impacts are collectively referred to as “financial impacts.” See Note 3-Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may further impact American Water, including without limitation, its liquidity, financial condition, and results of operations, will depend on future developments, which presently cannot be predicted.
As of February 16, 2022, American Water has commission orders authorizing deferred accounting or cost recovery for COVID-19 financial impacts in 11 of 13 jurisdictions. Other regulatory actions to date are presented in the table below:
The Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary filed for a request with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (the “PaPUC”) to defer as a regulatory asset all identified COVID-19 financial impacts. On September 15, 2021, the PaPUC issued an order approving the Company’s request to defer, with carrying costs, incremental uncollectible expense and other incremental costs net of savings attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. The PaPUC order denied the request to include lost revenues attributed to the waiver of late fees and reconnect fees and expenses associated with additional interest costs. Additionally, the PaPUC order approved the request to allow for the continuation of the deferral of financial impacts, rejecting proposals from the intervening parties to define an end date to the deferral in 2021. As a result of the order discussed above, the Company recorded a net $7 million reduction to its regulatory assets and corresponding impacts to revenue, interest expense and uncollectible expense during the third quarter of 2021. The Company continues to evaluate options within its next base rate case to address these denied items and the resulting financial impact.
On July 28, 2021, the Company’s Tennessee subsidiary filed a stipulation and settlement agreement with the Consumer Advocate Unit in the Financial Division of the Office of the Tennessee Attorney General, which reflected agreement on the deferral of COVID-19-related financial impacts through April 30, 2021. On August 9, 2021, the Tennessee Public Utility Commission denied the stipulation and settlement agreement and moved to address the Company’s Tennessee subsidiary’s petition to defer the COVID-19 financial impacts in a future hearing. On August 26, 2021, the Company’s Tennessee subsidiary filed a motion to withdraw its pending petition, preserving its right to seek recovery of the COVID-19 financial impacts in a future proceeding.
In December 2020, the Kentucky Public Service Commission issued an order denying a request to defer to a regulatory asset the financial impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Consistent with these regulatory orders, the Company has recorded $36 million in regulatory assets and $6 million of regulatory liabilities for the financial impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021.
As of February 16, 2022, one state, New Jersey, continues moratoria until March 15, 2022, on the suspension of service disconnections due to non-payment. The moratoria on disconnects have expired in 12 states. The Company continues to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and will continue to comply with the current ordered moratoria and any future moratoria implemented.
In 2019, the Company completed and submitted its project completion certification to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority (“NJEDA”) in connection with its capital investment in its corporate headquarters in Camden, New Jersey. The NJEDA determined that the Company is qualified to receive $164 million in tax credits over a ten-year period. The Company is required to meet various annual requirements in order to monetize one-tenth of the tax credits annually and is subject to a claw-back period if the Company does not meet certain NJEDA requirements of the tax credit program in years 11 through 15. The Company has made the necessary annual filings for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 and expects to make the 2021 filing by April 30, 2022. As a result, the Company had receivables of $49 million and $115 million in other current assets and other long-term assets, respectively, on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021. The submitted filings are under review by the NJEDA and it is expected that the Company will receive final NJEDA approval and monetize the credits in the first half of 2022.
In March 2020, in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, the NJEDA, pursuant to Executive Order 103 - State of Emergency and a Public Health Emergency, temporarily waived the requirement that a full-time employee must spend at least 80% of his or her time at the qualified business facility (“QBF”) to meet the definition of eligible position or full-time job. The waiver will continue for as long as New Jersey’s Executive Order 281 is valid. On July 2, 2021, New Jersey’s Governor approved a bill that revised provisions of the Economic Recovery Act of 2020 and other economic development programs, including amending the definition of an eligible position and full-time job in the Grow New Jersey Program and replacing the 80% requirement of time spent at the QBF. The bill states that an eligible position is one that is filled by a full-time employee who has their primary office at the QBF and spends at least 60% of their time at the QBF. The bill specifically states that it supersedes the existing regulations and existing incentive agreements that require an eligible employee spend at least 80% of their time at the QBF.
Sale of Homeowner Services Group
On the Closing Date, the Company sold all of the equity interests in subsidiaries that comprised HOS to the Buyer for total consideration of approximately $1.275 billion, resulting in a pre-tax gain on sale of $748 million. The consideration is comprised of $480 million in cash, a seller promissory note issued by the Buyer in the principal amount of $720 million, and a contingent cash payment of $75 million payable upon satisfaction of certain conditions on or before December 31, 2023. The structure of the transaction enables the initial cash proceeds to be redeployed into the Regulated Businesses to fund near-term incremental capital investments, while interest on the seller note provides a stream of earnings during its term. Upon maturity, the proceeds from the repayment of the seller note are expected to be used to fund capital investment in the Regulated Businesses. This sale narrowed the focus of the Company’s Market-Based Businesses primarily to MSG.
The seller note has a five-year term, is payable in cash, and bears interest at a rate of 7.00% per year during the term. The repayment obligations of the Buyer under the seller note have been secured by a first priority security interest in certain property of the Buyer and the former HOS subsidiaries, including their cash and securities accounts, as well as a pledge of the equity interests in each of those subsidiaries, subject to certain limitations and exceptions. The seller note requires compliance with affirmative and negative covenants (subject to certain conditions, limitations and exceptions), including a covenant limiting the incurrence by the Buyer and certain affiliates of additional indebtedness in excess of certain thresholds, but does not include any financial maintenance covenants.
Beginning December 9, 2024, the Company has a put right pursuant to which it may require the seller note to be repaid in full at par, plus accrued and unpaid interest, except that upon the occurrence of a disruption event in the broadly syndicated term loan “B” debt financing market, repayment by the Buyer pursuant to the Company’s exercise of the put right will be delayed until the market disruption event ends.
The seller note may not be prepaid at the Buyer’s election except in certain limited circumstances before the fourth anniversary of the Closing Date. If the Buyer seeks to repay the seller note in breach of this non-call provision, an event of default will occur under the seller note and the Company may, among other actions, demand repayment in full together with a premium ranging from 105.5% to 107.5% of the outstanding principal amount of the loan and a customary “make-whole” payment.
The Company and the Buyer also entered into a revenue share agreement, pursuant to which the Company is to receive 10% of the revenue generated from customers who are billed for home warranty services through an applicable Company subsidiary (an “on-bill” arrangement), and 15% of the revenue generated from any future on-bill arrangements entered into after the closing. Unless earlier terminated, this agreement has a term of up to 15 years, which may be renewed for up to two five-year periods.
Financing Activities
On May 10, 2021, American Water Capital Corp. (“AWCC”) completed a $1.1 billion debt offering, which included the sale of $550 million aggregate principal amount of its 2.30% senior notes due 2031 and $550 million aggregate principal amount of its 3.25% senior notes due 2051. Net proceeds of this offering were used to lend funds to parent company and its regulated subsidiaries, to prepay $327 million in aggregate principal amount of AWCC’s outstanding senior notes, to repay AWCC’s commercial paper obligations and for general corporate purposes. See Note 12-Long-Term Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
As a result of AWCC’s prepayment of the various senior notes, a make-whole premium of $15 million was paid to the holders thereof on June 14, 2021. Substantially all of the early debt extinguishment costs were allocable to the Company’s utility subsidiaries and recorded as regulatory assets, as the Company believes they are probable of recovery in future rates.
Selected Financial Data
This selected financial data below should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as the remainder of this Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Financial Results
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, diluted earnings per share (GAAP) were $6.95, $3.91 and $3.43, respectively. In 2021, as compared to 2020, diluted earnings per share increased $3.04. This increase was primarily driven by a pre-tax gain on sale of $748 million relating to the sale of HOS and continued growth in the Regulated Businesses from infrastructure investment, acquisitions and organic growth. These increases were offset by the $45 million pre-tax contribution to the AWCF authorized by the Company in 2021, and the impacts from weather in both 2021 and 2020, which had an estimated net decrease of $13 million in revenues in 2021, or $0.05 per share. The consolidated net income impact of the gain on sale of HOS and the AWCF contribution is $491 million, or $2.70 per share, inclusive of a $13 million net income benefit included in the Other segment, from the revaluation of state net operating losses that can now be utilized as a result of the sale.
Growth Through Capital Investment in Infrastructure and Regulated Acquisitions
The Company expects to continue to grow its businesses, with the majority of its growth to be achieved in the Regulated Businesses through (i) continued capital investment in the Company’s infrastructure to provide safe, clean, reliable and affordable water and wastewater services to its customers, and (ii) regulated acquisitions to expand the Company’s services to new customers. In 2021, the Company invested $1.9 billion, primarily in the Regulated Businesses, as discussed below:
Regulated Businesses Growth and Optimization
•$1.8 billion capital investment in the Regulated Businesses, the majority for infrastructure improvements and replacements; and
•$135 million to fund acquisitions, including deposits discussed below, in the Regulated Businesses, which added approximately 20,000 water and wastewater customers during 2021, in addition to approximately 17,500 customers added through organic growth during 2021.
On April 6, 2021, the Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary entered into an agreement to acquire the wastewater assets of the York City Sewer Authority for $235 million, plus an amount of average daily revenue calculated for the period between the final meter reading and the date of closing. This system, directly and indirectly through bulk contracts, serves more than 45,000 customers. In connection with the execution of the acquisition agreement, the Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary paid a $20 million deposit to the seller on April 30, 2021, which is refundable in the event the agreement is terminated prior to closing of the acquisition. The Company expects to close this acquisition in the first half of 2022, pending regulatory approval.
On March 29, 2021, the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary entered into an agreement to acquire the water and wastewater assets of Egg Harbor City for $22 million. The water and wastewater systems currently serve approximately 1,500 customers each, or 3,000 combined, and are being sold through the New Jersey Water Infrastructure Protection Act process. The Company expects to close this acquisition in the second half of 2022, pending regulatory approval.
During 2022, the Company closed on the acquisition of two regulated water and wastewater systems adding approximately 700 customers, for a total aggregate purchase price of $2 million. As of February 16, 2022, the Company has entered into agreements for pending acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses, including the York City Sewer Authority and Egg Harbor City agreements discussed above, to add approximately 77,000 additional customers.
Sale of New York American Water Company, Inc.
On January 1, 2022, the Company completed the previously disclosed sale of its regulated utility operations in New York to Liberty, an indirect, wholly owned subsidiary of Algonquin Power & Utilities Corp. Liberty purchased from the Company all of the capital stock of the Company’s New York subsidiary for a purchase price of $608 million in cash. The sale was approved by the New York State Department of Public Service on December 16, 2021. The Company’s regulated New York operations represented approximately 127,000 customers in the State of New York. The assets and related liabilities of the New York subsidiary were classified as held for sale on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021. See Note 6-Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Sale of Michigan American Water Company
On February 4, 2022, the Company completed the sale of its operations in Michigan for approximately $6 million.
Future Growth
The Company expects to invest between $13 billion to $14 billion over the next five years, and between $28 billion to $32 billion over the next 10 years, including $2.5 billion in 2022. The Company’s expected future investments include:
•capital investment for infrastructure improvements in the Regulated Businesses between $11.5 billion to $12 billion over the next five years, and between $25 billion to $28 billion over the next 10 years, including $2 billion expected in 2022; and
•growth from acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses to expand the Company’s water and wastewater customer base of between $1.5 billion to $2 billion over the next five years, and between $3 billion to $4 billion over the next 10 years, including $500 million expected in 2022.
Presented in the following chart is the estimated allocation of the Company’s expected capital investment for infrastructure improvements in its Regulated Businesses over the next five years, by purpose:
Operational Excellence
The Company’s adjusted regulated O&M efficiency ratio, which is used as a measure of the operating performance of the Regulated Businesses, was 34.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 34.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement in this ratio reflects the continued focus on operating costs, as well as an increase in operating revenues for the Regulated Businesses after considering the adjustment for the amortization of the excess accumulated deferred income taxes (“EADIT”) shown in the table below.
The Company’s adjusted regulated O&M efficiency ratio is a non-GAAP measure and is defined by the Company as its operation and maintenance expenses from the Regulated Businesses, divided by the operating revenues from the Regulated Businesses, where both operation and maintenance expenses and operating revenues were adjusted to eliminate purchased water expense. Operating revenues were further adjusted to exclude reductions for the amortization of the EADIT. Also excluded from operation and maintenance expenses is the allocable portion of non-O&M support services costs, mainly depreciation and general taxes, which is reflected in the Regulated Businesses segment as operation and maintenance expenses, but for consolidated financial reporting purposes, is categorized within other line items in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations. Additionally, the Company excluded the impact of certain Freedom Industries chemical spill settlement activities recognized in 2019 from operation and maintenance expenses. The items discussed above were excluded from the O&M efficiency ratio calculation as they are not reflective of management’s ability to increase the efficiency of the Regulated Businesses.
The Company evaluates its operating performance using this ratio, and believes it is useful to investors because it directly measures improvement in the operating performance and efficiency of the Regulated Businesses. This information is derived from the Company’s consolidated financial information but is not presented in its financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. This information supplements and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s GAAP disclosures, and should be considered as an addition to, and not a substitute for, any GAAP measure. The Company’s adjusted regulated O&M efficiency ratio (i) is not an accounting measure that is based on GAAP; (ii) is not based on a standard, objective industry definition or method of calculation; (iii) may not be comparable to other companies’ operating measures; and (iv) should not be used in place of the GAAP information provided elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Presented in the table below is the calculation of the Company’s adjusted regulated O&M efficiency ratio and a reconciliation that compares operation and maintenance expenses and operating revenues, each as determined in accordance with GAAP, to those amounts utilized in the calculation of its adjusted O&M efficiency ratio:
(a) Includes the impact of a reduction of a liability in the first quarter of 2019 related to the Freedom Industries chemical spill.
(b) The calculation assumes regulated purchased water revenues approximate regulated purchased water expenses.
Regulatory Matters
General Rate Cases
Presented in the table below are annualized incremental revenues, excluding reductions for the amortization of EADIT that are generally offset in income tax expense, assuming a constant water sales volume, resulting from general rate cases authorizations that became effective during 2019 through 2021:
(a)Excludes authorized increases of $7 million and $4 million in 2021 and 2019, respectively, for the Company’s New York subsidiary, which was sold on January 1, 2022. See Note 6-Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
On November 18, 2021, the CPUC unanimously approved a final decision in the test year 2021 general rate case filed by the Company’s California subsidiary, which is retroactive to January 1, 2021. The Company’s California subsidiary received authorization for additional annualized water and wastewater revenues of $22 million, excluding agreed to reductions for EADIT as a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “TCJA”). The EADIT reduction in revenues is $4 million and is offset by a like reduction in income tax expense. On January 18, 2022, the Company’s California subsidiary filed for approval of $13 million in 2022 escalation increases, excluding $4 million of reductions related to the TCJA. This filing, which is retroactive to January 1, 2022, is subject to CPUC approval with a 45-day review period.
On June 28, 2021, an order was issued authorizing an increase of $1 million in the general rate case filed by the Company’s Iowa subsidiary in 2020. The Company’s Iowa subsidiary filed tariffs consistent with the order on September 23, 2021. Effective October 11, 2021, the Iowa Utilities Board approved the tariffs and implemented the new rates.
On April 7, 2021, the Company’s Missouri subsidiary was authorized additional annualized revenues of $22 million, effective May 28, 2021, excluding agreed to reductions for EADIT as a result of the TCJA. The EADIT reduction in revenues is $25 million and is offset by a like reduction in income tax expense. The protected EADIT balance of $72 million is being returned to customers using the average rate assumption method (“ARAM”), and the unprotected EADIT balance of $74 million is being returned to customers over 10 years. The $25 million EADIT reduction includes both the protected and unprotected catch-up period EADIT of $13 million. The catch-up period of January 1, 2018 through May 31, 2021 covers the period from when the lower federal corporate income tax rate went into effect until new base rates went into effect and will be amortized over 2.5 years.
On March 2, 2021, an administrative law judge (“ALJ”) in the Office of Administrative Law of New Jersey filed an initial decision with the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities (the “NJBPU”) that recommended denial of a petition filed by the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary, which sought approval of acquisition adjustments in rate base of $29 million associated with the acquisitions of Shorelands Water Company, Inc. in 2017 and the Borough of Haddonfield’s water and wastewater systems in 2015. On July 29, 2021, the NJBPU issued an order adopting the ALJ’s initial decision without modification. The Company’s New Jersey subsidiary filed a Notice of Appeal with the New Jersey Appellate Division on September 10, 2021. A scheduling order was issued on October 18, 2021 establishing a briefing schedule through March 2022. There is no financial impact to the Company as a result of the NJBPU’s order, since the acquisition adjustments are currently recorded as goodwill on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
On February 25, 2021, the Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary was authorized additional annualized revenues of $90 million, effective January 28, 2021, excluding agreed to reductions for EADIT as a result of the TCJA, over two steps. The EADIT reduction in revenues is $19 million. The overall increase, net of TCJA reductions, is $71 million in revenues combined over two steps. The first step was effective January 28, 2021 in the amount of $70 million ($51 million including TCJA reductions) and the second step will be effective January 1, 2022 in the amount of $20 million. The protected EADIT balance of $200 million is being returned to customers using the ARAM, and the unprotected EADIT balance of $116 million is being returned to customers over 20 years. The $19 million annually includes both the protected and unprotected EADIT amortizations and a portion of catch-up period EADIT. A bill credit of $11 million annually for two years returns to customers the remainder of the EADIT catch-up period amortization. The catch-up period of January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2020 covers the period from when the lower federal corporate income tax rate went into effect until new base rates went into effect and will be amortized over two years.
Pending General Rate Case Filings
On February 10, 2022, the Company’s Illinois subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting $71 million in additional annualized revenues excluding proposed reductions for EADIT as a result of TCJA and infrastructure surcharges.
On January 14, 2022, the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting $110 million in additional annualized revenues excluding proposed reductions for EADIT as a result of TCJA and infrastructure surcharges.
On December 1, 2021, the Company’s Kentucky subsidiary filed a wastewater rate case requesting additional revenues of $1 million, excluding proposed reductions for EADIT as a result of TCJA. The Company requested a four-step rate increase for their wastewater operations with effective dates of June 1, 2022, June 1, 2023, June 1, 2024 and June 1, 2025 for annual amounts of less than $1 million each year. The Company filed their wastewater case under the alternative rate filing process for smaller utilities which calculates an operating ratio of 88% rather than a return on equity.
On November 15, 2021, the Company’s Virginia subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting $15 million in additional annualized revenues excluding proposed reductions for EADIT as a result of TCJA.
On August 18, 2021, the Company’s Hawaii subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting $2 million in additional annualized revenues excluding proposed reductions for EADIT as a result of TCJA.
On April 30, 2021, the Company’s West Virginia subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting $32 million in annualized incremental revenues excluding proposed reductions for EADIT as a result of TCJA and infrastructure surcharges. The proposed EADIT reduction in revenues is $1 million and the exclusion for infrastructure surcharges is $10 million. Intervenor testimony was received on September 20, 2021. The Company’s rebuttal testimony was filed on October 5, 2021. Hearings were conducted on November 3 and 4, 2021. A final order is expected no later than February 24, 2022.
The Company’s California subsidiary submitted its application on May 3, 2021 to set its cost of capital for 2022 through 2024. According to the CPUC’s process, a decision is expected to be issued, setting the authorized cost of capital in the third quarter of 2022.
Infrastructure Surcharges
A number of states have authorized the use of regulatory mechanisms that permit rates to be adjusted outside of a general rate case for certain costs and investments, such as infrastructure surcharge mechanisms that permit recovery of capital investments to replace aging infrastructure. Presented in the table below are annualized incremental revenues, assuming a constant water sales volume, resulting from infrastructure surcharge authorizations that became effective during 2019 through 2021:
(a)Excludes authorized increases of $2 million in 2019 for the Company’s New York subsidiary, which was sold on January 1, 2022. See Note 6-Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(b)In 2021, $12 million was effective on December 30 and $14 million was effective June 28. In 2020, $10 million was effective June 29 and $10 million was effective January 1. In 2019, the effective date was July 1.
(c)In 2021, the effective date was October 7. In 2020, $2 million was effective December 14 and $10 million was effective June 27. In 2019, $5 million was effective December 21 and $9 million was effective June 24.
(d)In 2021, the effective date was January 1. In 2020, $8 million was effective October 1, $4 million was effective July 1, $5 million was effective April 1 and $10 million was effective January 1. In 2019, $6 million was effective October 1, $3 million was effective July 1 and $2 million was effective April 1.
Presented in the table below are annualized incremental revenues, assuming a constant water sales volume, resulting from infrastructure surcharge authorizations that became effective after January 1, 2022:
Pending Infrastructure Surcharge Filings
On January 19, 2022, the Company’s Indiana subsidiary filed for infrastructure surcharges requesting $8 million in additional annualized revenues.
On June 30, 2021, the Company’s West Virginia subsidiary filed for an infrastructure surcharge requesting $3 million in additional annualized revenues.
Tax Matters
Federal Tax Legislation
On November 15, 2021, the IIJA was signed into law and was designed to provide significant investment in the nation’s infrastructure. The Company has analyzed the bill to assess legislative tax impacts, and determined that the most significant aspect impacting the Company is the provision for special rules for regulated water and wastewater utilities as it relates to the tax treatment of contributions in aid of construction (“CIAC”). The bill reinstates the pre-TCJA tax treatment of CIAC, which allows regulated water and wastewater utilities to generally exclude the receipt of CIAC from taxable income. This provision is effective for contributions made after December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has reflected the exemption retroactively to January 1, 2021.
On December 22, 2017, the TCJA was signed into law, which, among other things, enacted significant and complex changes to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), including a reduction in the federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% as of January 1, 2018. The enactment of the TCJA required a re-measurement of the Company’s deferred income taxes. The portion of this re-measurement related to the Regulated Businesses was substantially offset by a regulatory liability as EADIT will be used to benefit the Company’s regulated customers in future rates. Twelve of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries are amortizing EADIT and crediting customers. The Company expects the timing of the amortization of EADIT credits for the one remaining regulated subsidiary to be addressed in a pending rate case or other proceedings. When crediting EADIT to the customer, the Company records both a reduction to revenue and a reduction to income tax expense, having no material impact on net income.
Federal Net Operating Loss
The Company had no federal NOL carryover balance remaining as of December 31, 2021 due to the HOS sale, after which time the Company became a cash taxpayer for federal income tax purposes.
Legislative Updates
During 2021, the Company’s regulatory jurisdictions enacted the following legislation that has been approved and is effective as of February 16, 2022:
•California passed electronic payment legislation, Assembly Bill 1058, which permanently changes state law to allow investor-owned water and wastewater utilities to accept electronic payments, including credit and debit cards, without charging processing fees to customers.
•California passed CPUC consolidation timeline legislation, Assembly Bill 1250, which requires the CPUC to make timely decisions on applications to acquire systems. Consolidations of $5 million or less are to be processed within 180 days and those more than $5 million are required to be processed within 12 months.
•The Kentucky General Assembly adopted House Bill 465 relating to the acquisition of water and wastewater utilities. The legislation affirms a method in valuing water and wastewater systems above net book value and establishes a timeline of 60 days for Public Service Commission approval of an acquisition.
•Indiana House Enrolled Act 1287 creates a mechanism that reduces the required upfront cost to new customers for a water or wastewater utility to extend service to underserved areas.
•Indiana House Enrolled Act 349 establishes a tax rider for water and wastewater utilities based upon a change in state or federal income tax law. The legislation also requires the Indiana Finance Authority to prioritize loans that secure long-term benefits over shorter term projects.
•New Jersey passed Lead Service Line Replacement Bill, Senate Bill 3398/Assembly Bill 5343, which provides for the replacement of lead service lines within 10 years of the effective date of the bill and authorizes cost recovery of customer-owned lead service lines as an O&M expense plus interest through a semi-annual surcharge.
•Missouri passed the Water and Sewer Infrastructure Act, Senate Bill 44/House Bill 397, to establish a new statewide surcharge mechanism program which covers replacement of aging water distribution and sewer collection infrastructure. This legislation broadens the eligible projects covered by the current Infrastructure System Replacement Surcharge mechanism and expands its applicability to projects across the state.
•New Jersey passed Senate Bill 647/House Bill 4825 which strengthens the WQAA by requiring the Department of Environmental Protection to adopt regulations to implement the WQAA, enhancing asset management plans and reporting, upgrading cyber security standards and adding criminal penalties for falsifying reports.
•Illinois passed House Bill 414, Low Income Water & Sewer Financial Assistance Program, which authorizes the state’s Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity to institute a water and sewer assistance program for customers of privately and publicly owned systems. The program is modeled off the existing energy supplemental state Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program.
In September 2020, the CPUC released a decision under its Low-Income Rate Payer Assistance program rulemaking that will require the Company’s California subsidiary to file a proposal to alter its water revenue adjustment mechanism in its next general rate case filing in 2022, which would become effective in January 2024. On October 5, 2020, the Company’s California subsidiary filed an application for rehearing of the decision and following the CPUC’s denial of its rehearing application in September 2021, the Company’s California subsidiary filed a petition for writ of review with the California Supreme Court on October 27, 2021.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Presented in the table below are the Company’s consolidated results of operations:
Segment Results of Operations
The Company’s operating segments are comprised of the revenue-generating components of its business for which separate financial information is internally produced and regularly used by management to make operating decisions, assess performance and allocate resources. The Company operates its business primarily through one reportable segment, the Regulated Businesses segment. The Company also operates other businesses that, individually, do not meet the criteria of a reportable segment in accordance with GAAP, and are collectively presented as the Market-Based Businesses, which is consistent with how management assesses the results of these businesses. For a discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial statements for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, please refer to Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Regulated Businesses Segment
Presented in the table below is financial information for the Regulated Businesses:
Operating Revenues
Presented in the tables below is information regarding the main components of the Regulated Businesses’ operating revenues:
(a)Includes other operating revenues consisting primarily of miscellaneous utility charges, fees and rents.
In 2021, as compared to 2020, operating revenues increased $129 million primarily due to $208 million increase from authorized rate increases, including infrastructure surcharges, principally to fund infrastructure investment in various states, and a $26 million increase from water and wastewater acquisitions, as well as organic growth in existing systems. These increases were offset by an estimated net decrease of $13 million from weather in both 2021 and 2020, a $5 million decrease from lower water services demand and ongoing customer usage reductions from conservation, and a $79 million decrease in revenues due to the amortization of EADIT, which is generally offset with a reduction in income tax expense. Additionally, there was an $8 million decrease in revenue due to the denial of authorization to defer certain COVID-19 financial impacts based on the PaPUC order received by the Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary. See Note 3-Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Operation and Maintenance
Presented in the table below is information regarding the main components of the Regulated Businesses’ operating and maintenance expense:
Employee-Related Costs
In 2021, as compared to 2020, employee-related costs increased $27 million primarily due to a $20 million increase in salaries and wages from higher headcount and related compensation expense supporting growth in the businesses and a $5 million increase in pension service costs.
Production Costs
In 2021, as compared to 2020, production costs increased $18 million primarily due to a $9 million increase in fuel and power due to higher rates and system delivery across several subsidiaries and a $4 million increase in purchased water primarily due to usage in the Company’s California subsidiary.
Maintenance Materials and Supplies
In 2021, as compared to 2020, maintenance materials and supplies increased $9 million primarily due to timing of maintenance and tank painting projects in the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary and increased paving costs from a higher volume of main breaks.
Customer Billing and Accounting
In 2021, as compared to 2020, customer billing and accounting increased $8 million primarily due to higher call volumes experienced at our customer service centers, higher collections costs and higher uncollectible costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
In 2021, as compared to 2020, depreciation and amortization increased $39 million primarily due to additional utility plant placed in service from capital infrastructure investments and acquisitions.
General Taxes
In 2021, as compared to 2020, general taxes increased $16 million, primarily due to increased capital investments, including acquisitions, increased tax rates across several subsidiaries and an increase in the New Jersey Gross Receipts Tax.
Other Income (Expenses)
In 2021, as compared to 2020, other income (expenses) increased $26 million primarily due to the reduction in the non-service cost components of pension and other postretirement benefits expense resulting from higher asset returns.
Provision for Income Taxes
In 2021, as compared to 2020, the Regulated Businesses’ provision for income taxes decreased $45 million. The Regulated Businesses’ effective income tax rate was 17.9% and 23.3% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in the amortization of EADIT resulting from the TCJA, pursuant to regulatory orders. The amortization of EADIT is generally offset with reductions in revenue.
Market-Based Businesses
Presented in the table below is information for the Market-Based Businesses:
Operating Revenues
In 2021, as compared to 2020, operating revenues increased $23 million primarily due to a $32 million increase in capital and O&M projects in the MSG, across several of the Company’s military bases, primarily at the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, Fort Belvoir and Joint Base Lewis-McChord and a $7 million increase in the CSG related to the contract with the City of Camden, New Jersey. These increases were partially offset by a $17 million year over year decrease at HOS due to the sale of the business in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Operation and Maintenance
Presented in the table below is information regarding the main components of the Market-Based Businesses’ operating and maintenance expense:
Operating Supplies and Services
In 2021, as compared to 2020, operating supplies and services increased $73 million primarily due to the $45 million pre-tax contribution to the AWCF authorized by the Company in 2021, costs associated with MSG from increased capital and O&M projects as discussed above and an increase in additional O&M costs related to CSG.
Maintenance Materials and Supplies
In 2021, as compared to 2020, maintenance materials and supplies increased $9 million primarily due to an increase in CSG related to the contract with the City of Camden, New Jersey and an increase in HOS due to contract growth and an increase in claims. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in HOS due to the sale of its business in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Employee-Related Costs
In 2021, as compared to 2020, employee-related costs increased $6 million primarily due to an increase in salaries and wages in MSG from the addition of new bases in the second half of 2020 and HOS for additional customer service costs to support the business.
Depreciation and Amortization
In 2021, as compared to 2020, depreciation and amortization decreased $4 million primarily due to lower intangible asset amortization expenses in HOS.
Gain or (Loss) on Sale of Businesses
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of $748 million relating to the sale of HOS. See Note 6-Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Provision for Income Taxes
In 2021, as compared to 2020, provision for income taxes increased $219 million primarily due to the sale of HOS. See Note 6-Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company uses its capital resources, including cash, primarily to (i) fund operating and capital requirements, (ii) pay interest and meet debt maturities, (iii) pay dividends, (iv) fund acquisitions, (v) fund pension and postretirement benefit obligations, and (vi) to pay federal income taxes, which the Company began to pay as a result of fully utilizing its NOL carryforward in 2021. The Company invests a significant amount of cash on regulated capital projects where it expects to earn a long-term return on investment. Additionally, the Company operates in rate regulated environments in which the amount of new investment recovery may be limited, and where such recovery generally takes place over an extended period of time, and certain capital recovery is also subject to regulatory lag. See Item 1 - Business-Regulated Businesses-Regulation and Rate Making for additional information. The Company expects to fund future maturities of long-term debt through a combination of external debt and, to the extent available, cash flows from operations. Since the Company expects its capital investments over the next few years to be greater than its cash flows from operating activities, the Company currently plans to fund the excess of its capital investments over its cash flows from operating activities for the next five years through a combination of long-term debt and equity in addition to the proceeds from the sales of HOS and the Company’s New York subsidiary. If necessary, the Company may delay certain capital investments or other funding requirements, or pursue financing from other sources to preserve liquidity. In this event, the Company believes it can rely upon cash flows from operations to meet its obligations and fund its minimum required capital investments for an extended period of time.
The Company regularly evaluates and monitors its cash requirements for capital investments, acquisitions, operations, commitments, debt maturities, interest and dividends. The Company’s business is capital intensive, with a majority of this capital funded by cash flows from operations. When necessary, the Company also obtains funds from external sources, primarily in the debt markets and through short-term commercial paper borrowings. In order to meet short-term liquidity needs, AWCC issues commercial paper that is supported by its revolving credit facility. The Company may also access the equity capital markets to support its capital funding requirements, as needed. The Company’s access to external financing on reasonable terms depends on its credit ratings and current business conditions, including that of the utility and water utility industry in general, as well as conditions in the debt or equity capital markets, and the national and international economic and geopolitical arenas. Disruptions in the credit markets may discourage lenders from extending the terms of such commitments or agreeing to new commitments. Market disruptions may also limit the Company’s ability to issue debt and equity securities in the capital markets.
If these unfavorable business, market, financial and other conditions deteriorate to the extent that the Company is no longer able to access the commercial paper and/or capital markets on reasonable terms, AWCC has access to an unsecured revolving credit facility that expires in March 2025 with aggregate bank commitments of $2.25 billion. The facility is used principally to fulfill the Company’s short-term liquidity needs by supporting AWCC’s $2.10 billion commercial paper program and to provide a sublimit of up to $150 million for letters of credit. Subject to satisfying certain conditions, the credit agreement permits AWCC to increase the maximum commitment under the facility by up to $500 million. As of December 31, 2021, AWCC had no outstanding borrowings and $76 million of outstanding letters of credit under its revolving credit facility, with $1.59 billion available to fulfill its short-term liquidity needs and to issue letters of credit.
To ensure adequate liquidity given the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on debt and capital markets, on March 20, 2020, AWCC entered into a Term Loan Credit Agreement, by and among parent company, AWCC and the lenders party thereto (the “Term Loan Facility”). The net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes of AWCC and American Water and to provide additional liquidity. The Term Loan Facility commitments terminated at maturity on March 19, 2021, and the Term Loan Facility was repaid in full.
The Company believes that its ability to access the debt and equity capital markets, the revolving credit facility and cash flows from operations will generate sufficient cash to fund the Company’s short-term requirements. The Company believes it has sufficient liquidity and the ability to manage its expenditures, should there be a disruption of the capital and credit markets. However, there can be no assurance that the lenders will be able to meet existing commitments to AWCC under the revolving credit facility, or that AWCC will be able to access the commercial paper or loan markets in the future on acceptable terms or at all. See Credit Facilities and Short-Term Debt below for additional information.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities primarily result from the sale of water and wastewater services and, due to the seasonality of demand, are generally greater during the warmer months. The Company’s future cash flows from operating activities will be affected by, among other things: customers’ ability to pay for service in a timely manner, economic utility regulation, inflation, compliance with environmental, health and safety standards, production costs, maintenance costs, customer growth, declining customer usage of water, employee-related costs, including pension funding, weather and seasonality, taxes, and overall economic conditions.
Operating cash flows can be negatively affected by changes in the Company’s rate regulated environments, changes in the Market-Based Businesses, changes in the economy, interest rates, the timing of tax payments, and the Company’s customers’ ability to pay for service in a timely manner, among other items. The Company can provide no assurance that its customers’ historical payment pattern will continue in the future. The Company’s current liabilities may exceed current assets mainly from debt maturities due within one year and the use of short-term debt as a funding source, primarily to meet scheduled maturities of long-term debt, fund acquisitions and construction projects, as well as cash needs, which can fluctuate significantly due to the seasonality of the business and other factors. The Company addresses cash timing differences primarily through its short-term liquidity funding mechanisms.
Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows from operating activities:
(a)Includes provision for losses on accounts receivable, pension and non-pension postretirement benefits and other non-cash, net. Details of each component can be found on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
(b)Changes in working capital include changes to receivables and unbilled revenues, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and other current assets and liabilities, net, less the settlement of cash flow hedges.
In 2021, cash flows provided by operating activities increased $15 million, primarily due to an increase in net income, changes in working capital, primarily from an increase in accrued taxes, and an increase in depreciation and amortization due to additional utility plant placed in service from capital infrastructure investments. Partially offsetting these increases was the gain on sale of businesses, due to the gain on the sale of HOS.
The Company expects to make pension contributions to the plan trusts of $37 million in 2022. In addition, the Company estimates that contributions will amount to $35 million, $33 million, $30 million and $27 million in 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026, respectively. Actual amounts contributed could change materially from these estimates as a result of changes in assumptions and actual investment returns, among other factors.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows from investing activities:
In 2021, cash flows used in investing activities decreased $525 million primarily due to proceeds received from the sale of HOS and timing of payments for capital expenditures. The Company continues to invest across all infrastructure categories, mainly replacement and renewal of transmission and distribution and services, meter and fire hydrants infrastructure in the Company’s Regulated Businesses, as discussed below.
The Company’s infrastructure investment plan consists of both infrastructure renewal programs, where the Company replaces infrastructure, as needed, and major capital investment projects, where the Company constructs new water and wastewater treatment and delivery facilities to meet new customer growth and water quality regulations. The Company’s projected capital expenditures and other investments are subject to periodic review and revision to reflect changes in economic conditions and other factors.
Presented in the table below is a summary of the Company’s capital expenditures by category:
In 2021, the Company’s capital expenditures decreased $58 million primarily due to a decrease in treatment and pumping and general structure and equipment infrastructure investment partially offset by increases in transmission and distribution and services, meter and fire hydrants infrastructure investment.
The Company also grows its business primarily through acquisitions of water and wastewater systems. These acquisitions are generally located in geographic proximity to the Company’s existing Regulated Businesses and support continued geographical diversification and growth of its operations. Generally, acquisitions are funded initially with short-term debt, and later refinanced with long-term financing. During 2021, the Company paid $112 million for the acquisition of 23 water and wastewater systems, representing in the aggregate approximately 20,000 customers and paid $23 million in deposits for future acquisitions.
As previously noted, over the next five years the Company expects to invest between $13 billion to $14 billion, with $11.5 billion to $12 billion for infrastructure improvements in the Regulated Businesses, and the Company expects to invest between $28 billion to $32 billion over the next 10 years. In 2022, the Company expects to invest $2.5 billion, consisting of $2 billion for infrastructure improvements and $500 million for acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows from financing activities:
(a)Includes proceeds from issuances of common stock under various employee stock plans and the Company’s dividend reinvestment plan, net of taxes paid, advances and contributions in aid of construction, net of refunds, and debt issuance costs and make-whole premiums on early debt redemption.
In 2021, cash flows provided by financing activities decreased $1,465 million, primarily due to the repayment in full at maturity of the $500 million Term Loan Facility during the first quarter of 2021, an increase in net repayments of commercial paper borrowings, higher dividends paid in 2021 and an increase in repayments of long-term debt due to the prepayment of $327 million in aggregate principal amount of AWCC’s outstanding senior notes during the second quarter of 2021.
The Company’s financing activities are primarily focused on funding regulated infrastructure expenditures, regulated acquisitions and payment of dividends. These activities included the issuance of long-term and short-term debt, primarily through AWCC. Based on the needs of the Regulated Businesses and the Company, AWCC may borrow funds or issue its debt in the capital markets and then, through intercompany loans, provide those borrowings to the Regulated Businesses and parent company. The Regulated Businesses and parent company are obligated to pay their portion of the respective principal and interest to AWCC, in the amount necessary to enable AWCC to meet its debt service obligations. Parent company’s borrowings are not a source of capital for the Regulated Businesses, therefore, parent company is not able to recover the interest charges on its debt through regulated water and wastewater rates. As of December 31, 2021, AWCC has made long-term fixed rate loans and commercial paper loans to the Regulated Businesses amounting to $6.7 billion. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, AWCC has made long-term fixed rate loans and commercial paper loans to parent company amounting to $3.1 billion.
On May 10, 2021, AWCC completed a $1.1 billion debt offering, which included the sale of $550 million aggregate principal amount of its 2.30% Senior Notes due 2031 and $550 million aggregate principal amount of its 3.25% Senior Notes due 2051. At the closing of the offering, AWCC received, after deduction of underwriting discounts and before deduction of offering expenses, net proceeds of $1,086 million. AWCC used the net proceeds of this offering: (i) to lend funds to parent company and its regulated subsidiaries; (ii) to prepay $251 million aggregate principal amount of AWCC’s outstanding 5.77% Series D Senior Notes due December 21, 2021 (the “Series D Notes”) and $76 million aggregate principal amount of AWCC’s outstanding 6.55% Series H Senior Notes due May 15, 2023 (the “Series H Notes,” and together with the Series D Notes, the “Series Notes”); (iii) to repay AWCC’s commercial paper obligations; and (iv) for general corporate purposes. After the prepayments described above, none of the Series D Notes, and approximately $14 million aggregate principal amount of the Series H Notes, remain outstanding. As a result of AWCC’s prepayment of the Series Notes, a make-whole premium of $15 million was paid to the holders thereof on June 14, 2021. Substantially all of the early debt extinguishment costs were allocable to the Company’s utility subsidiaries and recorded as regulatory assets, as the Company believes they are probable of recovery in future rates.
One of the principal market risks to which the Company is exposed is changes in interest rates. In order to manage the exposure, the Company follows risk management policies and procedures, including the use of derivative contracts such as swaps. The Company also reduces exposure to interest rates by managing commercial paper and debt maturities. The Company does not enter into derivative contracts (through AWCC) for speculative purposes and does not use leveraged instruments. The derivative contracts entered into are for periods consistent with the related underlying exposures. The Company is exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts will fail to meet their contractual obligations. The Company minimizes the counterparty credit risk on these transactions by dealing only with leading, creditworthy financial institutions, having long-term credit ratings of “A” or better.
On May 10, 2021, the Company terminated two treasury lock agreements with an aggregate notional amount of $275 million, realizing a net gain of less than $1 million, to be amortized through interest, net over a ten-year period, in accordance with the terms of the new debt issued on May 10, 2021. No ineffectiveness was recognized on hedging instruments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
In February 2021, parent company and AWCC filed with the SEC a universal shelf registration statement that enables the Company to meet its capital needs through the offer and sale to the public from time to time of an unlimited amount of various types of securities, including American Water common stock, preferred stock, and other equity and hybrid securities, and AWCC debt securities, all subject to market conditions and demand, general economic conditions, and as applicable, rating status. The shelf registration statement will expire in February 2024. During 2021, 2020 and 2019, $1.10 billion, $1.00 billion, and $1.10 billion, respectively, of debt securities were issued under this and predecessor registration statements.
Presented in the table below are the issuances of long-term debt in 2021:
(a)This indebtedness is considered “debt” for purposes of a support agreement between parent company and AWCC, which serves as a functional equivalent of a full and unconditional guarantee by parent company of AWCC’s payment obligations under such indebtedness. See “-Issuer and Guarantor of Senior Notes” below.
Presented in the table below are the retirements and redemptions of long-term debt in 2021 through sinking fund provisions, optional redemption or payment at maturity:
From time to time and as market conditions warrant, the Company may engage in long-term debt retirements through make-whole redemptions, tender offers, open market repurchases or other viable alternatives.
Issuer and Guarantor of Senior Notes
The outstanding senior notes issued by AWCC, the wholly owned finance subsidiary of parent company, have been issued under two indentures, each by and between AWCC and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee, providing for the rights and obligations of the parties thereto and the holders of the notes issued thereunder. The senior notes also have been issued with the benefit of a support agreement, as amended, between parent company and AWCC, which serves as the functional equivalent of a full and unconditional guarantee by parent company of AWCC’s payment obligations under the senior notes. No other subsidiary of parent company provides guarantees for any of the outstanding senior notes. If AWCC is unable to make timely payment of any interest, principal or premium, if any, on such senior notes, parent company will provide to AWCC, at its request or the request of any holder of such senior notes, funds to make such payment in full. If AWCC fails or refuses to take timely action to enforce certain rights under the support agreement or if AWCC defaults in the timely payment of any amounts owed to any holder of such senior notes, when due, the support agreement provides that the holder may proceed directly against parent company to enforce such rights or to obtain payment of the defaulted amounts owed to that holder.
As a wholly owned finance subsidiary of parent company, AWCC has no significant assets other than obligations of parent company and certain of its subsidiaries in its Regulated Businesses segment to repay certain intercompany loans made to them by AWCC. AWCC’s ability to make payments of amounts owed to holders of the senior notes will be dependent upon AWCC’s receipt of sufficient payments of amounts owed pursuant to the terms of such intercompany loans and from its ability to issue indebtedness or otherwise obtain loans in the future, the proceeds of which would be used to fund the repayment of the senior notes.
Because parent company is a holding company and substantially all of its operations are conducted through its subsidiaries other than AWCC, parent company’s ability to fulfill its obligations under the support agreement will be dependent upon its receipt of sufficient cash dividends or distributions from its operating subsidiaries. See Note 10-Shareholders’ Equity-Dividends and Distributions, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of the limitations on parent company and its subsidiaries to pay dividends or make distributions. Furthermore, parent company’s operating subsidiaries are separate and distinct legal entities and, other than AWCC, have no obligation to make any payments on the senior notes or to make available or provide any funds for such payment, other than through their repayment obligations under intercompany loans, if any, with AWCC. Based on the foregoing, parent company’s obligations under the support agreement will be effectively subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, lease commitments and moneys borrowed or other indebtedness incurred or issued by parent company’s subsidiaries other than AWCC.
Credit Facilities and Short-Term Debt
Interest rates on advances under the Company’s revolving credit facility are based on a credit spread to the LIBOR rate (or applicable market replacement rate) or base rate in accordance with Moody Investors Service’s and Standard & Poor’s Financial Services’ then applicable credit rating on AWCC’s senior unsecured, non-credit enhanced debt. The facility is used principally to support AWCC’s commercial paper program and to provide up to $150 million in letters of credit. Indebtedness under the facility and AWCC’s commercial paper are considered “debt” for purposes of a support agreement between parent company and AWCC, which serves as a functional equivalent of a full and unconditional guarantee by parent company of AWCC’s payment obligations thereunder.
Presented in the tables below are the aggregate credit facility commitments, commercial paper limit and letter of credit availability under the revolving credit facility, as well as the available capacity for each, as of December 31:
(a)Total remaining availability of $1.59 billion as of December 31, 2021 may be accessed through revolver draws.
(a)Total remaining availability may be accessed through revolver draws.
Presented in the table below is the Company’s total available liquidity as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The weighted average interest rate on AWCC short-term borrowings, including as of December 31, 2020, $500 million of outstanding principal on the Term Loan Facility, was approximately 0.25% and 1.16%, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Capital Structure
Presented in the table below is the percentage of the Company’s capitalization represented by the components of its capital structure as of December 31:
The changes in the capital structure mix between periods were mainly attributable to the impacts of the HOS sale, repayment of the Term Loan Facility at maturity on March 19, 2021, and the Company’s long-term debt offering that was completed on May 10, 2021.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s debt agreements contain financial and non-financial covenants. To the extent that the Company is not in compliance with these covenants, an event of default may occur under one or more debt agreements and the Company, or its subsidiaries, may be restricted in its ability to pay dividends, issue new debt or access the revolving credit facility. The long-term debt indentures contain a number of covenants that, among other things, prohibit or restrict the Company from issuing debt secured by the Company’s assets, subject to certain exceptions. Failure to comply with any of these covenants could accelerate repayment obligations.
Covenants in certain long-term notes and the revolving credit facility require the Company to maintain a ratio of consolidated debt to consolidated capitalization (as defined in the relevant documents) of not more than 0.70 to 1.00. On December 31, 2021, the Company’s ratio was 0.60 to 1.00 and therefore the Company was in compliance with the covenants.
Security Ratings
Presented in the table below are long-term and short-term credit ratings and rating outlooks as of February 16, 2022 as issued by the following rating agencies:
A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating agency, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Security ratings are highly dependent upon the ability to generate cash flows in an amount sufficient to service debt and meet investment plans. The Company can provide no assurances that its ability to generate cash flows is sufficient to maintain its existing ratings. None of the Company’s borrowings are subject to default or prepayment as a result of the downgrading of these security ratings, although such a downgrading could increase fees and interest charges under its credit facility.
As part of its normal course of business, the Company routinely enters into contracts for the purchase and sale of water, energy, chemicals and other services. These contracts either contain express provisions or otherwise permit the Company and its counterparties to demand adequate assurance of future performance when there are reasonable grounds for doing so. In accordance with the contracts and applicable contract law, if the Company is downgraded by a credit rating agency, especially if such downgrade is to a level below investment grade, it is possible that a counterparty would attempt to rely on such a downgrade as a basis for making a demand for adequate assurance of future performance, which could include a demand that the Company must provide collateral to secure its obligations. The Company does not expect to post any collateral which will have a material adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
Access to the capital markets, including the commercial paper market, and respective financing costs in those markets, may be directly affected by the Company’s securities ratings. The Company primarily accesses the debt capital markets, including the commercial paper market, through AWCC. However, the Company has also issued debt through its regulated subsidiaries, primarily in the form of mortgage bonds and tax exempt securities or borrowings under state revolving funds, to lower the overall cost of debt.
Dividends and Regulatory Restrictions
For discussion of the Company’s dividends, dividend restrictions and dividend policy, see Note 10-Shareholders’ Equity in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Insurance Coverage
The Company carries various property, casualty, cyber and financial insurance policies with limits, deductibles and exclusions that it believes are consistent with industry standards. However, insurance coverage may not be adequate or available to cover unanticipated losses or claims. Additionally, annual policy renewals can be impacted by claims experience which in turn can impact coverage terms and conditions on a going-forward basis. The Company is self-insured to the extent that losses are within the policy deductible or exceed the amount of insurance maintained. Such losses could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s short-term and long-term financial condition and its results of operations and cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates, assumptions and judgments that could affect the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Actual results could differ from these estimates, assumptions and judgments. Management believes that the areas described below require significant judgment in the application of accounting policy or in making estimates and assumptions in matters that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. Accordingly, changes in the estimates, assumptions and judgments applied to these accounting policies could have a significant impact on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows, as reflected in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Management has reviewed the critical accounting polices described below with the Company’s Audit, Finance and Risk Committee, including the estimates, assumptions and judgments used in their application. Additional discussion regarding these critical accounting policies and their application can be found in Note 2-Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Regulation and Regulatory Accounting
The Company’s regulated utilities are subject to regulation by PUCs and, as such, the Company follows the authoritative accounting principles required for rate regulated utilities, which requires the Company to reflect the effects of rate regulation in its Consolidated Financial Statements. Use of this authoritative guidance is applicable to utility operations that meet the following criteria: (i) third-party regulation of rates; (ii) cost-based rates; and (iii) a reasonable assumption that rates will be set to recover the estimated costs of providing service, plus a return on net investment, or rate base. As of December 31, 2021, the Company concluded that the operations of its utilities met the criteria.
Application of this authoritative guidance has a further effect on the Company’s financial statements as it pertains to allowable costs used in the ratemaking process. The Company makes significant assumptions and estimates to quantify amounts recorded as regulatory assets and liabilities. Such judgments include, but are not limited to, assets and liabilities related to regulated acquisitions, pension and postretirement benefits, depreciation rates and taxes. Due to timing and other differences in the collection of revenues, these authoritative accounting principles allow a cost that would otherwise be charged as an expense by a non-regulated entity, to be deferred as a regulatory asset if it is probable that such cost is recoverable through future rates. Conversely, the principles require the creation of a regulatory liability for amounts collected in rates to recover costs expected to be incurred in the future, or amounts collected in excess of costs incurred and are refundable to customers.
For each regulatory jurisdiction where the Company conducts business, the Company assesses, at the end of each reporting period, whether the regulatory assets continue to meet the criteria for probable future recovery and regulatory liabilities continue to meet the criteria for probable future settlement. This assessment includes consideration of factors such as changes in regulatory environments, recent rate orders (including recent rate orders on recovery of a specific or similar incurred cost to other regulated entities in the same jurisdiction) and the status of any pending or potential legislation. If subsequent events indicate that the regulatory assets or liabilities no longer meet the criteria for probable future recovery or probable future settlement, the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and financial position could be materially affected. In addition, if the Company concludes in a future period that a separable portion of the business no longer meets the criteria, the Company is required to eliminate the financial statement effects of regulation for that part of the business, which would include the elimination of any or all regulatory assets and liabilities that had been recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Failure to meet the criteria of this authoritative guidance could materially impact the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company’s regulatory asset balance was $1.1 billion and its regulatory liability balance was $1.6 billion and $1.8 billion, respectively. See Note 4-Regulatory Matters in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the Company’s significant regulatory assets and liabilities.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Significant management judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes, primarily due to the uncertainty related to tax positions taken, as well as deferred tax assets and liabilities, valuation allowances and the utilization of NOL carryforwards.
In accordance with applicable authoritative guidance, the Company accounts for uncertain income tax positions using a benefit recognition model with a two-step approach, including a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold and a measurement approach based on the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. If it is not more-likely-than-not that the benefit of the tax position will be sustained on its technical merits, no benefit is recorded. Uncertain tax positions that relate only to timing of when an item is included on a tax return are considered to have met the recognition threshold. Management evaluates each position based solely on the technical merits and facts and circumstances of the position, assuming the position will be examined by a taxing authority having full knowledge of all relevant information. Significant judgment is required to determine whether the recognition threshold has been met and, if so, the appropriate amount of unrecognized tax benefit to be recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company evaluates the probability of realizing deferred tax assets quarterly by reviewing a forecast of future taxable income and its intent and ability to implement tax planning strategies, if necessary, to realize deferred tax assets. The Company also assesses its ability to utilize tax attributes, including those in the form of carryforwards, for which the benefits have already been reflected in the financial statements. The Company records valuation allowances for deferred tax assets when it concludes that it is more-likely-than-not such benefit will not be realized in future periods.
Under GAAP, specifically Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), the tax effects of changes in tax laws must be recognized in the period in which the law is enacted. ASC 740 also requires deferred tax assets and liabilities to be measured at the enacted tax rate expected to apply when temporary differences are to be realized or settled. Thus, at the date of enactment of the TCJA, the Company’s deferred taxes were re-measured based upon the new tax rate. For the Company’s regulated entities, the change in deferred taxes are recorded as either an offset to a regulatory asset or a regulatory liability and may be subject to refund to customers. For the Company’s unregulated operations, the change in deferred taxes are recorded as a non-cash re-measurement adjustment to earnings.
Actual income taxes could vary from estimated amounts due to the future impacts of various items, including changes in income tax laws, the Company’s forecasted financial condition and results of operations, failure to successfully implement tax planning strategies and recovery of taxes through the regulatory process for the Regulated Businesses, as well as results of audits and examinations of filed tax returns by taxing authorities. The resulting tax balances as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are appropriately accounted for in accordance with the applicable authoritative guidance; however, the ultimate outcome of tax matters could result in favorable or unfavorable adjustments to the Consolidated Financial Statements and such adjustments could be material. See Note 15-Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding income taxes.
Accounting for Pension and Postretirement Benefits
The Company maintains noncontributory defined benefit pension plans covering eligible employees of its regulated utility and shared service operations. See Note 16-Employee Benefits in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the description of and accounting for the defined benefit pension plans and postretirement benefit plans.
The Company’s pension and postretirement benefit costs are developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions provided by the Company to its actuaries, including the discount rate and expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. Material changes in the Company’s pension and postretirement benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions as well as fluctuations in plan assets. The assumptions are selected to represent the average expected experience over time and may differ in any one year from actual experience due to changes in capital markets and the overall economy. These differences will impact the amount of pension and other postretirement benefit expense that the Company recognizes. The primary assumptions are:
•Discount Rate-The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which are based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due.
•Expected Return on Plan Assets (“EROA”)-Management projects the future return on plan assets considering prior performance, but primarily based upon the plans’ mix of assets and expectations for the long-term returns on those asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs the Company records currently.
•Rate of Compensation Increase-Management projects employees’ pay increases, which are used to project employees’ pension benefits at retirement.
•Health Care Cost Trend Rate-Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care.
•Mortality- Management adopted the Society of Actuaries Pri-2012 mortality base table, the most recent table developed from private pension plan experience, which provides rates of mortality in 2012 and adopted the new MP-2021 mortality improvement scale to gradually adjust future mortality rates downward due to increased longevity in each year after 2012.
The discount rate assumption, which is determined for the pension and postretirement benefit plans independently, is subject to change each year, consistent with changes in applicable high-quality, long-term corporate bond indices. The Company uses an approach that approximates the process of settlement of obligations tailored to the plans’ expected cash flows by matching the plans’ cash flows to the coupons and expected maturity values of individually selected bonds. For each plan, the discount rate was developed as the level equivalent rate that would yield the same present value as using spot rates aligned with the projected benefit payments. The discount rate for determining pension benefit obligations was 2.94%, 2.74% and 3.44% at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The discount rate for determining other postretirement benefit obligations was 2.90%, 2.56% and 3.36% at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In selecting an EROA, the Company considered tax implications, past performance and economic forecasts for the types of investments held by the plans. The long-term EROA assumption used in calculating pension cost was 6.50% for 2021, 6.50% for 2020, and 6.20% for 2019. The weighted average EROA assumption used in calculating other postretirement benefit costs was 3.67% for 2021, 3.68% for 2020 and 3.56% for 2019.
Presented in the table below are the allocations of the pension plan assets by asset category:
Postretirement Medical Bargaining Plan Changes
On August 31, 2018, the Postretirement Medical Benefit Plan was remeasured as a result of an announced plan amendment which changed benefits for certain union and non-union plan participants. The plan change resulted in a $175 million reduction in future benefits payable to plan participants, and, in combination with other experience reflected as of the remeasurement date, resulted in a $227 million reduction to the net accumulated postretirement benefit obligation. As of December 31, 2021, the remaining amortization period of the impact of the plan amendment is 6.9 years. As a result of the remeasurement and change in funded status, the Company decreased the investment risk in the plan and reduced its exposure to changes in interest rates by matching the assets of the plan to the projected cash flows for future benefit payments of the liability. Plan assets in excess of those securities designed to match the long-term liabilities are invested in shorter duration fixed income securities and equities.
Presented in the table below are the allocations of the other postretirement benefit plan assets by asset category:
(a)Includes the American Water Postretirement Medical Benefits Bargaining Plan, the American Water Postretirement Medical Benefits Non-Bargaining Plan, and the American Water Life Insurance Trust.
The investments of the pension and postretirement welfare plan trusts include debt and equity securities held either directly or through mutual funds, commingled funds and limited partnerships. The trustee for the Company’s defined benefit pension and postretirement welfare plans uses an independent valuation firm to calculate the fair value of plan assets.
In selecting a rate of compensation increase, the Company considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. The Company’s rate of compensation increase was 3.51% for 2021, 3.51% for 2020 and 2.97% for 2019.
In selecting health care cost trend rates, the Company considers past performance and forecasts of increases in health care costs. As of January 1, 2021, the Company’s health care cost trend rate assumption used to calculate the periodic cost was 6.25% in 2021 gradually declining to 5.00% in 2026 and thereafter. As of December 31, 2021, the Company projects that medical inflation will be 6.00% in 2022 gradually declining to 5.00% in 2026 and thereafter.
The Company will use a discount rate and EROA of 2.94% and 6.50%, respectively, for estimating its 2022 pension costs. Additionally, the Company will use a discount rate and expected blended return based on weighted assets of 2.90% and 3.60%, respectively, for estimating its 2022 other postretirement benefit costs. A decrease in the discount rate or the EROA would increase the Company’s pension expense. The Company’s 2021 pension and postretirement benefit credit was $41 million and the 2020 pension and postretirement benefit credit was $14 million. The Company expects to make pension contributions to the plan trusts of $37 million in 2022, and $35 million, $33 million, $30 million and $27 million in 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026, respectively. Actual amounts contributed could change significantly from these estimates. The assumptions are reviewed annually and at any interim re-measurement of the plan obligations. The impact of assumption changes is reflected in the recorded pension and postretirement benefit amounts as they occur, or over a period of time if allowed under applicable accounting standards.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from the Company’s Regulated Businesses is generated primarily from water and wastewater services delivered to customers. These contracts contain a single performance obligation, the delivery of water or wastewater services, as the promise to transfer the individual good or service is not separately identifiable from other promises within the contracts and, therefore, is not distinct. Revenues are recognized over time, as services are provided. There are generally no significant financing components or variable consideration. Revenues include amounts billed to customers on a cycle basis, and unbilled amounts calculated based on estimated usage from the date of the meter reading associated with the latest customer bill, to the end of the accounting period. The amounts that the Company has a right to invoice are determined by each customer’s actual usage, an indicator that the invoice amount corresponds directly to the value transferred to the customer.
Increases or decreases in the volumes delivered to customers and rate mix due to changes in usage patterns in customer classes in the period could be significant to the calculation of unbilled revenue. In addition, changes in the timing of meter reading schedules and the number and type of customers scheduled for each meter reading date would also have an effect on the unbilled revenue calculation. Unbilled revenue for the Company’s regulated utilities as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $162 million and $150 million, respectively.
The Company also recognizes revenue when it is probable that future recovery of previously incurred costs or future refunds that are to be credited to customers will occur through the ratemaking process.
Revenue from the Company’s former HOS business was generated through various protection programs in which the Company provided fixed fee services to domestic homeowners and smaller commercial customers for interior and exterior water and sewer lines, interior electric and gas lines, heating and cooling systems, water heaters, power surge protection and other related services. Most of the contracts had a one-year term and each service was a separate performance obligation, satisfied over time, as the customers simultaneously received and consumed the benefits provided from the service. Customers were obligated to pay for the protection programs ratably over 12 months or via a one-time, annual fee, with revenues recognized ratably over time for those services. Advances from customers were deferred until the performance obligation was satisfied.
The Company also has long-term, fixed fee contracts to operate and maintain water and wastewater systems for the U.S. government on various military installations and facilities owned by municipal customers. Billing and revenue recognition for the fixed fee revenues occurs ratably over the term of the contract, as customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided by the Company. Additionally, these contracts allow the Company to make capital improvements to underlying infrastructure, which are initiated through separate modifications or amendments to the original contract, whereby stand-alone, fixed pricing is separately stated for each improvement. The Company has determined that these capital improvements are separate performance obligations, with revenue recognized over time based on performance completed at the end of each reporting period. Losses on contracts are recognized during the period in which the losses first become probable and estimable. Revenues recognized during the period in excess of billings on construction contracts are recorded as unbilled revenues, with billings in excess of revenues recorded as other current liabilities until the recognition criteria are met. Changes in contract performance and related estimated contract profitability may result in revisions to costs and revenues and are recognized in the period in which revisions are determined. Unbilled revenue for the Market-Based Businesses as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $86 million and $56 million, respectively.
Accounting for Contingencies
The Company records loss contingencies when management determines that the outcome of future events is probable of occurring and when the amount of the loss or a range of losses can be reasonably estimated. The determination of a loss contingency is based on management’s judgment and estimates about the likely outcome of the matter, which may include an analysis of different scenarios. Liabilities are recorded or adjusted when events or circumstances cause these judgments or estimates to change. In assessing whether a loss is reasonably possible, management considers many factors, which include, but are not limited to: the nature of the litigation, claim or assessment, review of applicable law, opinions or views of legal counsel and other advisors, and the experience gained from similar cases or situations. The Company provides disclosures for material contingencies when management deems there is a reasonable possibility that a loss or an additional loss may be incurred. The Company provides estimates of reasonably possible losses when such estimates may be reasonably determined, either as a single amount or within a reasonable range.
Actual amounts realized upon settlement or other resolution of loss contingencies may be different than amounts recorded and disclosed and could have a significant impact on the liabilities, revenue and expenses recorded on the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 17-Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding contingencies.
Recent Accounting Standards
See Note 2-Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting standards.