Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. We caution you that forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and that our actual results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the developments in our business and the industry in which we operate, may differ materially from the results discussed or projected in the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report. We discuss risks and other factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these potential differences elsewhere in this Annual Report, including under Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” In addition, even if our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the developments in our business and the industry in which we operate are consistent with the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report, they may not be predictive of results or developments in future periods. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements made by us, which speak only as of the date they are made. We disclaim any obligation, except as specifically required by law and the rules of the SEC to publicly update or revise any such statements to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statements may be based, or that may affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on pioneering a new approach to treat complex diseases using compositions of endogenous metabolic modulators, or EMMs. Our product candidates are comprised of multiple EMMs that are engineered in distinct combinations and ratios with the goal of simultaneously impacting multiple biological pathways. Our pipeline includes lead therapeutic candidates for the treatment of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, or NASH, for the treatment of Long COVID (also known as Post COVID-19 Condition and Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID-19, or “PASC”) associated fatigue, and for the reduction in risk of recurrent overt hepatic encephalopathy, or OHE.
Using our discovery platform, we have efficiently designed product candidates that are comprised of amino acids and their derivatives, which have a general history of safe use. The orally administered EMM compositions that we have tested clinically to date in our development model have shown the potential to generate multifactorial effects in our initial Clinical Studies.
To date, we have funded our operations with proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and common stock, and borrowing of debt. Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. Our net losses were $64.6 million and $56.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $337.2 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for at least the next several years as we continue to develop our product candidates.
Based on our current operating plan, we believe we do not have sufficient cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities to support current operations through a full 12 months from the issuance date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We will need substantial additional funding to continue development of our current and potential future pipeline candidates. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt re-financings, collaboration agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all, including as a result of market volatility following the COVID-19 pandemic. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions. We also intend to continue to evaluate options to refinance our outstanding long-term debt with SLR Investment Corp. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in the aggregate, may be material. These factors individually and collectively raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our business, operations or financial results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the pandemic, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 or the nature or effectiveness of actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. We cannot presently predict the scope and severity of any potential business shutdowns or disruptions. However, if we or any of the third parties with whom we engage were to experience shutdowns or other business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could be materially and negatively affected, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Components of our Consolidated Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval or we execute license or collaboration agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales, payments from collaborations or license agreements that we may enter into with third parties, or any combination thereof.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•direct external research and development expenses, including fees, reimbursed materials and other costs paid to consultants, contractors, contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and clinical research organizations, or CROs, in connection with our clinical and preclinical development and manufacturing activities;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, including any Clinical Studies, Clinical Trials and other research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and CROs;
•the cost of developing and scaling our manufacturing process and manufacturing products for use in our preclinical studies, Clinical Studies and Clinical Trials, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and CMOs;
•patent-related costs incurred in connection with filing and prosecuting patent applications; and
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We often contract with CROs and CMOs to facilitate, coordinate and perform agreed-upon research, design, development, and manufacturing of our product candidates. To ensure that research and development costs are expensed as incurred, we record monthly accruals for Clinical Studies, Clinical Trials and manufacturing costs based on the work performed under the contract.
These CRO and CMO contracts typically call for the payment of fees for services at the initiation of the contract and/or upon the achievement of certain clinical or manufacturing milestones. In the event that we prepay CRO or CMO fees, we record the prepayment as a prepaid asset and amortize the asset into research and development expense over the period of time the contracted research and development or manufacturing services are performed. Most professional fees, including project and clinical management, data management, monitoring and manufacturing fees are incurred throughout the contract period. These professional fees are expensed based on their estimated percentage of completion at a particular date. Our CRO and CMO contracts generally include pass through fees. Pass through fees include, but are not limited to, regulatory expenses, investigator fees, travel costs and other miscellaneous costs and raw materials. We expense the costs of pass through fees under our CRO and CMO contracts as they are incurred, based on the best information available to us at the time.
A significant portion of our research and development costs are not tracked by project as they benefit multiple projects or our technology platform, and, as such, are not separately classified.
Research and development expenses may fluctuate from period to period depending upon the stage of certain projects and the stage of preclinical and clinical activities and development. Many factors can affect the cost and timing of our Clinical Studies and Clinical Trials, including, without limitation, slow patient enrollment and the availability of supplies, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and real or perceived lack of effect on biology or safety of our product candidates. In addition, the development of all of our product candidates may be subject to extensive governmental regulation. These factors make it difficult for us to predict the timing and costs of the further development of our product candidates.
See “Risk Factors” for further discussion of these and additional risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization that may significantly affect the timing and cost of our research and development expenses and our ability to obtain regulatory approval for and successfully commercialize our product candidates. We expect research and development expenses to increase as we advance existing product candidates into additional Clinical Trials and Clinical Studies and develop new product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting and audit services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support our continued research and development of our product candidates. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and expense as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product candidate.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest income and interest expense. Interest income consists of interest earned on our investments in cash equivalents, money market funds, and high-quality fixed income securities. Interest expense consists of interest on outstanding borrowings under our loan and security agreement, the amortization expense of the debt discount and debt issuance costs, and interest paid for leased capital equipment.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year or for our research and development tax credits, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss, or NOLs, carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Salary and benefits-related costs decreased by $1.8 million due to lower headcount. Clinical research and outside services costs increased by $7.6 million due to expenses incurred for our AXA1665 EMMPOWER Phase 2 Clinical Trial, AXA1125 EMMPACT Phase 2b Clinical Trial, and our AXA1125 Phase 2a Clinical Trial to treat Long COVID.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Salary and benefits-related costs increased by $1.7 million due to higher equity compensation related to additional grants issued and recruiting costs related to the hiring of new employees. Other contract services and outside costs increased by $0.6 million due to higher business insurance, audit and tax fees, and corporate legal fees.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net was a net expense of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a net expense of $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by lower interest income as a result of declining cash balance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. Our net losses were $64.6 million and $56.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $337.2 million. We expect to incur net losses as we continue to develop our product candidates, and our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. Additionally, we are required to comply with an unrestricted minimum cash level in accordance with our Loan and Security Agreement with SLR Investment Corp. until certain clinical trial data conditions are met, and there is a risk that we may be unable to remain in compliance with those financial covenants in the future in which case the debt may become immediately due and payable.
To date, we have primarily financed our operations with proceeds from the sale of preferred and common stock and borrowing of debt, including the following significant transactions:
•On May 18, 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering pursuant to which we issued an aggregate of 12,650,000 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of approximately $55.9 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
•On June 5, 2020, we entered into a sales agreement with SVB Leerink LLC (“SVB Leerink”) pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $35.0 million from time to time through SVB Leerink, acting as our agent (the “ATM Offering”). As of December 31, 2021, we have sold an aggregate of 3,052,708 shares of common stock under the ATM Offering for net cash proceeds of $14.1 million after deducting commissions and expenses of $0.8 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 1,331,441 shares of common stock in a series of sales under the ATM Offering for an aggregate net proceeds of $4.8 million after deducting commissions and expenses of $0.3 million.
•On March 16, 2022, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional purchasers and certain directors and officers of the company named therein. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we sold and issued an aggregate of 13,089,002 shares of common stock, at a purchase price of $1.91 per share in a registered direct offering for net proceeds of approximately $24.9 million after deducting estimated offering expenses payable by us.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $55.0 million. Our cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021 consisted of bank deposits, money market funds that invest in U.S. treasury securities, and corporate obligations, which enables us to achieve our liquidity and capital needs.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $54.2 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $64.6 million, partially offset by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $2.3 million and non-cash charges of $8.1 million, including $6.2 million of stock-based compensation expense.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $49.8 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $56.5 million, partially offset by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.7 million and non-cash charges of $7.4 million, including $6.3 million of stock-based compensation expense.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities primarily consisted of $26.7 million in proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities, partially offset by purchases of marketable securities totaling $23.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities primarily consisted of purchases of marketable securities totaling $35.9 million.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $3.2 million, primarily consisting of net proceeds of $4.8 million from the issuance of common stock, partially offset by payments for a terminal fee obligation and debt issuance costs of $1.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $65.4 million, which primarily consisting of net cash proceeds from the issuance of common stock.
Loan and Security Agreement
On September 2, 2021, we entered into a loan and security agreement (the "New Loan and Security Agreement") with SLR Investment Corp., formerly known as Solar Capital Ltd., for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $26.0 million. The New Loan and Security Agreement replaced the loan and security agreement between us and SLR Investment Corp., dated as of January 9, 2018 and further amended on October 5, 2018, November 30, 2018 and August 28, 2020 (as amended, the "Prior Loan and Security Agreement"). The term loans under the New Loan and Security Agreement will accrue interest at an annual rate equal to 8.60% plus the greater of (a) the thirty (30) day U.S. Dollar LIBOR rate and (b) 0.10%, payable monthly in arrears. The monthly principal payments of $0.6 million will be paid over a period of 45 months beginning in January 2023 through the final maturity date of September 1, 2026. Per the New Loan and Security Agreement, the date on which repayment of principal commences can be further extended to July 2023 and January 2024, provided we satisfy certain equity related conditions. The term loans are also subject to a prepayment fee of 3.00% if prepayment occurs within the first year subsequent to September 2, 2021, 2.00% in the second year and 1.00% in the third year through final maturity. The New Loan and Security Agreement also contains certain financial covenants, including an unrestricted minimum cash level until certain clinical trial study data conditions are met, and non-financial covenants. As security for our obligations under the New Loan and Security Agreement, we granted the lender a first priority perfected security interest in all of our existing and after-acquired assets, including intellectual property.
In conjunction with the execution of the New Loan and Security Agreement, we also agreed to a new terminal fee obligation totaling $1.7 million, which is due and payable on the earliest to occur of (i) the maturity of the New Loan and Security Agreement, (ii) the acceleration of the term loans, and (iii) the prepayment, refinancing, substitution or replacement of the term loans. The obligation is equal to 6.45% of the aggregate principal amount of $26.0 million.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance existing product candidates and develop new clinical and pre-clinical programs. Our cash requirements depend on numerous factors, including, without limitation, expenditures in connection with our research and development programs, including with respect to the timing and progress of Clinical Trials, Clinical Studies and preclinical development activities; payments to CROs, CMOs and other third-party providers; the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights; our ability to raise additional equity or debt financing; potential repayments of our long-term debt; and our ability to enter into collaboration or license agreements and our receipt of any upfront, milestone or other payments thereunder. Changes in our research and development plans or other changes affecting our operating expenses may result in changes in the timing and amount of expenditures of our capital resources. See “Risk Factors” for further discussion of these and additional risks and uncertainties that may significantly affect the timing and amount of expenditures of our capital resources.
Based on our current operating plan, we believe we do not have sufficient cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities to support current operations through a full 12 months from the issuance date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt re-financings, collaboration agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all, including as a result of market volatility following the COVID-19 pandemic. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions. We also intend to continue to evaluate options to refinance our outstanding long-term debt. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in the aggregate, may be material. These factors individually and collectively raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to vendors including CROs and CMOs for research and development services.
We base our expenses related to research and development on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs that conduct and manage Clinical Trials, Clinical Studies and preclinical development activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients or subjects and the completion of clinical milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of our stock-based awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including (a) the expected volatility of our stock, (b) the expected term of the award, (c) the risk-free interest rate, and (d) expected dividends. Due to the lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we base our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of companies in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries in a similar stage of development as us and that are publicly traded. For these analyses, we have selected companies with comparable characteristics to ours including enterprise value, risk profiles and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies' shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available. We have estimated the expected life of our employee stock options using the "simplified" method, whereby, the expected life equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. The risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected life of the option are based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect during the period the options were granted. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, and we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We may take advantage of these exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, as a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We may take advantage of these exemptions up until the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our IPO or such earlier time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We would cease to be an emerging growth company if we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue, we have more than $700.0 million in market value of our stock held by non-affiliates (and we have been a public company for at least 12 months and have filed one annual report on Form 10-K) or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt securities over a three-year period.