Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a global medical technology company that is developing and commercializing novel products for adults with bladder and bowel dysfunction, including: (i) implantable SNMs to treat UUI and UUF, together referred to as OAB, as well as FI, and non-obstructive UR; and (ii) a urethral bulking agent to treat female SUI.
OAB affects an estimated 87 million adults in the United States and Europe, with an additional 40 million adults estimated to suffer from FI. SUI affects an estimated 29 million women in the United States alone.
SNM therapy is an effective and durable treatment for UUI, UUF, UR and FI that has been widely used and reimbursed in Europe and the United States for the past two decades. Bulkamid is also an effective and durable treatment for SUI. Bulkamid was approved by the FDA for use in the United States in early 2020 and is widely reimbursed in the United States and most international markets.
SNM is the only OAB treatment with proven clinical superiority to standard medical therapy and OAB patients who receive SNM report significantly higher quality of life than patients undergoing drug treatment.
We estimate the U.S. SNM market is now approximately $750 million and believe it is a growing market. Until we entered the market, it was serviced by Medtronic as a single participant.
We believe our proprietary r-SNM System, the first to be marketed worldwide, offers significant advantages, and is well positioned to capture market share and grow the market for SNM therapy. Our r-SNM System is designed to last 15 or more years in the human body, is only 5cc in volume, offers broad MRI access, ease of use, intuitive programmers, and the longest interval between recharging among rechargeable SNM systems.
We have marketing approvals in the United States, Europe, Canada, and Australia for all relevant clinical indications and initiated limited commercial efforts in England, the Netherlands and Canada in late 2018 and subsequently in Germany and Switzerland. SNM revenue in 2021 from international operations in the Netherlands, England, Canada, Switzerland, and Germany, was approximately $3.8 million.
We are primarily focused on commercializing our products in the United States, which accounts for the vast majority of sales worldwide. We have established a significant commercial infrastructure, with approximately 290 sales and clinical support personnel in the United States. We continue to make significant investments to build our commercial organization to market and support our products. When making hiring decisions for these roles, we prioritize individuals with strong sales backgrounds who also have existing relationships with urologists and urogynecologists.
In February 2021, the FDA approved a third-generation INS for our r-SNM System under a PMA supplement. The third-generation INS upgrades the embedded software in the INS and the functionality of the patient remote control. These modifications give patients the ability to make broader stimulation parameter adjustments at home, including selecting a second therapy program that was set post-operatively based on interoperative findings. We intend to continue to make investments in research and development efforts to develop enhancements to our r-SNM System.
On February 25, 2021, we acquired Contura Limited (Contura) and its Bulkamid product, a urethral bulking agent indicated for the treatment of female SUI. In consideration for the acquisition, we paid approximately $141.3 million in cash and issued 1,096,583 shares of our common stock. We may pay an additional $35 million in the event Bulkamid sales in any consecutive 12-month period exceed $50 million before December 31, 2024. As part of the transaction, we entered into a supply agreement with Contura International A/S (Contura International) to manufacture Bulkamid for us (Manufacturing and Supply Agreement). We have a right to a technology transfer after June 30, 2022 that would enable us to insource the manufacturing of Bulkamid. Bulkamid received a CE Mark in 2003 and a PMA from the FDA in 2020 and is sold through a combination of a direct sales force in the United States and certain European countries and distributors in certain international markets. The acquisition of Contura has expanded our international operations.
In May 2021, we received a CE Mark approval on our second-generation rechargeable INS and wireless patient remote control with SmartMRI™ technology.
In May 2021, the FDA approved the use of detachable extremity coils for patients undergoing 1.5T and 3.0T MRI scans.
In late June 2021, we filed a PMA supplement with the FDA for our newly developed, long-lived, non-rechargeable SNM system. The non-rechargeable INS will utilize a primary cell battery with an expected life of at least 10 years with standard stimulation parameters. The non-rechargeable INS submitted for FDA approval is approximately 10cc in volume, utilizes constant current stimulation and a recharge-free patient remote control, and is expected to be MRI compatible with 1.5T and 3.0T scanners.
Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable will depend on our ability to continue to successfully commercialize our products and any product enhancements we may advance in the future. We expect to derive future revenue by increasing patient and physician awareness of our products. If we are unable to accomplish any of these objectives, it could have a significant negative impact on our future revenue. If we fail to generate sufficient revenue in the future, our business, results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, and future prospects would be materially and adversely affected.
In the United States, the cost required to treat each patient is reimbursed through various third-party payors, such as commercial payors and government agencies. Most large insurers have established coverage policies in place to cover SNM therapy. Certain commercial payors have a patient-by-patient prior authorization process that must be followed before they will provide reimbursement for SNM therapy. Outside the United States, reimbursement levels vary significantly by country, particularly if that country maintains a single-payor system. SNM therapy is eligible for reimbursement in Canada, Australia, and certain countries in Europe, such as Germany and the United Kingdom. Annual healthcare budgets generally determine the number of SNM systems that will be paid for by the payor in these single-payor system countries.
We currently outsource the manufacture of certain implantable components of our r-SNM System. Our contract manufacturers are all recognized in their field for their competency to manufacture the respective portions of our r-SNM System and have quality systems established that meet FDA requirements. We believe the manufacturers we currently utilize have sufficient capacity to meet our requirements and are able to scale up their capacity relatively quickly with limited capital investment.
Prior to obtaining FDA approval, we devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development activities related to our r-SNM System, including clinical and regulatory initiatives to obtain marketing approvals. We spend a significant amount of our resources on sales and marketing activities to commercialize and market our r-SNM System in the United States.
We incurred net losses of $80.1 million, $54.9 million, and $79.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of $314.6 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $234.5 million at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had available cash and cash equivalents of approximately $220.9 million, current liabilities of approximately $26.9 million, and long-term liabilities of approximately $38.6 million.
November 2019 Follow-On Offering
On November 22, 2019, we completed a follow-on offering by issuing 5,345,000 shares of common stock, at an offering price of $22.00 per share, inclusive of 750,000 shares of our common stock issued upon the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. The gross proceeds to us from this follow-on offering were $117.6 million and the net proceeds were approximately $110.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
May 2020 Follow-On Offering
On May 12, 2020, we completed a follow-on offering by issuing 4,600,000 shares of common stock, at an offering price of $32.50 per share, inclusive of 600,000 shares of our common stock issued upon the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. The gross proceeds to us from this follow-on offering were $149.5 million and the net proceeds were approximately $140.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
May 2021 Follow-On Offering
On May 14, 2021, we completed a follow-on offering by issuing 4,025,000 shares of common stock, at an offering price of $50.00 per share, inclusive of 525,000 shares of our common stock issued upon the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. The gross proceeds to us from this follow-on offering were $201.3 million and the net proceeds were approximately $190.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our sales, starting in the second quarter of 2020, by significantly decreasing and delaying the number of procedures performed using our r-SNM System, and we expect that the pandemic could negatively impact our business, financial condition and results of operations. Similar to the general trend in elective and other surgical procedures, the number of procedures performed using our r-SNM System decreased significantly as healthcare organizations in the United States and globally, including in Europe and Canada, have prioritized the treatment of patients with COVID-19 or have altered their operations to prepare for and respond to the pandemic. Specifically, substantially all of the procedures using our r-SNM System were postponed or cancelled from middle of March 2020 through May 2020, but order flow began a gradual recovery in May 2020 and continued to improve in the second half of 2020 through the second quarter of 2021. During the second half of 2021, certain outpatient elective procedures were again postponed or cancelled related to the COVID-19 pandemic and specifically the Delta and Omicron variants, which adversely affected our business during the second half of 2021.
To protect the health of our employees, their families, and our communities, we have restricted access to our offices to personnel who must perform critical activities that must be completed on-site, limited the number of such personnel that can be present at our facilities at any one time, requested that many of our employees work remotely, and implemented strict travel restrictions. These restrictions and precautionary measures have not adversely affected our operations. Even as efforts to contain the pandemic have made progress and some restrictions have relaxed, new variants of the virus may continue to cause additional outbreaks. The full extent of COVID-19’s effect on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration, spread and intensity of the pandemic, and additional protective measures implemented by the governmental authorities, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict considering the rapidly evolving landscape. However, if the pandemic continues to evolve into a long-term severe worldwide health crisis, there could be a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
AMF License Agreement
On October 1, 2013, we entered into the License Agreement, pursuant to which AMF licensed us the AMF IP relating to AMF Licensed Products.
Under the License Agreement, for each calendar year beginning in 2018, we are obligated to pay AMF a royalty on an AMF Licensed Product-by-AMF Licensed Product basis if one of the following conditions applies: (i) one or more valid claims within any of the patents licensed to us by AMF covers such AMF Licensed Products or the manufacture of such AMF Licensed Products or (ii) for a period of 12 years from the first commercial sale anywhere in the world of such AMF Licensed Product, in each case. The foregoing royalty is calculated as the greater of (a) 4% of all net revenue derived from the AMF Licensed Products, and (b) the Minimum Royalty, payable quarterly. The Minimum Royalty automatically increases each year, subject to a maximum amount of $200,000 per year. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we have recorded royalties of $6.3 million, $4.4 million, and $0.6 million, respectively. We have 60 days to pay AMF the royalty amount due under the License Agreement, and if we fail to pay AMF within such 60-day period, AMF may, at its election, convert the exclusive license to a non-exclusive license or terminate the License Agreement.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 are as follows (in thousands):
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of costs of the components of our r-SNM System, third-party contract labor costs, overhead costs, Bulkamid product costs, as well as distribution-related expenses such as logistics and shipping costs. The overhead costs include the cost of material procurement and operations supervision and management personnel. We expect overhead costs as a percentage of revenue to decrease as our sales volume increases. Cost of goods sold also include other expenses such as scrap and inventory obsolescence. We expect cost of goods sold to increase in absolute dollars primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows. We expect gross margin to vary based on manufacturing costs, regional differences in pricing, and discounts negotiated by customers.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. We expect future gross margin will be affected by a variety of factors, including manufacturing costs, the average selling price of our products, the implementation of cost-reduction strategies, inventory obsolescence costs, which may occur when new generations of our r-SNM System are introduced, and to a lesser extent, the sales mix between the United States, Canada, Europe and Australia as our average selling price in the United States is expected to be higher than in Canada, Europe and Australia and foreign currency exchange rates. Our gross margin may increase over the long term to the extent our production volumes increase and we receive discounts on the costs charged by our contract manufacturers, thereby reducing our per unit costs. Additionally, our gross margin may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to seasonality.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, product development, including testing and engineering, royalty expense, and clinical studies to develop and support our r-SNM System, including clinical study and registry management and monitoring, payments to clinical investigators, and data management. Other research and development expenses include consulting and advisory fees, royalty expense, travel expenses, and equipment-related expenses and other miscellaneous office and facilities expenses related to research and development programs. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect to continue incurring research and development expenses in the future as we develop next generation versions of our r-SNM System and expand to new markets. We expect research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of initiating new product development efforts and new clinical development activities.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by functional area for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, and spending related to finance, information technology, human resource functions, consulting, legal, and professional service fees. Other general and administrative expenses include director and officer insurance premiums, investor relations costs, changes in fair value of the contingent consideration, office-related expenses, facilities and equipment rentals, bad debt expense, and travel expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses will significantly increase in absolute dollars as we increase our headcount and expand administrative personnel to support our growth and operations as a public company including finance personnel and information technology services. Additionally, we anticipate increased legal expenses associated with our patent infringement litigation with Medtronic. These expenses will further increase as we no longer qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act, which requires us to comply with certain additional reporting requirements effective December 31, 2020. We expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including sales personnel commissions and stock-based compensation, trade shows, booth exhibition costs, and the related travel for these events. Other sales and marketing expenses include direct-to-consumer promotional programs, consulting, and advisory fees. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our commercial infrastructure to both drive and support our expected growth in revenue. However, we expect sales and marketing expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets consist primarily of amortization expense on patent license asset, manufacturing license asset, technology, and customer relationships. We amortize finite lived intangible assets over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method. Indefinite lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset (asset group) may not be recoverable. If impairment is indicated, we measure the amount of the impairment loss as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset. Fair value is generally determined using a discounted future cash flow analysis.
Acquisition-Related Costs
Acquisition-related costs consist of expenses incurred related to the Contura acquisition.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest expense payable under the Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank and other debt arrangements, gains and losses on foreign currency transactions, net of interest income earned on cash equivalents.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense primarily consists of a remeasurement of deferred tax liabilities in our foreign operations as a result of a change in enacted tax rates in the U.K., net of losses benefited in certain foreign jurisdictions. We maintain a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets in our domestic operations, including net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credits.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table shows our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages):
Net Revenue
Net revenue was $180.3 million in fiscal year 2021 and was primarily derived from the sale of our products to customers in the United States and certain international markets. Net revenue was $111.5 million in fiscal year 2020 and was primarily derived from the sale of our r-SNM System to customers in the United States, Europe and Canada. The increase in net revenue is primarily due to increased sales of our r-SNM System as we expanded our customer base in the U.S. and international markets and the addition of $22.7 million in Bulkamid sales. Sales in fiscal year 2020 were also more severely impacted by the COVID-19 global pandemic, with the initial restrictions on elective procedures occurring during the second quarter of 2020 and continuing through 2021.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
We incurred $64.6 million of cost of goods sold in fiscal year 2021. We incurred $44.4 million in fiscal year 2020. Gross margin was 64.2% in fiscal year 2021, compared to 60.2% in fiscal year 2020. The increase in gross margin is primarily due to increased efficiencies resulting in higher absorption rates.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $8.2 million, or 28.4%, to $37.3 million in fiscal year 2021, compared to $29.1 million in fiscal year 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $7.0 million in personnel costs including salaries and wages, stock-based compensation and other employee-related benefits.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $7.2 million, or 28.4%, to $32.8 million in fiscal year 2021, compared to $25.6 million in fiscal year 2020, primarily as a result of an increase of $3.6 million in personnel costs including salaries and wages, stock-based compensation and other employee-related benefits and an increase of $2.7 million in the change in fair value of the contingent consideration.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $39.7 million, or 60.0%, to $105.8 million in fiscal year 2021, compared to $66.1 million in fiscal year 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to an increase of $27.4 million related to personnel costs including salaries, wages, sales personnel commissions, stock-based compensation and other employee-related benefits, an increase of $4.9 million related to direct-to-consumer programs and other advertising expenses, and an increase of $3.5 million related to travel expenses.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets increased to $7.2 million in fiscal year 2021, compared to $0.1 million in fiscal year 2020. The increase in amortization of intangible assets was primarily due to an increase of technology and customer relationships acquired related to the Contura acquisition.
Acquisition-Related Costs
Acquisition-related costs was $4.4 million in fiscal year 2021 related to the Contura acquisition.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $7.5 million in fiscal year 2021, consisting primarily of interest expense incurred related to the Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank. Other expense, net was $1.2 million in fiscal year 2020, consisting primarily of interest expense incurred related to the Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, partially offset by interest income earned on cash equivalents.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $0.8 million in fiscal year 2021 primarily related to the remeasurement of our U.K. deferred tax liabilities due to an increase in the U.K. income tax rate, net of losses benefited in certain foreign jurisdictions. We recorded minimal income tax expense in fiscal year 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations and cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We only began full-scale commercialization of our r-SNM System in late 2019. We have expended significant resources on research and development activities, growing our operations organization and building and training our sales organization.
We incurred net losses of $80.1 million, $54.9 million, and $79.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of $314.6 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to $234.5 million at December 31, 2020. We expect to continue to spend a significant amount of our
existing resources on sales and marketing activities as we continue to commercialize and market our products in the United States and internationally.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $220.9 million compared to $241.2 million at December 31, 2020. We expect that our cash and cash equivalents on hand will be sufficient to fund our operations through at least the next 12 months. We fund our operations through a combination of proceeds from public offerings of our common stock and cash receipts from sales of our products. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings.
Our principal contractual obligations consist of payments due under the Loan Agreement, including interest and principal payments and the final payment. The following table sets out, as of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations due by period (in thousands):
(1) Our principal office is currently located at 26 Technology Drive, Irvine, California 92618, where we lease approximately 25,548 square feet of office space under a lease that terminates on October 31, 2027. In addition, we maintain offices at 15326 Alton Parkway, Irvine, California 92618, where we lease approximately 32,621 square feet of office space under a lease that terminates on January 31, 2028, and at 7575 Irvine Center Drive, Suite 200, Irvine, California 92618, where we lease approximately 12,215 square feet of space, and where we conduct the training of our sales team, under a lease that terminates on January 31, 2028.
(2) Purchase obligations represent open purchase orders primarily for component materials and third-party contract labor costs at the end of the fiscal year. These purchase orders can be impacted by various factors, including the timing of issuing orders, the timing of the shipment of orders, and currency fluctuations.
(3) Represents the Minimum Royalty due under the License Agreement.
From time to time we enter into certain types of contracts that contingently require us to indemnify parties against third-party claims, including the License Agreement, and certain real estate leases, supply purchase agreements, and agreements with directors and officers. The terms of such obligations vary by contract and in most instances a maximum dollar amount is not explicitly stated therein. Generally, amounts under these contracts cannot be reasonably estimated until a specific claim is asserted, thus no liabilities have been recorded for these obligations on our balance sheets for any of the periods presented.
We may need to raise additional financing in the future to facilitate our business operations. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders could experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants further restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Additional financing may not be available at all, or in amounts or on terms acceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain additional financing when needed to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may be required to scale back our operations.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC, that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $47.3 million in fiscal year 2021 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $80.1 million, a decrease from changes in net operating assets of $9.8 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $42.6 million. Net operating assets consisted primarily of inventory and accounts receivable due to the commercial growth of our r-SNM System in the United States and the addition of Bulkamid sales. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization.
Net cash used in operating activities was $83.7 million in fiscal year 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $54.9 million, a decrease from changes in net operating assets of $47.0 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $18.2 million. Net operating assets consisted primarily of inventory to support the commercial launch of our r-SNM System in the United States. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities was $83.5 million in fiscal year 2019 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $79.9 million, a decrease in net operating assets of $14.4 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $10.9 million. Net operating assets consisted primarily of inventory to support the commercial launch of our r-SNM System in the United States. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $143.0 million in fiscal year 2021 and consisted primarily of the $140.7 million paid for the acquisition of Contura.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $9.7 million in fiscal year 2020 and consisted primarily of sales and maturities of short-term investments, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $45.3 million in fiscal year 2019 and consisted primarily of sales and maturities of short-term investments, partially offset by purchases of short-term investments.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $170.5 million in fiscal year 2021 and consisted primarily of $190.0 million in net proceeds received in the May 2021 follow-on offering, partially offset by a net debt repayment of $26.1 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $144.2 million in fiscal year 2020 and consisted primarily of $140.5 million in net proceeds received in the May 2020 follow-on offering.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $111.0 million in fiscal year 2019 and consisted primarily of $110.4 million in net proceeds received in the follow-on offering.
Indebtedness
In June 2021, the principal amount, accrued interest, accrued loan fees, and prepayment fees related to the term loan under the Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank entered into in February 2021, were paid in full. The unamortized debt issuance costs of $4.4 million was expensed and recognized as interest expense.
In January 2021, the principal amount, accrued interest, accrued loan fees, and prepayment fees related to the Term Loan were paid in full. The unamortized debt issuance costs of $0.4 million was expensed and recognized as interest expense.
We have no further indebtedness arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP) requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of this evaluation then form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 relates entirely to the sale of our products to our customers and distributors.
We have revenue arrangements that consist of a single performance obligation. We recognize revenue at the point in time when it transfers control of promised goods to its customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration it expects to receive in exchange for transferring goods. The amount of revenue that is recognized is based on the transaction price, which represents the invoiced amount and includes estimates of variable consideration such as discounts, where applicable. We also sell to distributors and apply the same policies as our revenue arrangements with customers, specifically that revenue is recognized at the point in time when we transfer control of promised goods to our distributors, revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods, the amount of revenue that is recognized is based on the transaction price, which represents the invoiced amount and includes estimates of variable consideration such as discounts, where applicable. We do not offer rights of return or price protection. The amount of variable consideration included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not occur in a future period. Payment terms, typically less than three months, do not include a significant financing component. We extend credit to our customers and distributors based upon an evaluation of their financial condition and credit history and generally require no collateral. We do not have any contract balances related to product sales. We also do not have significant contract acquisition costs related to product sales.
Shipping and handling costs incurred for the delivery of goods to customers and distributors are included in cost of goods sold. Amounts billed to customers and distributors for shipping and handling are included in net revenue.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We make estimates of the collectability of accounts receivable in accordance with ASU 2016-13. Our estimate of future losses is made by management based upon historical bad debts, customer receivable balances, age of customer receivable balances, customers’ financial conditions and reasonable forecasted economic trends. Despite our efforts to minimize credit risk exposure, customers could be adversely affected if future economic and industry trends, including those related to COVID-19, change in such a manner as to negatively impact their cash flows. The
full effects of COVID-19 on our customers are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. As a result, our future collection experience can differ significantly from historical collection trends. If our customers experience a negative impact on their cash flows, it could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A three-level fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value. The hierarchy requires entities to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The three levels of inputs used to measure fair value are as follows:
•Level 1: Inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
•Level 2: Inputs are quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs and significant value drivers are observable in active markets.
•Level 3: Inputs are unobservable inputs based on our assumptions and valuation techniques used to measure assets and liabilities at fair value. The inputs require significant management judgment or estimation.
Our assessment of the significance of an input to the fair value measurement requires judgment, which may affect the valuation of fair value assets and liabilities and their placement within the fair value hierarchy levels. The carrying amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements approximate the fair value for cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payables, and accrued expenses, due to their short-term nature. The carrying amount of our term loan, which is described below, approximates fair value, considering the interest rates are based on the prime interest rate.
The purchase price of business acquisitions is primarily allocated to the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values on the acquisition date, with the excess recorded as goodwill.
Contingent consideration represents contingent milestone, performance and revenue-sharing payment obligations related to acquisitions and is measured at fair value, based on significant inputs not observable in the market, which represents a Level 3 measurement within the fair value hierarchy. The valuation of contingent consideration is estimated using a binary option-based approach with assumptions we believe would be made by a market participant. Significant inputs include projected revenues, discount rates, volatility factors and risk-free rates. We assess these assumptions on an ongoing basis as additional data impacting the assumptions is obtained and any change in fair value of the contingent consideration is recorded in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss. Significant increases or decreases in any of those inputs in isolation would result in a significantly lower or higher fair value measurement. Generally, a change in the assumption used for the projected revenues would result in a directionally similar change to the overall estimate of the contingent consideration.
Investment Securities
Those investments in debt securities with maturities less than 12 months at the date of purchase are considered short-term investments. Those investments in debt securities with maturities greater than 12 months at the date of purchase are considered long-term investments. Our investment securities classified as available-for-sale are recorded at fair value based on the fair value hierarchy (Level 1 and Level 2 inputs in the fair value hierarchy), and consists primarily of commercial paper, corporate notes and U.S. government and agency securities. Unrealized gains or losses, deemed temporary in nature, are reported as other comprehensive income within the consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss).
Foreign Currency Translation
The functional currencies of the Company’s subsidiaries are currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The Company translates assets and liabilities of the foreign subsidiaries into U.S. dollars at the exchange rate in effect on the balance sheet date. Revenue and expenses of the subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars at the average
exchange rate during the period. Gains or losses from these translation adjustments are reported as a separate component of stockholders’ equity in accumulated other comprehensive gain or loss until there is a sale or complete or substantially complete liquidation of the Company’s investment in the foreign subsidiary at which time the gains or losses will be realized and included in net income (loss).
Inventory, Net
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost computed on a first-in, first-out basis. We reduce the carrying value of inventories for items that are potentially excess, obsolete, or slow-moving based on changes in customer demand, technology developments, or other economic factors.
We capitalize inventory produced for commercial sale. We capitalize manufacturing costs as inventory following both the receipt of regulatory approval from regulatory bodies and our intent to commercialize. Costs associated with developmental products prior to satisfying our inventory capitalization criteria are charged to research and development expense as incurred.
Products that have been approved by certain regulatory authorities may also be used in clinical programs to assess the safety and efficacy of the products for usage that have not been approved by the FDA or other regulatory authorities. The form of product utilized for both commercial and certain clinical programs that are identical are included as inventory with an “alternative future use” as defined in authoritative guidance. Component materials and purchased products associated with clinical development programs are included in inventory and charged to research and development expense when the product enters the research and development process and no longer can be used for commercial purposes and, therefore, does not have an “alternative future use.”
For products that are under development and have not yet been approved by regulatory authorities, purchased component materials are charged to research and development expense when the inventory ownership transfers to us.
We analyze inventory levels to identify inventory that may expire prior to sale, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its net realizable value, or inventory in excess of expected sales requirements. Although the manufacturing of the r-SNM System is subject to strict quality control, certain batches or units of product may no longer meet quality specifications or may expire, which would require adjustments to our inventory values. We also apply judgment related to the results of quality tests that are performed throughout the production process, as well as the understanding of regulatory guidelines, to determine if it is probable that inventory will be saleable. These quality tests are performed throughout the pre- and post-production processes, and we continually gather information regarding product quality for periods after the manufacturing date. Our products currently have a maximum estimated shelf-life range of 12 to 36 months and based on sales forecasts, we expect to realize the carrying value of the product inventory. In the future, reduced demand, quality issues, or excess supply beyond those anticipated by management may result in a material adjustment to inventory levels, which would be recorded as an increase to cost of sales.
The determination of whether inventory costs will be realizable or not requires estimates by our management. A critical input in this determination is future expected inventory requirements based on internal sales forecasts. Management then compares these requirements to the expiry dates of inventory on hand. To the extent that inventory is expected to expire prior to being sold, management will write down the value of inventory.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess purchase price over the fair values of the identifiable assets acquired less the liabilities assumed. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by comparing the reporting unit’s carrying amount to the fair value of the reporting unit. The fair values are estimated using an income and discounted cash flow approach. We evaluate our goodwill on an annual basis in the fourth quarter or more frequently if we believe indicators of impairment exist. We assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount or perform an annual impairment test. When tested quantitatively, we compare the fair value of the applicable reporting unit with its carrying value. In making this assessment, management relies on a number of factors, including expected future operating results, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows, business trends and declines in our market capitalization. We estimate the fair values of our reporting unit using a combination of the discounted cash flow
(DCF) and income approaches. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value is recognized as an impairment loss.
Intangible Assets
Patent license asset
The intangible asset represents exclusive rights to an additional field-of-use on the patent suite within the License Agreement with AMF. The additional field-of-use was provided in exchange for 50,000 shares of Series A preferred stock, the fair value of which was $1.0 million in 2013. The intangible asset was recorded at its fair value of $1.0 million at the date contributed. In connection with our IPO, such shares of Series A preferred stock were converted into common stock. Amortization of this asset is recorded over the shorter of the patent or legal life on a straight-line basis. The weighted-average amortization period is 8.71 years. We will review the intangible asset for impairment whenever an impairment indicator exists. There have been no intangible asset impairment charges to date.
Exclusive license asset
The intangible asset represents exclusive rights of existing technologies and development services from MST entered into on March 2, 2021. The agreement was provided in exchange for 65,594 shares of common stock, $0.0001 par value, the fair value of which was $3.6 million upon transfer. The intangible asset was recorded at its fair value of $3.3 million at the date of the agreement, with the difference of $0.3 million recorded as a vendor credit in accounts payable in the consolidated balance sheets. Amortization of this asset is recorded over the four-year term of the agreement on a straight-line basis. We will review the intangible asset for impairment whenever an impairment indicator exists. There have been no intangible asset impairment charges to date.
Contura acquisition
The intangible assets represent technology, trade names and trademarks, and customer relationships acquired from Contura on February 25, 2021. The straight-line method over the period of estimated benefit is used to amortize finite-lived intangible assets except for customer relationships. Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 350-30-35-3 states that customer relationships generally dissipate at a more rapid rate in the earlier periods following a company’s succession to these relationships, with the rate of attrition declining over time. As such, the accelerated method is used to amortize customer relationships.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying amount to the future net cash flows that the assets are expected to generate. If said assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment that would be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the projected discounted future net cash flows arising from the asset. There have been minimal impairments of long-lived assets to date.
Leases
In accordance with Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)”, components of a lease should be split into three categories: lease components, non-lease components, and non-components. The fixed and in-substance fixed contract consideration (including any consideration related to non-components) must be allocated based on the respective relative fair values to the lease components and non-lease components. Entities may elect not to separate lease and non-lease components. Rather, entities would account for each lease component and related non-lease component together as a single lease component. We have elected to account for lease and non-lease components together as a single lease component for all underlying assets and allocate all of the contract consideration to the lease component only. Topic 842 allows for the use of judgment in determining whether the assumed lease term is for a major part of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset and whether the present value of lease payments represents substantially all of the fair value of the underlying asset. We apply the bright line thresholds referenced in Topic 842 to assist in evaluating leases for appropriate classification between operating and finance leases. The aforementioned bright lines are applied consistently to our entire portfolio of leases.
Operating lease ROU asset and operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate for a fully collateralized amortizing loan with the same maturity as the lease term, based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of future payments. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives and initial direct costs incurred. The lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are charged to operations as incurred. Research and development costs include salary and personnel-related costs, costs of clinical studies and testing, supplies and materials, and outside consultant costs.
Advertising Expense
The Company expenses advertising costs as they are incurred.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method to compute the difference between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and the related financial amounts, using currently enacted tax rates. We have net deferred tax assets in certain jurisdictions. The realization of these deferred tax assets is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient taxable income in future years. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that more likely than not will be realized. We evaluate the recoverability of the deferred tax assets annually and maintain a full valuation allowance on our U.S. net deferred tax assets. We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. We are subject to transfer pricing and other tax regulations designed to ensure that appropriate levels of income are reported as earned by our U.S. and foreign entities and are taxed accordingly. In the normal course of business, we are audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, and subject to inquiries from those tax authorities regarding the amount of taxes due. These inquiries may relate to the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. Our policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if any, in income tax expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of employee and non-employee services in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognize compensation cost over the requisite service period (typically the vesting period), generally four years. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of the grant and revised in subsequent periods to reflect differences between the estimates and the number of shares that actually become exercisable. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options (as of the date of grant) that have service conditions for vesting. Stock options and restricted shares awards vest based on service conditions, typically over four years.
We also grant shares of performance-based restricted stock units that typically vest after one year only if we have also achieved certain performance objectives as defined and approved by our board of directors. The fair value of performance awards are determined based on the Company’s stock price at the date of grant and expensed over the performance period based on the probability of achieving the performance objectives. In addition, we also grant market-based restricted stock units that have combined market conditions and service conditions for vesting, for which we use the Monte Carlo valuation model to value equity awards (as of the date of grant).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.