Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A")
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is designed to provide a reader of our consolidated financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. Our MD&A should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Part I, Item 1A: “Risk Factors” and Part II, Item 8: “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The various sections of this MD&A contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this filing. The tables in the MD&A sections below are derived from exact numbers and may have immaterial rounding differences.
This section discusses our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019 please refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Overview
Axon is a global network of devices, apps and people that helps public safety personnel become smarter and safer. With a mission of protecting life, our technologies give law enforcement the confidence, focus and time they need to protect their communities. Our products impact every aspect of a public safety officer’s day-to-day experience with the goal of helping everyone get home safe.
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $863.4 million, an increase of $182.4 million, or 26.8%, from the prior year. We had a loss from operations of $168.1 million compared to $14.2 million in the prior year. The higher loss from operations was primarily the result of increased stock compensation expense for our CEO Performance Award and XSPP. In addition, operating expenses were higher in 2021 primarily due to an increase in headcount; these other cost increases were largely offset by higher revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded net loss of $60.0 million compared to net loss of $1.7 million for the prior year.
2022 Outlook
For the year ending December 31, 2022, we expect revenue of approximately $1 billion. We anticipate capital expenditures of approximately $135 million to $160 million in 2022, including approximately $85 million for development of our manufacturing facility and campus in Scottsdale, Arizona, approximately $40 million to support capacity expansion and automation of TASER devices, and the remainder on additional investments to support our continued growth.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected workforces, economies, and financial markets globally, and led to an economic downturn. As an essential provider of products and services for law enforcement and other first responders, we remain focused on protecting the health and wellbeing of our employees while assuring the continuity of our business operations.
We have taken a number of actions in response to the pandemic:
Employee safety and manufacturing:
●
We continue to allow for a remote work model for the majority of our office staff, with medical screening for any employees who do work in our offices; and
●
We hosted several onsite vaccination clinics for our employees and their family members.
Supply chain:
●
We previously took steps to diversify our supply chain and global manufacturing footprint, which have positioned us well to manage through the pandemic.
●
We have proactively built up a safety stock of raw and finished goods inventory aligned to our strategic model to help meet strong product demand while also preparing us to stagger factory work schedules. We continue to adjust strategic inventory levels based on areas of risk to mitigate potential supply disruptions.
●
In light of our broad geographic supplier base both domestic and international, we are continuously monitoring our supply chain to manage through potential impacts, identifying alternate sources as well as shipping / logistic sources and working with foreign regulators to ensure that our suppliers can provide parts.
Shareholder engagement:
●
We have continued our shareholder engagement in a primarily virtual format.
Results of Operations
The following table presents data from our consolidated statements of operations as well as the percentage relationship to total net sales of items included in our statements of operations (dollars in thousands):
Net sales to the U.S. and other countries are summarized as follows (dollars in thousands):
International revenue in 2021 increased compared to 2020, driven by strength in all of our international regions, particularly in the Americas and EMEA regions.
Our operations are comprised of two reportable segments: the manufacture and sale of CEDs, batteries, accessories and extended warranties and other products and services (collectively, the “TASER” segment); and software and sensors, which includes the sale of devices, wearables, applications, cloud and mobile products, and services (collectively, the "Software and Sensors" segment). In both segments, we report sales of products and services. Service revenue in both segments includes sales related to Axon Evidence. In the TASER segment, service revenue also includes digital subscription training content. In the Software and Sensors segment, service revenue also
includes other recurring cloud-hosted software revenue and related professional services. Collectively, this revenue is sometimes referred to as "Axon Cloud revenue." Revenue from our “products” in the Software and Sensors segment are generally from sales of sensors, including on-officer body cameras, Axon Fleet cameras, other hardware sensors, warranties on sensors, and other products, and is sometimes referred to as "Sensors and Other revenue." Within the Software and Sensors segment, we include only revenues and costs attributable to that segment which costs include: costs of sales for both products and services, direct labor, and product management and R&D for products included, or to be included, within the Software and Sensors segment. All other costs are included in the TASER segment.
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Sales
Net sales by product line were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Net unit sales were as follows:
Net sales for the TASER segment increased $70.4 million, or 19.2%, primarily as a result of an increase of $37.6 million in cartridge revenue and a $28.4 million increase in TASER 7 devices. Cartridge revenue increased due to
increased unit sales. Consumer devices revenue decreased $2.3 million or 24.2% driven by a decrease in retail sales due to a shift in consumer shopping behaviors, as well as lower average selling prices, and higher sales during the prior year due to civil unrest. We continue to see a shift to purchases of our latest generation device, TASER 7, from legacy devices, especially X26P devices. Sales of our TASER 7 device also drove the increase in revenue from Axon Evidence and cloud services. Revenue was also impacted by higher average selling prices for TASER devices other than TASER consumer devices. TASER 7 revenue for 2021 was impacted by approximately $35.0 million for orders that were scheduled to ship prior to December 31, 2021, but could not be fulfilled due to the delayed receipt of a manufacturing component for our TASER 7 devices. We expect to recognize this revenue during the first half of 2022.
Net sales for the Software and Sensors segment increased $112.0 million, or 35.6%. Revenue from Axon Evidence and cloud services increased $69.2 million as we continued to add users and associated devices to our network during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in the aggregate number of users and devices also resulted in increased extended warranty revenues of $9.3 million. Sales of our Axon Body 3 camera drove most of the $18.3 million increase in Axon Body revenue and the $4.7 million increase in Axon Dock revenue. Other revenue increased $6.2 million or 50.7% due to increases in signal sidearm and signal performance power magazine (SPPM) attributable to increased sales of our TASER 7 devices. Axon Body revenue was impacted by approximately $15.5 million for orders that were scheduled to ship prior to December 31, 2021, but could not be fulfilled due to supply chain constraints for our Axon Body 3 devices. We expect to recognize this revenue during the first half of 2022.
Backlog - As of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020
Our backlog for products and services includes all orders that have been received and are believed to be firm.
In the TASER segment, we define backlog as equal to deferred revenue. Deferred revenue represents amounts invoiced to customers for goods and services to be delivered in subsequent periods. We process orders within the TASER segment quickly, and our best estimate of firm orders outstanding as of period end represents those that have been invoiced but remain undelivered. The TASER segment backlog balance was $73.9 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect to realize $36.9 million of this deferred revenue balance as revenue during the next 12 months. This represents cash received and accounts receivable from customers on or prior to December 31, 2021 for products and services expected to be delivered in the next 12 months.
In the Software and Sensors segment, we define backlog as cumulative bookings, net of cancellations, less product and service revenue recognized to date. Bookings are generally realized as revenue over multiple years. The Software and Sensors backlog balance was $2.4 billion as of December 31, 2021. This backlog balance includes $377.4 million of deferred revenue, and $2.0 billion that has been recorded as bookings but not yet invoiced, all as of December 31, 2021. We expect to realize approximately $510.8 million of the December 31, 2021 backlog balance as revenue during the next 12 months.
Our backlog of $2.4 billion as of December 31, 2021 has increased significantly from $1.5 billion as of December 31, 2020. The increase in TASER segment backlog is not expected to have a material impact on revenue or operating margins. Our significant increase in backlog, primarily in the Software and Sensors segment is indicative of expected revenue growth in this segment.
Cost of Product and Service Sales
Cost of product and services sales in dollars and as a percent of related segment sales (dollars in thousands):
Within the TASER segment, cost of product and service sales was $149.9 million, an increase of $13.0 million, or 9.5%, from 2020. Cost as a percentage of sales decreased to 34.3% from 37.4%. The improvement was primarily attributable to a combination of manufacturing cost improvement and strong demand for our premium TASER offerings, which resulted in a favorable product mix. We are building manufacturing capacity to support our TASER device and cartridge manufacturing lines in response to growing international and federal demand and an increased install base.
Within the Software and Sensors segment, cost of product and service sales was $172.6 million, an increase of $44.8 million, or 35.1%, from 2020. As a percentage of net sales, cost of product and service sales decreased slightly to 40.5% in 2021 from 40.6% in 2020. Cost of product sales increased $23.2 million primarily driven by the impact of increased units, but decreased as a percentage of sales due to the fulfillment of several large shipments of lower-margin body camera hardware to our largest customers during the prior year. Cost of service sales increased $21.7 million and increased as a percentage of sales. We are investing in scaling our cloud business, which includes standing up new cloud environments, cloud applications, and Long-Term Evolution (“LTE”) costs, which can result in some margin compression in advance of anticipated revenue, as well as low-to-no margin professional services that support new installations for software customers.
Gross Margin
Gross Margin (dollars in thousands):
Gross margin increased $124.6 million to $540.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $416.3 million for 2020. As a percentage of net sales, gross margin increased to 62.7% for 2021 from 61.1% for 2020.
As a percentage of net sales, gross margin for the TASER segment increased to 65.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 62.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Within the Software and Sensors segment, gross margin as a percentage of total segment net sales was 59.5% and 59.4% for the years ended 2021 and 2020, respectively. Within the Software and Sensors segment, product gross
margin was 39.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 36.6% for the same period in 2020, while the service margins were 74.6% and 77.1% during those same periods, respectively.
Sales, General and Administrative Expenses
Sales, General and Administrative ("SG&A") Expenses (dollars in thousands):
SG&A expenses increased $207.7 million, or 67.6%. Stock-based compensation expense increased $135.0 million in comparison to the prior year comparable period, which was attributable to an increase of $137.9 million in expense related to the CEO Performance Award and XSPP, partially offset by a decrease of $1.9 million related to PSUs for certain key employees and executives that fully vested in March 2021. As of December 31, 2021, all twelve operational goals for the CEO Performance Award and XSPP are considered probable of attainment or have been attained; during the prior year comparable period, eleven operational goals were considered probable. Refer to Note 14 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of the CEO Performance Award and XSPP.
Salaries, benefits and bonus expense increased $56.8 million, primarily due to an increase in headcount and an increase in payroll taxes on a higher base of salaries and bonus expense. Salaries, benefits and bonus expense increased as a percentage of sales from 12.2% for 2020 to 16.2% for 2021.
Sales and marketing expenses increased $19.6 million, driven by a $10.5 million increase in commissions tied to higher revenues, and by higher spending on advertising, sponsorships, and customer samples. Included in this increase was $3.4 million related to trade shows and seminars, including our inaugural VR roadshow and $1.0 million attributable to our annual Axon Accelerate user conference being held in-person.
Professional, consulting and lobbying expenses decreased $11.2 million, driven primarily by a decrease of $18.3 million in expenses related to the FTC litigation. As discussed in Note 11 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we sued the FTC in the District of Arizona, and the FTC filed an enforcement action regarding our May 2018 acquisition of Vievu LLC. Offsetting the decrease in legal expenses was an increase in other professional and consulting expenses for costs related to the implementation of several phases of our enterprise resource planning and related systems.
Other SG&A expenses increased by $7.6 million, primarily driven by the following:
● Travel expenses increased $6.4 million, reflecting a return to pre-pandemic travel levels for certain of our employees.
● Depreciation and amortization increased $3.7 million primarily due to an increase in depreciation and amortization expense following the implementation of several phases of our enterprise resource planning and related systems during 2021.
● Supplies expense increased $3.5 million, primarily attributable to an increase in computer licenses and maintenance supporting increased headcount.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and Development ("R&D") Expenses (dollars in thousands):
Within the TASER segment, R&D expenses increased $30.8 million or 200%, reflecting increased stock-based compensation expense of $10.8 million, of which $5.7 million related to the XSPP. Salaries, benefits and bonus expense increased $8.2 million, primarily due to an increase in headcount. Consulting expense increased $7.9 million related to the development of next generation products.
R&D expense for the Software and Sensors segment increased $40.1 million or 37.2% and increased slightly as a percentage of sales to 34.7% compared to 34.3% in the prior year. Of the increase, $15.4 million related to salaries, benefits, and bonus attributable to increased headcount.
Stock-based compensation expense for the Software and Sensors segment increased $21.6 million. Contributing to the increase was expense of $12.9 million related to our XSPP. As of December 31, 2021, all twelve operational goals for the XSPP are considered probable of attainment or have been attained; during the prior year comparable period, eleven operational goals were considered probable. Stock-based compensation expense also increased over the prior year comparable period due to an increase in headcount.
Professional and consulting expenses increased $9.7 million related to development of next generation products.
We expect R&D expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we focus on growing the Software and Sensors segment as we add headcount and additional resources to develop new products and services to further advance our scalable cloud-connected device platform. We are investing in technologies that include our CEDs, body cameras, in-car cameras and other sensors, artificial intelligence, digital evidence management, productivity software, communications software, and technologies that enable real-time situational awareness for public safety.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net was $26.7 million and $7.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain of $40.9 million related to observable price changes for our investments in certain strategic investments and related warrants. The gain was partially offset by a $17.8 million unrealized loss on marketable securities related to our investment in Cellebrite DI Ltd. Interest and other income, net also reflected interest income of $1.7 million, other income of $0.9 million from a government grant, and gains from foreign currency transactions of $0.4 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we earned interest income of $5.1 million and had losses from foreign currency transaction adjustments of $0.2 million, other income, net of $0.6 million, and interest expense of $0.1 million.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was a benefit of $81.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The effective income tax rate for 2021 was 57.5%. The benefits related to excess stock-based compensation of $205.5 million and research and development credits of $34.4 million were partially offset by the tax effects of permanently non-deductible expenses for executive compensation of $180.5 million, an increase in uncertain tax benefits of $10.2 million, and other permanently non-deductible expenses of $1.8 million. Additionally, we recorded a $9.0 million increase to our valuation allowance as of December 31, 2021 related to research and development tax credits that may not be utilized prior to expiration and an unrealized investment loss.
The provision for income taxes was a benefit of $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective income tax rate for 2020 was 72.6%. The benefits related to excess stock-based compensation of $9.0 million, research and development credits of $10.2 million, and a deduction for foreign derived intangible income (“FDII”) of $0.9 million were partially offset by the tax effects of permanently non-deductible expenses for executive compensation of $15.5 million, an increase in uncertain tax benefits of $1.0 million, other permanently non-deductible expenses of $0.8 million and state tax expense of $0.9 million. Additionally, we recorded a $0.2 million increase to our valuation allowance as of December 31, 2020 related to research and development tax credits that may not be utilized prior to expiration, partially offset by changes in certain foreign jurisdictions.
Net Income
We recorded net loss of $60.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net loss of $1.7 million in 2020. Net loss per basic and diluted share was $0.91 for 2021, compared to net loss per basic and diluted share of $0.03 for 2020.
Three Months Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to September 30, 2021
Net sales by product line were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Net unit sales were as follows:
Net sales for the TASER segment decreased $17.6 million, or 14.5%, on a sequential basis primarily due to a $27.5 million decrease in revenue from TASER 7 devices and a $2.9 million decrease in cartridge revenue. The decrease in TASER 7 revenues was partially offset by a revenue increase of $13.2 million of other TASER devices. The decrease in revenue is a result of decreased unit sales, partially offset by higher average selling prices on our TASER 7 devices. TASER 7 revenue for the three months ended December 30, 2021 was impacted by approximately $35.0 million for orders that were scheduled to ship prior to December 31, 2021, but could not be fulfilled due to the delayed receipt of a manufacturing component for our TASER 7 devices. We expect to recognize this revenue during the first half of 2022.
Net sales for the Software and Sensors segment increased $3.2 million, or 2.9%, on a sequential basis primarily due to a $6.8 million increase in Axon Evidence and cloud services revenue and a $3.2 million increase in Axon Fleet revenue. The increase in Axon Evidence and cloud services revenue was a result of the increase in the aggregate
number of users on our network. Axon Fleet revenue was driven primarily by increased unit sales, as well as an increase in the average selling price. Axon Body revenue was impacted by approximately $15.5 million for orders that were scheduled to ship prior to December 31, 2021, but could not be fulfilled due to supply chain constraints for our Axon Body 3 devices. We expect to recognize this revenue during the first half of 2022.
International sales were $48.7 million in for the three months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $39.2 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $9.5 million, primarily driven by increased sales in the EMEA region.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial results presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. ("GAAP"), we present the non-GAAP financial measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (CEO Performance Award). Our management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in evaluating our performance in comparison to prior periods. We believe that both management and investors benefit from referring to these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our performance, and when planning and forecasting our future periods. A reconciliation of GAAP to the non-GAAP financial measures is presented below.
● EBITDA (Most comparable GAAP Measure: Net income) - Earnings before interest expense, investment interest income, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
● Adjusted EBITDA (CEO Performance Award) (Most comparable GAAP Measure: Net income) - Earnings before interest expense, investment interest income, taxes, depreciation, amortization and non-cash stock-based compensation expense.
Although these non-GAAP financial measures are not consistent with GAAP, management believes investors will benefit by referring to these non-GAAP financial measures when assessing our operating results, as well as when forecasting and analyzing future periods. However, management recognizes that:
● these non-GAAP financial measures are limited in their usefulness and should be considered only as a supplement to our GAAP financial measures;
● these non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, our GAAP financial measures;
● these non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered to be superior to our GAAP financial measures; and
● these non-GAAP financial measures were not prepared in accordance with GAAP and investors should not assume that the non-GAAP financial measures presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K were prepared under a comprehensive set of rules or principles.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (CEO Performance Award) reconcile to net income as follows (dollars in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Summary
As of December 31, 2021, we had $356.3 million of cash and cash equivalents, an increase of $200.9 million from December 31, 2020. Cash and cash equivalents and investments totaled $402.1 million, a decrease of $250.6 million from December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2021 of $124.5 million consisted of $60.0 million in net loss, the net add-back of non-cash income statement items totaling $227.8 million and a $43.3 million net change in operating assets and liabilities. Included in the non-cash items were $18.7 million in depreciation and amortization expense, $303.3 million in stock-based compensation expense, and an $81.3 million increase in deferred income tax assets. Cash provided by operations was impacted by an increase of $205.8 million in accounts and notes receivable and contract assets, which was largely attributable to increased sales in 2021, particularly for sales made under subscription plans. Cash provided by operations was also impacted by an increase of $40.2 million in prepaid expenses and other assets, resulting primarily from an increase in deferred commissions expense and an increase in income tax receivable due to overpayments, and an increase of $18.3 million in inventory on as we proactively built up inventory to help meet future product demand. Partially offsetting this activity was an increase in deferred revenue of $175.6 million, which was primarily attributable to increased subscription payments for Software and Sensors hardware and services in advance of fulfillment, and a smaller increase in hardware deferred revenue from TASER subscription sales.
Investing activities
We generated $252.6 million from investing activities in 2021. Proceeds from investments, net of purchases of investments and marketable securities, were $356.1 million, and $14.5 million of proceeds from the sale of a portion of one of our existing strategic investments. We also invested $50.3 million in the purchase of property and equipment and intangibles, $45.5 million for new or incremental strategic minority investments, and $22.4 million in cash paid for business combinations.
Financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $174.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, certain restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and stock options were net-share settled, such that we withheld shares to cover the employees’ tax obligation for the applicable income and other employment taxes, and remitted the cash, which payments totaled $331.3 million, to the appropriate taxing authorities. Net-settled stock awards included six tranches of our XSPP which vested during 2021 and 2.1 million stock options which were exercised during 2021. Partially offsetting this use of cash were net proceeds received from our ATM offering during 2021 of $105.5 million in cash and $51.6 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options where shares were sold to cover the exercise price.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our most significant source of liquidity continues to be funds generated by operating activities and available cash and cash equivalents. In addition, our $50.0 million revolving credit facility is available for additional working capital needs or investment opportunities. Under the terms of the line of credit, available borrowings are reduced by outstanding letters of credit. Advances under the line of credit bear interest at LIBOR plus 1.0 to 1.5% per year determined in accordance with a pricing grid based on our funded debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") ratio.
As of December 31, 2021, we had letters of credit outstanding of $6.1 million, leaving the net amount available for borrowing of $43.9 million. The facility matures on December 31, 2023 and has an accordion feature which allows for an increase in the total line of credit up to $100.0 million, subject to certain conditions, including the availability of additional bank commitments. There can be no assurance that we will continue to generate cash flows at or above current levels or that we will be able to maintain our ability to borrow under our revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no borrowings under the line.
Our agreement with the bank requires us to comply with a maximum funded debt to EBITDA ratio, as defined, of no greater than 2.50 to 1.00 based upon a trailing four fiscal quarter period. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s funded debt to EBITDA ratio was 0.00 to 1.00.
On January 29, 2021, we entered into an amendment to the credit agreement which extends the maturity date to December 31, 2023 and increased the amount of the unsecured revolving line of credit which is available for letters of credit from $10 million to $20 million.
TASER subscription and installment purchase arrangements typically involve amounts invoiced in five equal installments at the beginning of each year of the five-year term. This is in contrast to a traditional CED sale in which the entire amount being charged for the hardware is invoiced upon shipment. This impacts liquidity in a commensurate fashion, with the cash for the subscription or installment purchase received in five annual installments rather than up front. It is our strategic intent to shift an increasing amount of our business to a subscription model, to better match the municipal budgeting process of our customers as well as to allow for multiple product offerings to be bundled into existing subscriptions. We carefully considered the cash flow impacts of this strategic shift and regularly revisit our cash flow forecast with the goal of maintaining a comfortable level of liquidity as we introduce commercial offerings in which we incur upfront cash costs to produce and fulfill hardware sales ahead of the cash inflows from our customers.
Based on our strong balance sheet and the fact that we had no long-term debt or financing lease obligations at December 31, 2021, we believe financing will be available, both through our existing credit line and possible additional financing. However, there is no assurance that such funding will be available on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
We believe that our sources of funding will be sufficient to satisfy our currently anticipated cash requirements including capital expenditures, working capital requirements, potential acquisitions or investments, income and payroll tax payments for net-settled stock awards, and other liquidity requirements through at least the next 12 months. We and our Board of Directors may consider repurchases of our common stock. Further repurchases of our common stock would take place on the open market, would be financed with available cash and are subject to authorization as well as market and business conditions.
Contractual Obligations
The following table outlines our future contractual financial obligations by period in which payment is expected, as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
Purchase obligations in the table above represent $313.5 million of open purchase orders and $14.9 million of other purchase obligations. The open purchase orders represent both cancelable and non-cancelable purchase orders with key vendors, which are included in this table due to our strategic relationships with these vendors.
On February 23, 2022, the Company entered into construction management agreement with Okland Construction Company, Inc. for construction of a new manufacturing and office campus on land the Company owns in Scottsdale, Arizona. The contract specifies a maximum guaranteed construction price of approximately $149.7 million, of which approximately $85.0 million is expected to be incurred in 2022. Construction is expected to start no later than May 3, 2022 with final completion by July 25, 2024.
We are subject to U.S. federal income tax as well as income taxes imposed by state and foreign jurisdictions. As of December 31, 2021, we had $18.2 million of gross unrecognized tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions. The settlement period for these long-term income tax liabilities cannot be determined; however, the liabilities are expected to increase by approximately $0.7 million within the next 12 months.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We have identified the following accounting estimates as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. The preparation of this Annual Report on Form 10-K requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. While we do not believe that a change in these estimates is reasonably likely, there can be no assurance that our actual results will not differ from these estimates. The effect of these estimates on our business operations is discussed below.
Product Warranties
We warranty our CEDs, Axon cameras and certain related accessories from manufacturing defects on a limited basis for a period of one year after purchase and, thereafter, will replace any defective unit for a fee. Estimated costs for the standard warranty are charged to cost of products sold when revenue is recorded for the related product. Future
warranty costs are estimated based on historical data related to warranty claims on a quarterly basis and this rate is applied to current product sales. Historically, reserve amounts have been increased if management becomes aware of a component failure or other issue that could result in larger than anticipated warranty claims from customers. The warranty reserve is reviewed quarterly to verify that it sufficiently reflects the remaining warranty obligations based on the anticipated expenditures over the balance of the warranty obligation period, and adjustments are made when actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our warranty reserve was approximately $2.8 million and $0.8 million, respectively. Warranty expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $2.9 million, $0.0 million and $1.6 million, respectively. Warranty expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was impacted by higher battery degradation resulting in shorter battery lives for the Axon Body 3 on-officer body camera and warranty claims for TASER 7 handles. Warranty expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was impacted by lower than expected warranty claims for the Axon Body 3 on-officer body camera. Warranty expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was impacted by higher than initially expected warranty claims for the Axon Flex 2 on-officer body camera.
Revenue related to separately-priced extended warranties is initially recorded as deferred revenue at its allocated amount and subsequently recognized as net sales on a straight-line basis over the warranty service period. Costs related to extended warranties are charged to cost of product and service sales when incurred.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined on the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) basis, or net realizable value, net of an inventory valuation allowance. We use a standard cost methodology to determine the cost basis for its inventories. Costs include allocations for materials, labor, and overhead. All variances between actual costs and standard costs are apportioned to inventory and cost of goods sold based upon inventory turnover. We evaluate inventory on a quarterly basis for obsolete or slow-moving items to ascertain if the recorded allowance is reasonable and adequate. Additional provisions are made to reduce excess, obsolete or slow-moving inventories to their net realizable value.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded provisions to reduce inventories to their lower of cost and net realizable value of approximately $0.9 million compared to $3.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The largest driver of the decrease in the provision in 2021 compared to 2020 was a one-time prior year reduction in the carrying amount of our trial and evaluation inventory to zero which was our estimate of its net realizable value. The provision in 2021 and in 2020 was driven by analyses for existing products resulting in adjustments to state inventories at their lower of cost and net realizable value.
Revenue Recognition, Deferred Revenue and Accounts and Notes Receivable
We derive revenue from two primary sources: (1) the sale of physical products, including CEDs, Axon cameras, Axon Signal enabled devices, corresponding hardware extended warranties, and related accessories such as Axon docks, cartridges and batteries, among others, and (2) subscriptions to our Axon Evidence digital evidence management SaaS (including data storage fees and other ancillary services), which includes varying levels of support. To a lesser extent, we also recognize training, professional services and revenue related to other software and SaaS services. We apply the five-step model outlined in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("Topic 606").
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, and is the unit of account in Topic 606. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract transaction price to each performance obligation using our estimate of the standalone selling price ("SSP") of each distinct good or service in the contract.
Revenues are recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We enter into contracts
that can include various combinations of products and services, each of which is generally distinct and accounted for as a separate performance obligation. Revenue is recognized net of allowances for returns.
Performance obligations to deliver products, including CEDs, cameras and related accessories such as cartridges, batteries and docks, are generally satisfied at the point in time we ship the product, as this is when the customer obtains control of the asset under our standard terms and conditions. In certain contracts with non-standard terms and conditions, these performance obligations may not be satisfied until formal customer acceptance occurs. Performance obligations to fulfill service-type extended warranties and provide our SaaS offerings, including Axon Evidence and other cloud services, are generally satisfied over time as the customer receives and consumes the benefits of these services over the stated service period.
Many of our products and services are sold on a standalone basis. We also bundle our hardware products and services together and sell them to our customers in single transactions, where the customer can make payments over a multi-year period. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the composition of revenue recognized from contracts containing multiple performance obligations and those not containing multiple performance obligations was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Additionally, we offer customers the ability to purchase CED cartridges and certain services on an unlimited basis over the contractual term. Due to the unlimited nature of these arrangements whereby we are obligated to deliver unlimited products at the customer’s request, we account for these arrangements as stand-ready obligations, and recognize revenue ratably over the contract period. Cost of product sales is recognized as the products are shipped to the customer.
We have elected to recognize shipping costs as an expense in cost of product sales when the control of hardware products or accessories have transferred to the customer.
Sales tax collected on sales is netted against government remittances and thus, recorded on a net basis.
Deferred revenue consists of payments received in advance related to products and services for which the criteria for revenue recognition have not yet been met. Deferred revenue that will be recognized during the subsequent twelve month period from the balance sheet date is recorded as current deferred revenue and the remaining portion is recorded as long-term. Generally, customers are billed in annual installments.
Sales are typically made on credit, and we generally do not require collateral.
Valuation of Goodwill, Intangible and Long-lived Assets
We do not amortize goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives; rather, such assets are required to be tested for impairment at least annually, or sooner whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets may be impaired. We perform our annual impairment assessment in the fourth quarter of each year. Finite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives. Management evaluates whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the remaining estimated useful life of long-lived assets and intangible assets may warrant revision or that the remaining balance of these assets, including intangible assets with indefinite lives, may not be recoverable.
Circumstances that might indicate long-lived assets might not be recoverable could include, but are not limited to, a change in the product mix, a change in the way products and services are created, produced or delivered, or a significant change in the way our products are branded and marketed. When performing a review for recoverability, management estimates the future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. The amount of the impairment loss, if impairment exists, is calculated based on the excess of the carrying amounts of the assets over their estimated fair value computed using discounted cash flows. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an immaterial amount of impairment charges. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we abandoned certain planning and site development activities related to our planned new headquarters, resulting in an impairment charge of $0.7 million. Additionally, we recognized impairment charges totaling $0.5 million related to improvements and remodeling of certain of our offices. Both charges were included in sales, general and administrative expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we abandoned certain capitalized software related to implementation work on an enterprise resource planning system conversion, resulting in an impairment charge of $1.3 million, and certain planning and site development activities related to our planned new headquarters, resulting in an impairment charge of $0.7 million, both of which were included in sales, general and administrative expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
Income Taxes
We recognize federal, state and foreign current tax liabilities or assets based on our estimate of taxes payable or refundable in the current fiscal year by tax jurisdiction. We also recognize federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets or liabilities, as appropriate, for our estimate of future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carry forwards.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such positions are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. We must also assess whether uncertain tax positions as filed could result in the recognition of a liability for possible interest and penalties if any. We have completed research and development tax credit studies for each year a tax credit was claimed for federal and state income tax purposes. We determined that it was more likely than not that the full benefit of the research and development tax credit would not be sustained on examination and accordingly, have established a liability for unrecognized tax benefits of $18.2 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect the amount of the unrecognized tax benefit to increase by approximately $0.7 million within the next 12 months. Should the unrecognized tax benefit of $18.2 million be recognized, our effective tax rate would be favorably impacted. Our estimates are based on information available to us at the time we prepare the income tax provision. Our income tax returns are subject to audit by federal, state, and local governments, generally years
after the returns are filed. These returns could be subject to material adjustments or differing interpretations of the tax laws. During 2021, we completed an audit of our 2018 Illinois income tax return. Additionally, we have been notified that an audit will commence for Axon Public Safety Southeast Asia LLC, our entity in Vietnam. The tax period has not yet been defined.
Our calculation of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on certain estimates and judgments and involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Our estimates of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities may change based, in part, on added certainty or finality to an anticipated outcome, changes in accounting or tax laws in the U.S. and internationally, or changes in other facts or circumstances. In addition, we recognize liabilities for potential tax contingencies based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes may be due. If we determine that payment of these amounts is unnecessary, or if the recorded tax liability is greater than our current assessment, we may be required to recognize an income tax benefit, or additional income tax expense, respectively, in our consolidated financial statements.
In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be realized from future taxable income. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred income tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including operating results, ongoing tax planning and forecasts of future taxable income on a jurisdiction by jurisdiction basis. A valuation allowance is established if we determine that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the net deferred tax assets will not be realized. Although we believe that our tax estimates are reasonable, the ultimate tax determination involves significant judgments that could become subject to audit by tax authorities in the ordinary course of business.
We have federal net operating losses ("NOLs") of $259.0 million, which either carryforward indefinitely or expire in 2036 and $0.1 million of which is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code (“IRC”) Section 382. Additionally, we have state NOLs of $251.4 million, which expire at various dates between 2026 and 2041 or carryforward indefinitely. We anticipate sufficient future pre-tax book income to realize a large portion of our deferred tax assets. However, based on expected income for years in which Arizona R&D tax credits are set to expire, unrealized investment loss for which realization is uncertain, and specific identified intangibles with an indefinite life, a reserve of $16.2 million has been recorded as a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have historically granted stock-based compensation to key employees and non-employee directors as a means of attracting and retaining highly qualified personnel. Stock-based compensation awards primarily consist of service-based RSUs, performance-based RSUs, and performance-based stock options. Our stock-based compensation awards are classified as equity and measured at the fair market value of the underlying stock at the grant date. For service-based awards, we recognize RSU expense using the straight-line attribution method over the requisite service period. Vesting of performance-based RSUs is contingent upon the achievement of certain performance criteria related to our operating performance, as well as successful and timely development and market acceptance of future product introductions. For performance-based RSUs containing only performance conditions, compensation cost is recognized using the graded attribution model over the explicit or implicit service period. For awards containing multiple service, performance or market conditions, where all conditions must be satisfied prior to vesting, compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period, which is defined as the longest explicit, implicit or derived service period, based on management’s estimate of the probability and timing of the performance criteria being satisfied, adjusted at each balance sheet date. For both service-based and performance-based RSUs, we account for forfeitures as they occur as a reduction to stock-based compensation expense and additional paid-in-capital.
For performance-based options, stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the expected performance achievement period of individual performance goals when the achievement of each individual performance goal becomes probable. For performance-based awards with a vesting schedule based entirely on the attainment of both performance and market conditions, stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the longer of the expected achievement period of the performance and market conditions, beginning at the point in time that the relevant
performance condition is considered probable of achievement. The fair value of such awards is estimated on the grant date using Monte Carlo simulations. Refer to Note 14 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have granted a total of approximately 15.1 million performance-based awards (options and restricted stock units) of which approximately 3.9 million are outstanding as of December 31, 2021, the vesting of which is contingent upon the achievement of certain performance criteria including the successful development and market acceptance of future product introductions as well as our future sales targets and operating performance and market capitalization. Of the 3.9 million performance-based awards that are outstanding, 1.4 million are options that are exercisable. Compensation expense for performance awards will be recognized based on management’s best estimate of the probability of the performance criteria being satisfied using the most currently available projections of future product adoption and operating performance, adjusted at each balance sheet date. Changes in the subjective and probability-based assumptions can materially affect the estimates of the fair value of the awards and timing of recognition of stock-based compensation and consequently, the related amount recognized in our statements of operations and comprehensive income.
Contingencies and Accrued Litigation Expense
We are subject to the possibility of various loss contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business, including product-related and other litigation. We consider the likelihood of loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability, as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted and whether new accruals are required. Refer to Note 11 of our consolidated financial statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Reserve for Expected Credit Losses
We are exposed to the risk of credit losses primarily through sales of products and services. Our expected credit loss allowance for accounts receivable, notes receivable, and contract assets represents management’s best estimate and application of judgment considering a number of factors, including historical collection experience, published or estimated credit default rates for entities that represent our customer base, current and future economic and market conditions and a review of the current status of customers' trade accounts receivables. Additionally, specific reserve amounts are established to record the appropriate provision for customers that have a higher probability of default. Our monitoring activities include account reconciliation, dispute resolution, payment confirmation, consideration of customers' financial condition and macroeconomic conditions. Balances are written off when determined to be uncollectible.
We review receivables for U.S. and international customers separately to better reflect different published credit default rates and economic and market conditions.
A majority of our customers are governmental agencies. Due to municipal government funding rules, certain of our contracts are subject to appropriation, termination for convenience, or similar cancellation clauses, which could allow our customers to cancel or not exercise options to renew contracts in the future. Economic slowdowns that negatively affect municipal tax collections and put pressure on law enforcement may increase this risk and negatively impact the realizability of our accounts and notes receivable and contract assets. We considered the current and expected future economic and market conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and reversed our previously-recorded additional reserve for credit losses of approximately $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Based on the balances of our financial instruments as of December 31, 2021, a hypothetical 25 percent increase in expected credit loss rates across all pools would result in a $0.7 million increase in the allowance for expected credit losses.