Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For a description of the Company’s business, refer to Item 1 of Part I of this annual report on Form 10-K. As indicated in Item 1, the Company, through its subsidiaries, is primarily engaged in two business segments: land development and homebuilding. The Company has no foreign sales. The following provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of the Company’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Company prepares its financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The Company discloses its significant accounting policies in the notes to its audited consolidated financial statements.
The preparation of such financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of those financial statements as well as the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Areas that require significant judgments and estimates to be made include: (1) land sale cost of revenues calculations, which are based on land development budgets and estimates of costs to complete; (2) cash flows, asset groupings and valuation assumptions in performing asset impairment tests of long-lived assets and assets held for sale; (3) actuarially determined defined benefit pension obligations and other pension plan accounting and disclosures; (4) risk assessment of uncertain tax positions; and (5) the determination of the recoverability of net deferred tax assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
There are numerous critical assumptions that may influence accounting estimates in these and other areas. Management bases its critical assumptions on historical experience, third-party data and various other estimates that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. The most critical assumptions made in arriving at these accounting estimates include the following:
● land sale cost of revenues are incurred throughout the life of a project, and the costs of initial sales from a project frequently must include a portion of costs that have been budgeted based on engineering estimates or other studies, but not yet incurred;
● when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable, a test for asset impairment may be required. Asset impairment determinations are based upon the intended use of assets, the grouping of those assets, the expected future cash flows and estimates of fair value of assets. For real estate projects under development, an estimate of future cash flows on an undiscounted basis is determined using estimated future expenditures necessary to complete such projects and using management’s best estimates about sales prices and holding periods. Testing of long-lived assets includes an estimate of future cash flows on an undiscounted basis using estimated revenue streams, operating margins, administrative expenses and terminal values. The estimation process involved in determining if assets have been impaired and in the determination of estimated future cash flows is inherently uncertain because it requires estimates of future revenues and costs, as well as future events and conditions. If the excess of undiscounted cash flows over the carrying value of a particular asset group is small, there is a greater risk of future impairment and any resulting impairment charges could be material;
● defined benefit pension obligations and other pension plan accounting and disclosures are based upon numerous assumptions and estimates, including the expected rate of investment return on pension plan assets, the discount rate used to determine the present value of liabilities, and certain employee-related factors such as turnover, retirement age and mortality;
● the Company assesses risk for uncertain tax positions and recognizes the financial statement effects of a tax position when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by tax authorities; and
● the Company provides a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets unless, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. In making this determination, the Company projects its future earnings (including currently unrealized gains on real estate inventory) for the future recoverability of net deferred tax assets.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended April 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended April 30, 2021
For 2022, the Company had net income of $15,862,000, or $2.21 per diluted share, compared to net income of $7,392,000, or $0.95 per diluted share, in 2021.
Revenues. The following presents information on revenues for the Company’s operations (dollars in thousands):
(a)
Percentage not meaningful.
During 2022, the Company experienced supply chain constraints, increases in the prices of building materials, shortages of skilled labor and delays in municipal approvals and inspections in both the land development business segment and homebuilding business segment, which have caused delays in construction and the realization of revenues and increases in cost of revenues. Future economic conditions and the demand for land and homes are subject to continued uncertainty due to many factors, including the recent increase in mortgage interest rates, higher inflation, low supplies of new and existing home inventory, ongoing disruptions from supply chain challenges and labor shortages, the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and government directives, and other factors. While construction and land costs remain elevated, the Company has been able to offset these cost increases through land and home price increases in 2022 due to the strong pricing environment. The Company’s past performance may not be indicative of future results.
● Land sale revenues for 2022 were higher than 2021 by $13,389,000 primarily due to the sale of a significant amount of undeveloped land, the sale of developed commercial land and increased demand for lots by builders. The Company’s land sale revenues were as follows (dollars in thousands):
The increase in the average selling price per acre of developed residential land in 2022 compared to 2021 was primarily due to the location and mix of property sold and increased demand for lots by builders. The increase in the average selling price per acre of developed commercial land in 2022 compared to 2021 was primarily due to the location and mix of property sold. The increase in the average selling price per acre of undeveloped land in 2022 compared to 2021 was primarily due to the location and mix of property sold and increased demand in the market. The Company sold 1,196 acres of contiguous undeveloped land in Sandoval County, New Mexico in 2022, representing $7,107,000 of revenue, to one purchaser. The Company does not expect the sale of a significant amount of undeveloped land in 2022 to be indicative of the sale of such undeveloped land in the future.
● Home sale revenues for 2022 were higher than 2021 by $10,486,000 due to the expansion of the Company’s homebuilding operations. The Company’s home sale revenues consisted of:
As of April 30, 2022, the Company had 38 homes in production, including 17 homes under contract, which homes under contract represented $8,713,000 of expected sale revenues when closed, subject to customer cancellations and change orders. As of April 30, 2021, the Company had 33 homes in production, including 23 homes under contract, which homes under contract represented $6,567,000 of expected sale revenues when closed, subject to customer cancellations and change orders.
● Building sales and other revenues for 2022 were lower than 2021 by $1,465,000. Building sales and other revenues consisted of (in thousands):
Sales of buildings and other land during 2022 consisted of revenues from the sale of a 4,338 square foot, single tenant retail building in the La Mirada subdivision and from the sale of a 143,000 square foot warehouse and office facility located in Palm Coast, Florida. Sales of buildings and other land during 2021 consisted of revenues from the sale of a 14,000 square foot, single tenant retail building in the Las Fuentes at Panorama Village subdivision in Rio Rancho and from the sale of a 61,000 square foot warehouse and office facility located in Palm Coast, Florida. The Company does not expect the sale of the warehouse and office facilities located in Palm Coast, Florida to be indicative of future sales of such properties since the Company has no other similar properties.
Refer to Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K for detail about the categories of building sales and other revenues.
1Revenues per lot may not calculate precisely due to the rounding of revenues to the nearest thousand dollars.
Cost of Revenues. The following presents information on cost of revenues for the Company’s operations (dollars in thousands):
(a)
Percentage not meaningful.
● Land sale cost of revenues for 2022 were higher than 2021 by $3,902,000. Land sale gross margin was 45.0% for 2022 compared to 31.3% for 2021. The gross margin increase was primarily due to the location, size and mix of property sold (including the sale of 1,233.5 acres in 2022 versus 83.3 acres in 2021 of undeveloped land with a low associated land sale cost of revenues) and the demand for lots by builders resulting in higher revenue per developed lot. As a result of many factors, including the nature and timing of specific transactions and the type and location of land being sold, revenues, average selling prices and related average gross margin from land sales can vary significantly from period to period and prior results are not necessarily a good indication of what may occur in future periods.
● Home sale cost of revenues for 2022 were higher than 2021 by $7,653,000. Average home sale cost of revenues per home sold was $250,000 for 2022 compared to $185,000 for 2021 and home sale gross margin was 24.5% for 2022 compared to 16.1% for 2021. The gross margin increase was primarily due to the location and mix of homes sold and to efficiencies gained during the expansion of the Company’s homebuilding operations.
● Building sales and other cost of revenues for 2022 consisted of expenses associated with the sale of a 4,338 square foot, single tenant retail building in the La Mirada subdivision and the sale of a 143,000 square foot warehouse and office facility located in Palm Coast, Florida. Building sales and other cost of revenues for 2021 consisted of expenses associated with the sale of a 14,000 square foot, single tenant retail building in the Las Fuentes at Panorama Village subdivision in Rio Rancho and the sale of a 61,000 square foot warehouse and office facility located in Palm Coast, Florida.
General and Administrative Expenses. The following presents information on general and administrative expenses for the Company’s operations (dollars in thousands):
● Land development general and administrative expenses for 2022 were higher than 2021 by $726,000 primarily due to an increase in real estate taxes. The Company did not record any non-cash impairment charges on real estate inventory or investment assets in 2022 or 2021. Due to volatility in market conditions and development costs, the Company may experience future impairment charges.
● Homebuilding general and administrative expenses for 2022 were higher than 2021 by $252,000 primarily due to expansion of the Company’s homebuilding operations.
● Corporate general and administrative expenses for 2022 were lower than 2021 by $1,044,000 primarily due to reduced pension benefit expenses, depreciation and professional fees.
Interest Income (Expense). Interest income (expense), net increased to $2,000 for 2022 from $(40,000) for 2021. Interest and loan costs of $224,000 and $105,000 were capitalized in real estate inventory for the years ending April 30, 2022 and April 30, 2021.
Other Income. Other income of $261,000 for 2022 primarily consisted of $185,000 received in connection with the bankruptcy of a warranty provider, $45,000 of debt forgiveness with respect to a note payable and $30,000 earned from a life insurance policy for a retired executive of the Company. Other income of $1,028,000 for 2021 primarily consisted of a settlement payment of $650,000 from a tenant for failure to pay rent for the Company’s warehouse and office facilities located in Palm Coast, Florida and $300,000 of debt forgiveness with respect to a loan received by the Company pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration.
Income Taxes. The Company had a provision for income taxes of $5,704,000 for 2022 compared to a provision for income taxes of $2,643,000 for 2021. The provision for income taxes correlated to the amount of income before income taxes during each year.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
AMREP Corporation is a holding company that conducts substantially all of its operations through subsidiaries. As a holding company, AMREP Corporation is dependent on its available cash and on cash from subsidiaries to pay expenses and fund operations. The Company’s liquidity is affected by many factors, including some that are based on normal operations and some that are related to the real estate industry and the economy generally.
The Company’s primary sources of funding for working capital requirements are cash flow from operations, bank financing for specific real estate projects, a revolving line of credit and existing cash balances. Land and homebuilding properties generally cannot be sold quickly, and the ability of the Company to sell properties has been and will continue to be affected by market conditions. The ability of the Company to generate cash flow from operations is primarily dependent upon its ability to sell the properties it has selected for disposition at the prices and within the timeframes the Company has established for each property. The development of additional lots for sale, construction of homes or pursuing other real estate projects will require financing or other sources of funding, which may not be available on acceptable terms (or at all). If the Company is unable to obtain such financing, the Company’s results of operations could be adversely affected.
The Company expects the primary demand for funds in the short-term and long-term future will be for the development and acquisition of land, construction of home and commercial projects and general and administrative expenses. The development and acquisition of land and construction of home and commercial projects is generally required to satisfy delivery obligations of developed land or finished homes to customers. Further, the Company regularly evaluates property available for purchase from third parties for possible acquisition and development by the Company. To the extent the sources of capital described above are insufficient to meet its needs, the Company may conduct public or private offerings of securities, dispose of certain assets or draw on existing or new debt facilities. The Company believes that it has adequate cash, bank financing and cash flows from operations to provide for its anticipated spending in fiscal year 2023.
COVID-19 Impact and Response. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. Subsequently, extraordinary and wide-ranging actions were taken by public health and governmental authorities to contain and combat the outbreak and spread of COVID-19, including quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and similar mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations.
The Company’s construction operations have continued functioning during this period subject to health and safety protocols in order to protect the Company’s employees, trade contractors and homebuilder customers. Those restrictions, combined with a reduction in the availability, capacity and efficiency of municipal and private services necessary to progress land development and homebuilding, have reduced the Company’s sales pace and delayed certain projects and deliveries. The inconsistent and unpredictable impacts of the COVID-19 virus and related variants, including changing governmental directives, public health challenges and progress, macroeconomic consequences and market reactions thereto, may cause the Company to adjust its planning and operations and makes it more challenging for the Company to estimate the future performance of the business and develop strategies to generate growth. Despite the development of vaccines and more effective treatments for the physical impacts of COVID-19, there are no reliable estimates of how long the COVID-19 pandemic, or its related impacts on overall economic conditions or the global supply chain, will last. As a result, the unpredictability of the current economic and public health conditions will continue to evolve. While the Company cannot reasonably estimate the length or severity of this pandemic or if there will be additional periods of increases or spikes in the number of COVID-19 cases, future mutations or related strains of the virus in areas in which the Company operates, the cumulative effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global supply chain and the Company’s operations could materially impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
The Company could also be negatively impacted if disruptions related to COVID-19 (a) decrease consumer confidence generally or with respect to purchasing a home or cause civil unrest, (b) precipitate a prolonged economic downturn or an extended rise in unemployment or tempering of wage growth, any of which could lower demand for the Company’s products, impair the Company’s ability to sell and build finished lots and homes in a typical manner or at all, impair the Company’s ability to generate revenues and cash flows, or impair the Company’s ability to access the capital or lending markets (or significantly increase the costs of doing so), (c) increase the costs or decrease the supply of construction materials or the availability of subcontractors and other talent, including as a result of infections or medically necessary or recommended self-quarantining, or governmental mandates to direct production activities to support public health efforts or (d) result in the Company recognizing charges in future periods, which may be material, for impairments related to the Company’s inventory or investment assets. Any epidemic, pandemic or similar serious public health issue, and the measures undertaken by governmental authorities to address it, could significantly disrupt or prevent the Company from
operating in the ordinary course for an extended period and could have a significant adverse impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Should the adverse impacts described above (or others that are currently unknown) occur, whether individually or collectively, the Company would expect to experience, among other things, increases in defaults under customer contracts, and decreases in future demand for finished lots and homes, likely resulting in reduced revenues and profitability. Such impacts could be material to the Company’s financial statements. The Company could also be forced to reduce its average selling prices in order to generate homebuilder or homebuyer demand or in reaction to competitive pressures. In addition, should the COVID-19 public health effort intensify to such an extent that the Company cannot operate in Rio Rancho, the Company could generate few or no sales during the applicable period, which could be prolonged. If there are prolonged government restrictions on the Company’s operations or the Company’s employees, trade contractors or customers, or an extended economic recession, the Company could be unable to produce revenues and cash flows sufficient to conduct operations, meet the terms of the Company’s covenants and other requirements under its financing arrangements or service the Company’s outstanding debt. Such a circumstance could, among other things, exhaust the Company’s available liquidity (and ability to access liquidity sources) or trigger an acceleration to pay a significant portion or all of the Company’s then-outstanding debt obligations, which the Company may be unable to do.
Pension Plan. The Company has a defined benefit pension plan for which accumulated benefits were frozen and future service credits were curtailed as of March 1, 2004. Under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company’s defined benefit pension plan was overfunded as of April 30, 2022 by $90,000, with $18,054,000 of assets and $17,964,000 of liabilities, and was underfunded as of April 30, 2021 by $476,000, with $21,102,000 of assets and $21,578,000 of liabilities. The pension plan liabilities were determined using a weighted average discount interest rate of 3.97% per year as of April 30, 2022 and 2.48% per year as of April 30, 2021, which are based on the FTSE Pension Discount Curve as of such dates as it corresponds to the projected liability requirements of the pension plan. As of April 30, 2022, for each 0.25% increase in the weighted average discount interest rate, the pension plan liabilities are forecasted to decrease by $337,000 and for each 0.25% decrease in the weighted average discount interest rate, the pension plan liabilities are forecasted to increase by $350,000. As of April 30, 2022, the effect of every 0.25% change in the investment rate of return on pension plan assets would increase or decrease the subsequent year’s pension expense by $42,000, and the effect of every 0.25% change in the weighted average discount interest rate would increase or decrease the subsequent year’s pension expense by $7,000. The pension plan is subject to minimum IRS contribution requirements, but these requirements can be satisfied by the use of the pension plan’s existing credit balance. No cash contributions were required during 2022. The Company made voluntary contributions to the pension plan of $1,847,000 during 2021.
Cash Flow. The following presents information on the cash flows for the Company (dollars in thousands):
(a)Percentage not meaningful.
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities for 2022 was higher than 2021 by $2,867,000 primarily due to (i) an increase in the Company’s net income, accounts payable and accrued expenses and taxes payable and (ii) a decrease in the amount of investment assets and pension costs, partially offset by (a) a decrease in the amount of deferred income taxes and (b) an increase in the amount of real estate inventory.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities for 2022 was higher than 2021 by $1,190,000 primarily due to the acquisition of a 7,000 square foot office building in Rio Rancho from which the Company’s real estate business now operates.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities for 2022 was higher than 2021 by $18,056,000 primarily due to the Company’s share repurchase activity. Notes payable, net decreased from $3,448,000 as of April 30, 2021 to $2,030,000 as of April 30, 2022, primarily due to repayments made on outstanding borrowings partially offset by additional borrowings to fund land acquisitions and land development activities. Refer to Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K for detail regarding each of the Company’s notes payable. Refer to Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K for detail regarding the Company’s share repurchase activity. The Company does not expect the Company’s share repurchase activity to be indicative of its future activity in this area.
Asset and Liability Levels. The following presents information on certain asset and liability levels (dollars in thousands):
(a)
Percentage not meaningful.
● Real estate inventory increased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $11,660,000. Real estate inventory consisted of (in thousands):
(a)
Percentage not meaningful.
Land inventory in New Mexico increased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $9,456,000 primarily due to increased land development activity and the acquisition of land. Homebuilding finished inventory increased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $718,000 primarily due to the completion of construction of model homes and homes not yet sold. Homebuilding construction in process increased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $2,027,000 due to increased homebuilding activity.
● Investment assets, net decreased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $4,565,000. Investment assets, net consisted of (in thousands):
(a)
Percentage not meaningful.
Land held for long-term investment represents property located in areas that are not planned to be developed in the near term and that has not been offered for sale in the normal course of business. In 2022, the Company sold 1,233.5 acres of undeveloped property in Sandoval County, New Mexico categorized as land held for long-term investment. As of April 30, 2022 and April 30, 2021, the Company held approximately 11,000 and 12,000 acres of land in New Mexico classified as land held for long-term investment.
As of April 30, 2021, buildings were comprised of a 143,000 square foot warehouse and office facility located in Palm Coast, Florida. During 2022, the Company sold this warehouse and office facility. Depreciation associated with the buildings was $201,000 and $542,000 for 2022 and 2021.
● Other assets increased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $1,237,000 primarily due to an increase in property and equipment as a result of the acquisition of a 7,000 square foot office building in Rio Rancho from which the Company’s real estate business now operates and to an increase in right-of-use assets exchanged for operating lease liabilities.
● Deferred income taxes, net decreased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $1,791,000 primarily due to use of federal net operating loss carry forwards.
● Accounts payable and accrued expenses increased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $1,619,000 primarily due to the timing of invoices received but not paid and to an increase in operating lease liabilities exchanged for right-of-use assets.
● Taxes payable, net increased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $3,553,000.
● Accrued pension costs of the Company’s frozen defined benefit pension plan decreased from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2022 by $566,000 primarily due to favorable investment results of plan assets. The Company recorded, net of tax, other comprehensive income of $50,000 and $1,844,000 in 2022 and 2021, reflecting the change in accrued pension costs in each year net of the related deferred tax and unrecognized prepaid pension amounts.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. As of April 30, 2022 and April 30, 2021, the Company did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements. Refer to Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
The Company’s operations can be impacted by inflation. Inflation can cause increases in the cost of land, materials, services, interest rates and labor. Unless such increased costs are recovered through increased sales prices or improved operating efficiencies, operating margins will decrease. The Company’s homebuilding segment as well as homebuilders that are customers of the Company’s land development business segment face inflationary concerns that rising housing costs, including interest costs, may substantially outpace increases in the incomes of potential purchasers and make it difficult for them to purchase a new home or sell an owned home. If this situation were to exist, the demand for homes produced by the Company’s homebuilding segment could decrease and the demand for the Company’s land by homebuilder customers could decrease. Although the rate of inflation has been historically low in recent years, it has increased significantly in 2022 and the Company is currently experiencing historically significant increases in the prices of labor and certain materials as a result of this increase as well as the COVID-19 pandemic and increased demand for new homes. Inflation may also increase the Company’s financing costs. While the Company attempts to pass on to its customers increases in costs through increased sales prices, market forces may limit the Company’s ability to do so. If the Company is unable to raise sales prices enough to compensate for higher costs, or if mortgage interest rates increase significantly, the Company’s revenues, gross margins and net income could be adversely affected.
OTHER
In November 2021, the Company entered into an employment agreement with Christopher V. Vitale. Mr. Vitale is the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company. Pursuant to the employment agreement,
● Mr. Vitale will serve as the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company for a base salary of not less than the rate in effect immediately before the date of such agreement, which resulted in a base salary of $335,000 per year.
● The parties agreed to provisions relating to vacation, paid-time-off, office location, confidentiality, invention assignment, non-competition and non-solicitation.
● Upon any termination of Mr. Vitale’s employment, the Company will pay and issue to Mr. Vitale any earned but unpaid base salary, the dollar value equivalent of the number of days of vacation and paid-time-off earned but not used, unreimbursed business expenses, unpaid bonus previously awarded by the Company and vested benefits, equity awards or payments (excluding any severance benefits or payments) payable or issuable under any policy or plan of the Company or under any equity award agreement or other arrangement between the Company and Mr. Vitale.
● Upon any termination of Mr. Vitale’s employment due to the death of Mr. Vitale, the Company will pay to Mr. Vitale’s executors, administrators or personal representatives, an amount equal to his then-annual base salary which he would otherwise have earned for the month in which he dies and for three months thereafter.
● Upon any termination of Mr. Vitale’s employment by Mr. Vitale for Good Reason or the Company without Cause and delivery by Mr. Vitale of a release of claims to the Company, the Company will pay or provide to Mr. Vitale (a) a lump sum amount
equal to 200% of the highest of (i) Mr. Vitale’s annual base salary in effect immediately prior to the termination date, (ii) Mr. Vitale’s annual base salary in effect on the date 210 days prior to the termination date or (iii) in the event the termination of Mr. Vitale’s employment was for Good Reason, Mr. Vitale’s annual base salary in effect prior to the event constituting Good Reason; and (b) all restricted stock, stock options and other outstanding equity grants with respect to the Company that are held by Mr. Vitale immediately prior to the termination date will become fully vested and, as applicable, fully exercisable as of the termination date.
● For purposes of the employment agreement, the term “Good Reason” means any of the following actions taken by the Company without Mr. Vitale’s consent: a diminution in base salary of more than five percent; the removal of Mr. Vitale as the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company; a material diminution in Mr. Vitale’s authority, duties or responsibilities as the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company; assigning any material new duties or responsibilities to Mr. Vitale in addition to those normally associated with his role as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company; the Company ceasing to be a company subject to the periodic and current reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or ceasing to have its common stock traded on an exchange registered as a national securities exchange under Section 6 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; a requirement that Mr. Vitale relocate his office other than as permitted by the employment agreement; or the failure of the Company to observe or perform any of its obligations to Mr. Vitale under the employment agreement.
● For purposes of the employment agreement, the term “Cause” means the failure of Mr. Vitale to observe or perform (other than by reason of illness, injury, disability or incapacity) any of the material terms or provisions of the employment agreement, conviction of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude, misappropriation of funds of the Company, the commission of an act of dishonesty by Mr. Vitale resulting in or intended to result in wrongful personal gain or enrichment at the expense of the Company or a material breach (other than by reason of illness, injury, disability or incapacity) of any written employment or other policy of the Company.
● Upon any termination of Mr. Vitale’s employment in connection with a long-term disability, by Mr. Vitale for Good Reason or by the Company without Cause, the Company will pay to Mr. Vitale a lump sum cash payment equal to 200% of the annual cost of medical and other health care benefits for Mr. Vitale, his spouse and his other dependents and an amount equal to the estimated federal, state and local income and FICA taxes related thereto.
● Payments under the employment agreement may be adjusted as a result of section 409A and section 280G of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
● In the event Mr. Vitale is made, or threatened to be made, a party to any legal action or proceeding, whether civil or criminal, including any governmental or regulatory proceeding or investigation, by reason of the fact that Mr. Vitale is or was a director or senior officer of the Company, the Company will defend, indemnify and hold harmless Mr. Vitale, and the Company will promptly pay or reimburse Mr. Vitale’s related expenses to the fullest extent contemplated or permitted from time to time by applicable law and required by the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation. During Mr. Vitale’s employment with the Company and after termination of any such employment for any reason, the Company will cover Mr. Vitale under the Company’s directors’ and officers’ insurance policy applicable to other officers and directors according to the terms of such policy, but in no event for a period of time to exceed six years after the termination date.
In November 2021, the Company granted Mr. Vitale an option to purchase 50,000 shares of common stock of the Company under the AMREP Corporation 2016 Equity Compensation Plan. Refer to Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K for additional detail about this option.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the Company. The Company and its representatives may from time to time make written or oral statements that are “forward-looking”, including statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, reports to the Company’s shareholders and news releases. All statements that express expectations, estimates, forecasts or projections are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In addition, other written or oral statements, which constitute forward-looking statements, may be made by or on behalf of the Company. Words such as “expects”, “anticipates”, “intends”, “plans”, “believes”, “seeks”, “estimates”, “projects”, “forecasts”, “may”, “should”, variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve certain risks, uncertainties and contingencies that are difficult to predict. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this annual report on Form 10-K or, in the case of any document incorporated by reference, the date of that
document. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to the Company or any person acting on behalf of the Company are qualified by the cautionary statements in this section. Many of the factors that will determine the Company’s future results are beyond the ability of management to control or predict. Therefore, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in or suggested by such forward-looking statements.
The forward-looking statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K include, but are not limited to, statements regarding (1) the Company’s ability to finance its future working capital, land development, homebuilding and capital expenditure needs, (2) the Company’s expected liquidity sources, including the amount of principal available for borrowing under the Company’s financing arrangements, (3) anticipated future development of the Company’s real estate holdings, (4) the development and construction of possible future commercial properties to be marketed to tenants, (5) the designs, pricing and levels of options and amenities with respect to the Company’s homebuilding operations, (6) the timing of reimbursements under, and the general effectiveness of, the Company’s public improvement districts and private infrastructure reimbursement covenants, (7) the number of planned residential lots in the Company’s subdivisions, (8) the sale of a significant amount of undeveloped land in 2022 and the sale of the warehouse and office facilities located in Palm Coast, Florida not being indicative of future operating results and the Company’s share repurchase activity not being indicative of future financing activities, (9) estimates and assumptions used in determining future cash flows of real estate projects, (10) the availability of bank financing for projects and the utilization of existing bank financing, (11) the backlog of homes under contract and in production and the dollar amount of expected sale revenues when such homes are closed, (12) the effect of recent accounting pronouncements, (13) contributions by the Company to the pension plan, the amount of future annual benefit payments to pension plan participants payable from plan assets, the investment mix between equity securities and fixed income securities seeks to achieve a desired return in the pension plan, the appropriateness of valuation methods to determine the fair value of financial instruments in the pension plan, the expected return on assets in the pension plan, the expected long-term rate of return on assets in the pension plan, the effect of changes in the weighted average discount interest rate on the amount of pension plan liabilities and the effect of changes in the investment rate of return on pension plan assets with respect to pension expense, (14) the timing of recognizing unrecognized compensation expense related to shares of common stock issued under the AMREP Corporation 2016 Equity Compensation Plan, (15) the Company’s belief that its compensation package and benefits offered to employees are competitive with others in the industry, (16) the future issuance of deferred stock units to directors of the Company, (17) the future business conditions that may be experienced by the Company, (18) the dilution to earnings per share that outstanding options to purchase shares of common stock of the Company may cause in the future, (19) the adequacy of the Company’s facilities, (20) the materiality of claims and legal actions arising in the normal course of the Company’s business, (21) the state net operating losses that are not expected to be realizable, (22) the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s financial position and ability to continue operations at normal levels or at all, (23) the duration, effect and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and (24) the measures that governmental authorities may take to address the COVID-19 pandemic which may precipitate or exacerbate one or more of the above-mentioned or other risks and significantly disrupt or prevent the Company from operating in the ordinary course for an extended period of time. The Company undertakes no obligation to update or publicly release any revisions to any forward-looking statement to reflect events, circumstances or changes in expectations after the date of such forward-looking statement, or to make any other forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.