ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements about our plans and expectations of what may happen in the future. You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” and our consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this report. Forward-looking statements are based on a number of assumptions and estimates that are inherently subject to significant risks and uncertainties, and our results could differ materially from the results anticipated by our forward-looking statements as a result of many known or unknown factors, including, but not limited to, those factors discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” See also the “Special Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” set forth at the beginning of this report.
In July 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (which we refer to as “FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update 2019-07, “Codification Updates to SEC Sections-Amendments to SEC Paragraphs Pursuant to SEC Final Rule Releases No. 33-10532, Disclosure Update and Simplification", which changes were meant to simplify certain disclosures in financial condition and results of operations, particularly by eliminating year-to-year comparisons between prior periods previously disclosed. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company developing novel therapies for the management of central nervous system, or CNS, conditions that have limited treatment options. By focusing on this therapeutic area, we are addressing significant and growing markets where current treatment options are limited or inadequate. Our core CNS portfolio includes four CNS product candidates, AXS-05, AXS-07, AXS-12, and AXS-14 which are being developed for multiple indications.
As described in Part I, Item 1. "Business," we currently have four product candidates in clinical development. Refer to Part I, Item 1. "Business" for a summary of our clinical programs.
Since our incorporation in January 2012, our operations to date have included organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, developing our compounds, and engaging in other discovery and preclinical activities. Subsequent to our IPO, through proceeds from sales of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock to equity investors and debt borrowings. For a further discussion, see the section entitled “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Our ability to become profitable depends on our ability to generate revenue. We do not expect to generate significant revenue unless and until we obtain marketing approval for and successfully commercialize one of our product candidates.
We have incurred significant operating and net losses since inception. We incurred net losses of $130.4 million and $102.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2021was $409.2 million, and we expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, as we continue the development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for our current product candidates and any other product candidates that we develop or in-license and advance to clinical development. If we obtain regulatory approval for a product candidate, we expect to incur significant expenses in order to create an infrastructure to support the commercialization of the product candidate, including manufacturing, sales, marketing, and distribution functions. Further, we have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Accordingly, we may need additional financing to support our continuing operations. We may seek to fund our operations through public or private equity, debt financings, or other sources. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue and have incurred significant operating losses since inception, and we do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of any products unless or until we obtain regulatory approval. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially and adversely affected. If we enter into licensing or collaboration arrangements, such agreements may generate revenue in the future.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily include preclinical studies, clinical trials, manufacturing costs, employee salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation expense, contract services, including external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations, or CROs, facilities costs, overhead costs, depreciation, and other related costs.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We will incur substantial costs beyond our present and planned clinical trials in order to file a new drug application, or NDA, for any of our product candidates. It is difficult to determine with certainty the costs and duration of our current or future clinical trials and preclinical studies, or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates if we obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval. The duration, costs, and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical trials and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rate, and significant and changing government regulation. In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability, and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, as well as an assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential.
Management considers many factors in developing the estimates and assumptions that are used in the preparation of these financial statements. Management must apply significant judgment in this process. In addition, other factors may affect estimates, including expected business and operational changes, sensitivity and volatility associated with the assumptions used in developing estimates, and whether historical trends are expected to be representative of future trends. The estimation process often may yield a range of potentially reasonable estimates of the ultimate future outcomes and management must select an amount that falls within that range of reasonable estimates. This process may result in actual results differing materially from those estimated amounts used in the preparation of the financial statements if these results differ from historical experience, or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate, even if such assumptions are reasonable when made.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by program for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020:
Other research and development expenses primarily consist of employee salaries and benefits, facilities and overhead costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, commercial, finance, and operational functions, including stock-based compensation and travel expenses. Also included in general and administrative expenses are pre-commercialization costs, facility-related costs, insurance expense, professional fees for legal and accounting services, and patent filing and prosecution costs. General and administrative expenses are expensed when incurred.
Interest and Amortization of Debt Discount Expense
Interest and amortization of debt discount expense primarily consists of cash interest and non-cash costs related to our term loans (see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for a further discussion). We amortize these costs over the term of our debt agreements as interest expense in our consolidated statement of operations. Interest and amortization of debt discount expense also includes interest income earned on cash.
Tax Credit
The tax credits represent the receipt by Axsome Therapeutics Australia PTY, LTD, our Australian subsidiary, of the Australia Tax Incentive Credit, related to allowable research and development expenses incurred for our product candidates.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
We recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt in connection with the repayment and retirement of our previous SVB Loan. The 2020 Term Loan was considered substantially different from the SVB Loan, as such, the repayment qualified for extinguishment accounting. The loss on extinguishment of debt recorded represents the prepayment premium, the unamortized discount of the SVB Loan and the write-off of deferred financing costs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reported period. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our research and development employees, costs incurred to third-party service providers for the conduct of research, preclinical and clinical studies, laboratory supplies, product license fees, consulting and other related expenses. We estimate research, preclinical and clinical study expenses based on services performed, pursuant to contracts with third-party research and development organizations that conduct and manage research, preclinical and clinical activities on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on discussions with internal management personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire licenses to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternative future use are expensed as incurred. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services by the third parties are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, operating losses, and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are provided if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit will more likely than not be realized. As of December 31, 2021, we do not believe any material uncertain tax positions are present.
As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal net operating loss, or NOL carryforwards of approximately $364 million. NOLs amounting to $60 million generated before the 2018 tax year will start expiring beginning 2032, and the NOLs of approximately $304 million generated in 2018 and later have an indefinite carryforward period.
Utilization of the NOLs may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations provided by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The annual limitation for net operating losses incurred before the 2018 tax year may result in expiration before we can use them. We have recorded a valuation allowance on all of our deferred tax assets.
Stock-based compensation
For issued stock options, we estimate the grant date fair value of each option using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes model takes into account the expected volatility of our common stock, the risk-free interest rate, the estimated life of the option, the closing market price of our common stock, expected dividend yield and the exercise price. The estimates utilized in the Black-Scholes calculation involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. In addition, we recognize expense for equity award forfeitures as they occur. For awards subject to service-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting term. For awards subject to performance-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method when it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved. The expense related to the stock-based compensation is recorded within the financial statement line item the grantee’s cash compensation is recorded in.
Our policy upon exercise of stock options is that shares will be issued as new shares drawing on our 2015 Omnibus Incentive Compensation Plan share pool that was adopted by the stockholders in November 2015.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021and 2020:
Research and Development Expenses. Our research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $58.1 million, compared to $70.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $12.1 million. R&D expense during the 2020 fiscal year included a one-time charge of $10.2 million for the Pfizer license agreement, of which $7.2 million was non-cash related. The remaining decrease was due to the conclusion of several clinical trials, which were ongoing in the comparable prior period.
General and Administrative Expenses. Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $66.6 million, compared to $28.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $37.7 million. The increase was primarily due to increased stock compensation expense, along with the build-out of the commercial function.
Interest and Amortization of Debt Discount Expense. Interest and amortization of debt discount expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $5.7 million, compared to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $3.1 million. The increase was driven by a higher outstanding principal amount on our debt for the full year in 2021 as compared to 2020. The higher principal balance reflects our September 2020 loan and security agreement with Hercules from which we have drawn down $50 million.
Tax Credit. We did not receive a tax credit for the year ended December 31, 2021, and the tax credit income for December 31, 2020, was $0.1 million. This income represents the receipt by Axsome Therapeutics Australia PTY LTD, our Australian subsidiary, of the Australia Tax Incentive Credit related to the 2019 research and development expenses incurred for our product candidates.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. In September 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Hercules. A portion of the first tranche, which was funded upon execution of the 2020 Term Loan, was used to repay our 2019 Term Loan with SVB, which we refer to as the 2019 Term Loan. As a result of the repayment of the 2019 Term Loan, we recorded a loss on the extinguishment of debt of approximately $1.2 million representing the difference between the amount paid to SVB and the carrying amount of the 2019 Term Loan. Included in the loss on extinguishment of debt is the prepayment premium, the unamortized discount and the write-off of deferred financing costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception through December 31, 2021, we have financed our operations primarily through proceeds from equity offerings and debt borrowings.
On December 5, 2019, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement with the SEC for the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, rights, debt securities and units up to an unlimited amount, which we refer to as the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement. It was declared effective by the SEC upon filing. As discussed in greater detail below, we entered into a sales agreement in December 2019 pursuant to which we sold shares of our common stock from time to time in an at-the-market offering and completed an offering of common stock in December 2019, each utilizing the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement. In the future, we may conduct additional offerings of one or more of these securities utilizing the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement in such amounts, prices and terms to be announced when and if the securities are offered. At the time any of our securities covered by the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement are offered for sale, a prospectus supplement will be prepared and filed with the SEC containing specific information about the terms of any such offering.
In December 2019, we entered into the December 2019 Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink, pursuant to which we may sell up to $80 million in shares of our common stock from time to time through SVB Leerink, acting as our sales agent, in one or more at-the-market offerings utilizing the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement. SVB Leerink is entitled to receive a commission of 3.0% of the gross proceeds for any shares sold under the December 2019 Sales Agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received approximately $7.4 million in gross proceeds through the sale of 110,296 shares, of which net proceeds were approximately $7.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received approximately $14.6 million in gross proceeds through the sale of 167,243 shares, of which net proceeds were approximately $14.1 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we received approximately $7.3 million in gross proceeds through the sale of 89,390 shares, of which net proceeds were approximately $7.1 million.
In December 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering, whereby we sold 2,300,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $87.00 per share. We received gross proceeds of approximately $200.1 million and net proceeds of approximately $187.1 million, net of underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
In September 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Hercules for the 2020 Term Loan, which consists of several tranches in an aggregate amount of up to $225.0 million. See 'Contractual Obligations and Commitments - September 2020 Loan and Security Agreement - Hercules' section below for more information. The remaining $10 million on the first tranche was not utilized and such tranche and future tranches were amended upon the execution of the First Amendment to the Loan and Security Agreement.
In October 2021, we amended the Loan Agreement with Hercules. which expanded the facility amount of up to $300 million and now has a maturity date of October 2026. See 'Contractual Obligations and Commitments - October 2021 First Amendment to the Loan and Security Agreement - Hercules' section below for more information.
In the future, we may conduct additional offerings of one or more of the securities covered by the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement in such amounts, prices and terms to be announced when and if the securities are offered. At the time any of our securities covered by the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement are offered for sale, a prospectus supplement will be prepared and filed with the SEC containing specific information about the terms of any such offering.
We believe our current cash, along with the committed capital from the Hercules Loan Agreement, will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operations, based on our current operating plans which includes costs for the commercial launch of AXS-05 in MDD and AXS-07 in migraine into 2024. Because the process of commercializing products and evaluating product candidates in clinical trials is costly and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain, it is possible that the assumptions upon which we have based this estimate may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our primary sources and uses of cash for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $108.2 million as compared to $78.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $29.7 million in net cash used was primarily related to the build-out of the commercial function.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities for the purchase of equipment was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which relates to build-out of the commercial function.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $11.1 million, which included net proceeds from the sale of common stock through the December 2019 Sales Agreement of $7.2 million and proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of employee stock options of $4.4 million. These proceeds were offset by the payment of debt issuance costs related to the October 2021 Hercules Amendment and payments for tax withholdings on stock awards.
Funding requirements
We have not achieved profitability since our inception, and we expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our losses to increase as we continue the development of and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates and begin to commercialize any approved products. We are subject to all of the risks pertinent to the development of new product candidates, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays, and other unknown factors that may harm our business.
We may need to raise additional financing in the future to fund our operations. In the event that we need additional financing, we may incur additional debt, license certain intellectual property, and seek to sell additional equity or convertible securities that may result in dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible securities, these securities could have rights or preferences senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that restrict our operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, rate of progress, results, and cost of our clinical studies and other related activities;
•our ability to enter into collaborative agreements for the development and commercialization of our product candidates;
•the number and development requirements of any other product candidates that we pursue;
•the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory reviews of our product candidates;
•the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales, and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•any product liability or other lawsuits related to our product candidates;
•the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•the general and administrative expenses related to being a public company;
•the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval; and
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights, and defending our intellectual property-related claims.
Please see “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following is a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
License agreement with Pfizer
In January 2020, we entered into a license agreement with Pfizer. Under the terms of our exclusive license agreement with Pfizer, Pfizer received 82,019 shares of our common stock having a value of $8.0 million, based on the average closing price of the Company’s common stock for the 10 prior trading days of $97.538, in consideration for the license and rights. Pfizer also received an upfront cash payment of $3.0 million and will also receive up to $323 million upon the achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones, and tiered mid-single to low double-digit royalties on future sales. Pfizer will also have a right of first negotiation on any potential future strategic transactions involving AXS-12 and AXS-14. For a more detailed description of these agreements, please see “Business-Material License Agreements.”
License agreements with Antecip Bioventures
Under three exclusive license agreements with Antecip Bioventures II LLC, or Antecip, an entity owned by our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, Herriot Tabuteau, M.D., we are obligated to make specified royalty payments ranging from 1.5% to 4.5%, subject to up to a 50% reduction depending on required payments to third parties,
on net sales of licensed products. The amount, timing, and likelihood of such payments are not known. For a more detailed description of these agreements, please see “Business-Material License Agreements.”
September 2020 Loan and Security Agreement - Hercules
In September 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Hercules, in its capacity as administrative agent and collateral agent and as a lender, and the other financial institutions that may from time to time become parties to the Loan Agreement as lenders, which we collectively refer to as the Lenders. The Loan Agreement provides for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $225.0 million under multiple tranches. The tranches consist of (i) a first tranche consisting of term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $60.0 million, of which $50.0 million, or the First Advance, was funded at closing, and of which the remaining $10.0 million is available at our option at any time through September 15, 2021; (ii) subject to the FDA approval of our AXS-05 product candidate for the treatment of major depressive disorder, or the First Milestone, a second tranche consisting of additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $35.0 million, available at our option beginning on the date that the First Milestone is achieved through the earlier of (A) 181 days following such date and (B) June 30, 2022; (iii) subject to the approval of our AXS-07 product candidate for the treatment of migraine, or the Second Milestone, a third tranche consisting of additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $20.0 million, available at our option beginning on the date that the Second Milestone is achieved through the earlier of (A) 181 days following such date and (B) June 30, 2022; (iv) subject to the achievement of either the First Milestone or the Second Milestone and so long as we are in compliance with a required ratio of Lender indebtedness to net product revenue, a fourth tranche consisting of additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $60.0 million, available at our option beginning on January 1, 2022 and continuing through March 31, 2023; and (v) subject to approval by the Lenders in their discretion, a fifth tranche of additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $50.0 million, available through December 31, 2023. The remaining $10 million on the first tranche was not utilized and such tranche and future tranches were amended upon the execution of the First Amendment to the Loan and Security Agreement. See "October 2021 First Amendment to the Loan and Security Agreement - Hercules" below for further information. We intend to use the proceeds of the Term Loan Advances for working capital and general corporate purposes. In addition, approximately $21.7 million of the proceeds from the First Advance was used to satisfy in full and retire our indebtedness under the 2019 Term Loan, as amended.
The outstanding principal balance of the term loans bears interest at an annual rate equal to the greater of either (i) the prime rate as reported in The Wall Street Journal plus 5.90% or (ii) 9.15%, subject to an ability by us, during certain periods, each such period a PIK Deferral Period, to request a reduction of the then-effective cash-pay interest rate by up to 1.00% per annum, which we refer to as the Cash Interest Reduction Amount. Accrued interest is payable monthly following the funding of each term loan. During each PIK Deferral Period, the term loans will bear cash-pay interest, at the reduced amount, and will accrue paid-in-kind interest at a rate equal to the Cash Interest Reduction Amount multiplied by 1.15, which amount will be capitalized and added to the outstanding principal balance of the term loans on each monthly interest payment date during the PIK Deferral Period. We are required to repay the term loans in equal installments of principal and interest commencing on May 1, 2023, through October 1, 2025, which is the Maturity Date. However, if either the First Milestone or the Second Milestone are achieved prior to May 1, 2023, and no default exists, the amortization commencement date will be automatically extended to November 1, 2023; if both the First Milestone and the Second Milestone are achieved prior to November 1, 2023, and no default exists, the amortization commencement date will be further automatically extended to May 1, 2024 and if any term loans are funded under the fourth tranche noted above prior to May 1, 2024, and no default exists, the amortization commencement date will be further automatically extended to November 1, 2024. On the Maturity Date, all unpaid term loans will be due and payable.
As collateral for the obligations, we have granted to Hercules a senior security interest in all our right, title, and interest in, to and under all of our property, inclusive of intellectual property, which includes one of our existing license agreements with Antecip, subject to limited exceptions. Antecip consented to the collateral assignment of the License Agreement, among other things, under a Direct Agreement with us and Hercules.
The Loan Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants by us limiting additional indebtedness, liens (including a negative pledge on intellectual property and other assets), guaranties, mergers and consolidations, substantial asset sales, investments and loans, certain corporate changes, transactions with affiliates and fundamental changes. At the initial closing, there were no applicable financial covenants contained in the Loan Agreement. Only after additional amounts are drawn down by us in the future, if we decide to do so, under the terms set forth in the Loan Agreement, there will be certain limited financial covenants that will apply, including:
•Effective upon the date the outstanding principal amount of the advances under the Loan Agreement equals or exceeds $55.0 million, which has not yet occurred, we at all times thereafter must maintain cash in an account or accounts in which Hercules has a first priority security interest, in an aggregate amount greater than or equal to $15.0 million, plus the amount of our accounts payable under U.S. GAAP not paid after the 180th day following the invoice for such account payable which amount we refer to as the Qualified Cash A/P Amount.
•Effective upon the later of (i) the last calendar month of the calendar quarter that is twelve months following the earlier of (x) the date that the First Milestone is achieved and (y) the date that the Second Milestone is achieved, or (ii) the date on which the outstanding principal amount of the term loan advances under the Loan Agreement is equal to or greater than $65.0 million, we are required to (A) ensure that at all times its market capitalization exceeds $2.0 billion, and that it maintains cash in an account which Hercules has a first priority security interest in an amount not less than 65% of the sum of the outstanding principal amount of the term loan advances plus the Qualified Cash A/P Amount, (B) ensure that at all times that it maintains cash in an account which Hercules has a first priority security interest in an amount not less than 100% of the sum of the outstanding principal amount of the term loan advances plus the Qualified Cash A/P Amount, or (C) achieve at least 60% of the net product revenue solely from the sale of AXS-05 and AXS-07 (which may include royalty, profit sharing, or sales-based milestone revenue recognized in accordance with GAAP, but will not include any upfront or non-sales-based milestone payments under business development or licensing transactions), measured on a trailing six-month basis as of the date of our most recent quarterly financial statement, determined on a quarterly basis.
•Restrictions on our ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends, encumber its intellectual property, or engage in certain fundamental business transactions, such as mergers or acquisitions of other businesses, with certain exceptions.
Our obligations under the Loan Agreement are subject to acceleration upon the occurrence of specified events of default, including payment default, insolvency and a material adverse change in our business, operations or financial or other condition.
In addition, we are required to pay a final payment fee equal to the greater of (A) $2,910,000 and (B) 4.85% of the aggregate amount of all future term loan advances. The final payment fee is being accreted and amortized into interest expense using the effective interest rate method over the term of the loan.
We may, at our option prepay the term loans in full or in part, subject to a prepayment penalty equal to (i) 2.0% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs prior to the first anniversary of the initial closing, (ii) 1.5% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs on or after the first anniversary and prior to the second anniversary of the initial closing, and (iii) 1.0% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs on or after the second anniversary and prior to the third anniversary of the initial closing.
October 2021 First Amendment to the Loan and Security Agreement - Hercules
On October 14, 2021 ("First Amendment Closing Date"), we entered into the first amendment to the Loan Agreement (the “First Amendment to the Loan Agreement”).
Under the First Amendment to the Loan Agreement, the First Amendment amended the terms of that certain Loan and Security Agreement, dated as of September 25, 2020, by and among us, Hercules and the Lenders party thereto (the “Loan Agreement”) to, among other things, (i) increase the aggregate principal amount of the loan, available at the our option, from $225,000,000 to $300,000,000, (ii) change the draw amounts and dates available in Tranche 2 through Tranche 5 including increasing the amount available under Tranche 2 subject to FDA approval of our AXS-05 product candidate for the treatment of major depressive disorder from $35,000,000 to $100,000,000, maintaining the amount available under Tranche 3 subject to FDA approval of our AXS-07 product candidate for the acute treatment of migraine
of $20,000,000, reducing the amount under Tranche 4 available upon achievement of certain combined sales and outstanding debt criteria from $60,000,000 to $55,000,000, and increasing the amount available under Tranche 5 to support future strategic initiatives, including further pipeline advancement or expansion from $50,000,000 to $75,000,000 subject to the approval from Hercules, (iii) extend the maturity date of the facility from the original October 2025 to October 2026, and optionally to October 2027, subject to certain conditions, (iv) reset and extend the interest only period from the initial 30 months from the original loan closing to 48 months from the First Amendment and extendable up to 60 months subject to FDA approval of our AXS-05 product candidate for the treatment of major depressive disorder and subject to FDA approval of AXS-07 in the acute treatment of migraine, and (v) decrease the interest rate from 9.15% (floating rate based on the greater of (a) 9.15% or (b) US WSJ Prime + 5.90%) to 8.95% (floating rate based on the greater of (a) 8.95% or (b) US WSJ Prime + 5.70%).
In addition, we are required to pay a final payment fee equal to (A) $2,910,000 plus (B) 4.5% of the aggregate amount of all future term loan advances. The final payment fee is being accreted and amortized into interest expense using the effective interest rate method over the term of the loan.
We may, at our option prepay the term loans in full or in part, subject to a prepayment penalty equal to (i) 2.0% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs prior to the first anniversary of the First Amendment Closing Date, (ii) 1.5% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs on or after the first anniversary and prior to the second anniversary of the First Amendment Closing Date, and (iii) 1.0% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs on or after the second anniversary and prior to the third anniversary of the First Amendment Closing Date. These percentages are unchanged from the Loan Agreement.
Shelf Registration Statement
On December 5, 2019, we filed a Form S-3ASR (File No. 333-235372) with the SEC, or the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement, for the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, rights, debt securities and units, which became effective immediately upon filing. At the time any of the securities covered by the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement are offered for sale, a prospectus supplement will be prepared and filed with the SEC containing specific information about the terms of any such offering.
Impact of the CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted and signed into law, and GAAP requires recognition of the tax effects of new legislation during the reporting period that includes the enactment date. The CARES Act, among other things, includes changes to the tax provisions that benefits business entities and makes certain technical corrections to the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, including, permitting net operating losses (“NOLs”), carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. The CARES Act provides other reliefs and stimulus measures. We have evaluated the impact of the CARES Act, however, at present we do not expect that any provision of the CARES Act would result in a material cash benefit to us or have a material impact on our financial statements or internal controls over financial reporting.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus known as SARS-CoV-2 was first detected in Wuhan, Hubei Province, People’s Republic of China, causing outbreaks of the coronavirus disease, known as COVID-19, which has now spread globally. On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a public health emergency. The Secretary of Health and Human Services declared a public health emergency in the United States on January 31, 2020, under section 319 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d), in response to the COVID-19 outbreak. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 a pandemic.
Operations and Liquidity
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is unknown and constantly evolving. While the potential economic impact brought by and over the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant disruption of global financial markets, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic could affect our business. We have taken proactive, aggressive action throughout the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the health and safety of our employees and expect to continue to implement these measures until we determine that the COVID-19 pandemic is adequately contained for purposes of our business. We may take further actions as government authorities require or recommend or as we determine to be in the best interests of our employees. To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had significant effects on the progression of our clinical trials. Given the nature and type of our short-term investments, we do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic will have a material impact on our current investment liquidity.
Outlook
Although there is uncertainty related to the anticipated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our future results, we believe our current cash reserves, coupled with our access to additional capital through the December 2019 Sales Agreement, leave us well-positioned to manage our business through this crisis as it continues to unfold. However, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are broad-reaching and continuing and the financial impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic are still uncertain.
As a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its dynamic nature, including uncertainties relating to the ultimate geographic spread of the virus, the severity of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, and actions that have been or may be taken by governmental authorities to contain the pandemic or to treat its impact, it is difficult to forecast the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2022.
Despite the economic uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we intend to continue to focus on the development of our product candidates. We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities and we may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside of our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable SEC regulations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.