ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our historical financial statements and the related notes thereto. This management’s discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect” and the like, and/or future tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including those under “Risk Factors” in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors. See “Forward-Looking Statements.”
References in this management’s discussion and analysis to “we,” “us,” “our,” “the Company,” “our Company” or “AYRO” refer to AYRO, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Overview
Merger
On May 28, 2020, pursuant to the previously announced Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated December 19, 2019 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among AYRO, Inc., a Delaware corporation previously known as DropCar, Inc., ABC Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), and AYRO Operating Company (“AYRO Operating”), a Delaware corporation previously known as AYRO, Inc., Merger Sub was merged with and into AYRO Operating, with AYRO Operating continuing after the merger as the surviving entity and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”). At the effective time of the Merger, without any action on the part of any stockholder, each issued and outstanding share of AYRO Operating’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (“AYRO Operating Common Stock”), including shares underlying AYRO Operating’s outstanding equity awards and warrants, was converted into the right to receive 1.3634 pre-split and pre-stock dividend shares (the “Exchange Ratio”) of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Company Common Stock”). As part of the Merger, we received cash of $3.06 million in consideration for 2,337,663 shares of common stock. Upon completion of the Merger and the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement and assuming the exercise in full of all pre-funded warrants issued pursuant thereto, (i) the former AYRO Operating equity holders (including the investors in a bridge financing and private placements that closed prior to closing of the Merger) owned approximately 79% of the outstanding equity of the Company; (ii) former DropCar stockholders owned approximately 18% of the outstanding equity of the Company; and (iii) a financial advisor to DropCar and AYRO owned approximately 3% of the outstanding equity of the Company.
The Merger was treated as a reverse recapitalization effected by a share exchange for financial accounting and reporting purposes because substantially all of DropCar, Inc.’s operations were disposed of as part of the consummation of the Merger and therefore no goodwill or other intangible assets were recorded by the Company as a result of the Merger. AYRO Operating was treated as the accounting acquirer as its stockholders controlled the Company after the Merger, even though DropCar, Inc. was the legal acquirer. As a result, the assets and liabilities and the historical operations that are reflected in our consolidated financial statements are those of AYRO Operating as if AYRO Operating had always been the reporting company.
Reverse Stock Split and Stock Dividend
On May 28, 2020, immediately following the effective time of the Merger, we effected a reverse stock split of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock, at a ratio of one share for ten shares (the “Reverse Stock Split”). Immediately following the Reverse Stock Split, we issued a stock dividend of one share of our common stock for each outstanding share of common stock to all holders of record immediately following the effective time of the Reverse Stock Split (the “Stock Dividend”). The net result of the Reverse Stock Split and the Stock Dividend was a 1-for-5 reverse stock split. We made proportionate adjustments to the per share exercise price and/or the number of shares issuable upon the exercise or vesting of all stock options, restricted stock awards (if any) and warrants outstanding as of the effective times of the Reverse Stock Split and the Stock Dividend in accordance with the terms of each security based on the split or dividend ratio. Also, we reduced the number of shares reserved for issuance under our equity compensation plans proportionately based on the split and dividend ratios. Except for adjustments that resulted from the rounding up of fractional shares to the next whole share, the Reverse Stock Split and Stock Dividend affected all stockholders uniformly and did not change any stockholder’s percentage ownership interest in the Company. The Reverse Stock Split did not alter the par value of Company Common Stock, $0.0001 per share, or modify any voting rights or other terms of the common stock. Except as otherwise set forth herein, share and related option or warrant information presented in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations have been adjusted to reflect the reduced number of shares outstanding, the increase in share price which resulted from these actions or otherwise to give effect to the Reverse Stock Split and the Stock Dividend.
Transactions Related to the Merger
Simultaneous with the signing of the Merger Agreement, accredited investors, including certain investors in DropCar, purchased $1.0 million of AYRO Operating’s convertible bridge notes bearing interest at the rate of 5% per annum (the “Bridge Notes”). The Bridge Notes automatically converted into 1,030,585 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock immediately prior to the consummation of the Merger representing an aggregate of 7.45% of the outstanding common stock of the combined company after giving effect to the Merger. Pursuant to the terms of the Bridge Notes, immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the five lenders received warrants to purchase 1,030,585 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock at an exercise price of $1.1159 per share. In conjunction with the bridge notes, we issued Palladium Capital Advisors, LLC (together with its affiliates, “Palladium”), our advisor, a warrant to purchase 72,141 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.1159 per share.
In addition, immediately prior to the execution and delivery of the Merger Agreement, AYRO Operating entered into agreements with accredited investors, including certain stockholders of DropCar, pursuant to which such investors agreed to purchase, prior to the consummation of the Merger, 543,179 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock (or common stock equivalents or pre-funded warrants to purchase 429,305 shares of Company Common Stock) representing an aggregate of 16.55% of the outstanding common stock of the combined company after giving effect to the Merger and warrants to purchase an equivalent number of shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $1.2 million (the “AYRO Private Placement”). Pursuant to the terms of the AYRO Private Placement, immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the investors received warrants to purchase 972,486 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock at an exercise price of $1.3599 per share. On the closing date of the Merger, AYRO Operating issued to the investors party to this second AYRO Operating Private Placement SPA (i) an aggregate of approximately 1,030,039 shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 286,896 shares of Company Common Stock for an aggregate of $0.85 million and warrants to purchase 1,316,936 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.7423 per share. In conjunction with the AYRO Private Placement, we issued Palladium, our advisor, a warrant to purchase 92,186 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.7423 per share and a warrant to purchase 68,074 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.3599 per share.
As additional consideration to the lead investor in the AYRO Private Placement, AYRO Operating also entered into a stock subscription agreement with the lead investor, pursuant to which, immediately prior to the Merger, AYRO Operating issued pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 477,190 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock for the nominal per share purchase price of $0.000367 per share.
As part of the Merger, we issued to Palladium Holdings, LLC, our advisor, 415,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share.
On December 19, 2019, AYRO Operating entered into a letter agreement with ALS Investment, LLC (“ALS”), pursuant to which AYRO Operating issued ALS 622,496 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock, which equaled 4.5% of the outstanding shares of common stock of the combined company giving effect to the Merger. In addition to introducing AYRO Operating and DropCar, ALS agreed to provide, as an independent contractor, consulting services to us relating to financial, capital market and investor relations for twelve months following the closing of the Merger.
In February 2020, AYRO Operating received a $0.5 million secured loan from certain existing investors in DropCar and AYRO Operating, and, in connection therewith, we received $10,000 upon exercise of the previously issued warrants to purchase 100,000 shares of common stock. The entire amount of the loan was paid off upon closing of the Merger.
In April 2020, AYRO Operating issued a secured promissory note payable to an individual investor providing $0.6 million of short-term financing. The note carried an interest rate of fifteen percent (15%) and was to be repaid upon the earlier of (1) closing date of the pending Merger and (2) July 14, 2020. Fifty percent (50%) of the principal amount was personally guaranteed by Mark Adams, a former director of AYRO Operating and AYRO. In conjunction with the notes 553,330 shares of common stock (276,665 shares of common stock representing two percent (2%) of the combined company’s post-merger outstanding common stock each) were issued to the lender and to Mr. Adams as compensation for his personal guarantee. The entire amount of the loan was paid off upon the closing of the Merger.
Other AYRO Operating Warrants
At the effective time of the Merger, each AYRO Operating warrant that was outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the effective time was converted pursuant to its terms and became a warrant to purchase Company Common Stock.
Closing of Asset Purchase Agreement
On December 19, 2019, DropCar entered into an asset purchase agreement (the “Asset Purchase Agreement”) with DC Partners Acquisition, LLC (“DC Partners”), Spencer Richardson and David Newman, pursuant to which DropCar agreed to sell substantially all of the assets associated with its business of providing vehicle support, fleet logistics and concierge services for both consumers and the automotive industry to an entity controlled by Messrs. Richardson and Newman, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Business Development Officer at the time, respectively. The aggregate purchase price for the purchased assets consisted of the cancellation of certain liabilities pursuant to those certain employment agreements by and between DropCar and each of Messrs. Richardson and Newman, plus the assumption of certain liabilities relating to, or arising out of, workers’ compensation claims that occurred prior to the closing date of the Asset Purchase Agreement. On May 28, 2020, the parties to the Asset Purchase Agreement entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Asset Purchase Agreement Amendment”), which Asset Purchase Agreement Amendment (i) provides for the inclusion of up to $0.03 million in refunds associated with certain insurance premiums as assets being purchased by DC Partners, (ii) amends the covenant associated with the funding of the DropCar business, such that DropCar provided the DropCar business with additional funding of approximately $0.18 million at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Asset Purchase Agreement and (iii) provides for a current employee of the Company being transferred to DC Partners to provide transition services to the Company for a period of three months after the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Asset Purchase Agreement. The Asset Purchase Agreement closed on May 28, 2020, immediately following the consummation of the Merger.
Business
Prior to the Merger, DropCar provided consumer and enterprise solutions to urban automobile-related logistical challenges. Following the Merger, we design and manufacture compact, sustainable electric vehicles for closed campus mobility, urban and community transport, local on-demand and last mile delivery, and government use. Our four-wheeled purpose-built electric vehicles are geared toward commercial customers including universities, business and medical campuses, last mile delivery services and food service providers.
Products
AYRO vehicles provide the end user an environmentally friendly alternative to internal combustion engine vehicles (cars powered by gasoline or diesel oil), for light duty uses, including low-speed logistics, maintenance and cargo services, at a lower total cost. The majority of our sales are comprised of sales of our four-wheeled vehicle to Club Car, LLC (“Club Car”), through a strategic arrangement entered into in early 2019.
Strategic Review
Following the hiring of our new Chief Executive Officer in the third quarter of 2021, we initiated a strategic review of our product development strategy, as we focus on creating value within the electric vehicle, last-mile delivery, and smart payload and enabling infrastructure markets. While we complete our strategic review, we have paused all material research and development activity and expenditures, associated with our planned next-generation three-wheeled high speed vehicle.
In December of 2021 we began research and development on the new 411 fleet vehicle model refresh the AYRO Z, including updates on our supply chain evolution, the offshoring/onshoring mix, our manufacturing strategy, and our annual model year refresh program.
Manufacturing Agreement with Cenntro
In 2017, AYRO Operating partnered with Cenntro Automotive Group, Ltd. (“Cenntro”), which operates a large electric vehicle factory in the automotive district in Hangzhou, China, in a supply chain agreement to provide sub-assembly manufacturing services. Through the partnership, Cenntro initially acquired 19% of AYRO Operating’s common stock in 2017. Cenntro owns the design of the AYRO 411x Fleet vehicles and has granted us an exclusive license to purchase the AYRO 411x Fleet vehicles for sale in North America.
Under our Manufacturing License Agreement with Cenntro (the “MLA”), in order for us to maintain our exclusive territorial rights pursuant to the MLA, for the first three years after the effective date of March 22, 2020, we must meet the following minimum purchase requirements, which we believe we satisfied for the initial period: (i) a minimum of 300 units sold by the first anniversary of the effective date of the MLA; (ii) a minimum of 800 units sold by the second anniversary of the effective date of the MLA; and (iii) a minimum of 1,300 units sold by the third anniversary of the effective date of the MLA.
Cenntro will determine the minimum sale requirements for the years thereafter. Should any event of default occur, the other party may terminate the MLA by providing written notice to the defaulting party, who will have 90 days from the effective date of the notice to cure the default. Unless waived by the party providing notice, a failure to cure the default(s) within the 90-day time frame will result in the automatic termination of the MLA. Events of default under the MLA include a failure to make a required payment when due, the insolvency or bankruptcy of either party, the subjection of either party’s property to any levy, seizure, general assignment for the benefit of creditors, and a failure to make available or deliver the products in the time and manner provided for in the MLA. We are dependent on the MLA, and in the event of its termination our manufacturing operations and customer deliveries would be materially impacted.
Master Procurement Agreement with Club Car
In March 2019, AYRO Operating entered into a five-year Master Procurement Agreement (the “MPA”) with Club Car for the sale of our four-wheeled vehicle. The MPA grants Club Car the exclusive right to sell our four-wheeled vehicle in North America, provided that Club Car orders at least 500 vehicles per year. Although Club Car did not meet the volume threshold for 2020 or 2021, we currently have no intention of selling our four-wheeled vehicles other than exclusively through Club Car. Under the terms of the MPA, we receive orders from Club Car dealers for vehicles of specific configurations, and we invoice Club Car once the vehicle has shipped. The MPA has an initial term of five (5) years commencing January 1, 2019 and may be renewed by Club Car for successive one-year periods upon 60 days’ prior written notice. Pursuant to the MPA, we granted Club Car a right of first refusal for sales of 51% or more of AYRO Operating’s assets or equity interests, which right of first refusal is exercisable for a period of 45 days following AYRO Operating’s delivery of an acquisition notice to Club Car. We also agreed to collaborate with Club Car on new products similar to our four-wheeled vehicle and improvements to existing products and granted Club Car a right of first refusal to purchase similar commercial utility vehicles we develop during the term of the MPA. We are currently engaged in discussions with Club Car to develop additional products to be sold by Club Car in Europe and Asia but there can be no assurance that these discussions will be successful. For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenues from Club Car constituted approximately 79% of our revenue, as compared to 68% in 2020. Any loss of Club Car as a customer, or significant reduction in purchases by Club Car, could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Manufacturing Services Agreement with Karma
On September 25, 2020, we entered into a Master Manufacturing Services Agreement (the “Karma Agreement”) with Karma Automotive LLC (“Karma”), pursuant to which Karma agreed to provide certain manufacturing services for the production of our vehicles. The initial statement of work provides that Karma will perform assembly of a certain quantity of the AYRO 411 and 411x vehicles and provide testing, materials management and outbound logistics services. For such services in the initial statement of work, we agreed to pay $1.2 million to Karma, of which (i) $0.52 million was paid at closing and (ii) $0.64 million was due and payable five months following the satisfaction of certain production requirements. This total was accrued for as of December 31, 2021. The Karma Agreement expires (i) 12 months from the start of volume production of the vehicles or (ii) such earlier time as the parties mutually agree in writing. In addition, Karma, in its sole discretion, may terminate the Karma Agreement at any time, without cause, upon twelve months’ prior written notice. We may terminate the Karma Agreement, without cause, upon six months’ prior written notice.
Supply Agreement with Gallery Carts
During 2020, we entered into a supply agreement with Gallery Carts, a leading provider of food and beverage kiosks, carts, and mobile storefront solutions (the “Gallery Agreement”). Joint development efforts have led to the launch of the parties’ first all-electric configurable mobile hospitality vehicle for “on-the-go” venues across the United States. This innovative solution permits food, beverage and merchandising operators to bring goods directly to consumers.
The configurable Powered Vendor Box, in the rear of the vehicle, features long-life lithium batteries that power the preconfigured hot/cold beverage and food equipment and is directly integrated with the AYRO 411x. The canopy doors, as well as the full vehicle, can be customized with end-user logos and graphics to enhance the brand experience. Gallery, with 40 years of experience delivering custom food kiosk solutions, has expanded into electric mobile delivery vehicles, as customers increasingly want food, beverages and merchandise delivered to where they are gathering. For example, a recent study conducted by Technomic found that a large majority of students, 77%, desired alternative mobile and to-go food options on campus.
Gallery Carts, a premier distributor of AYRO 411x low-speed electric vehicles, has a diverse clientele throughout mobile food, beverage and merchandise distribution markets, for key customer applications such as university, corporate and government campuses, major league and amateur-level stadiums and arenas, resorts, airports and event centers. In addition to finding innovative and safe ways to deliver food and beverages to their patrons, reducing and ultimately eliminating their carbon footprint is a top priority for many of these customers.
Recent Developments
On January 25, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 3,333,334 shares at an offering price of $6.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $20.0 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. In a concurrent private placement, we sold to such investors warrants to purchase, at any time on or after July 26, 2021 and on or before July 26, 2023, additional shares of common stock equal to the full amount of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 3,333,334 shares, at an exercise price of $6.93 per share.
In connection with the January 25, 2021, securities purchase agreement, we issued Palladium a warrant to purchase 233,334 shares of common stock (which equals 7.0% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock sold in the January 2021 registered direct offering). The warrants issued to Palladium have the same terms as the investor warrants issued in the January 25, 2021, concurrent private placement.
On February 11, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 4,400,001 shares of common stock at an offering price of $9.50 per share, for gross proceeds of $41.8 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. Each purchaser was also granted an option to purchase, on or before February 16, 2022, additional shares of common stock equal to the full amount of 75% of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 3,300,001 shares, at an exercise price of $11.50 per share.
Palladium and Spartan Capital Securities, LLC were entitled to a fee equal to 8% of the gross proceeds raised in the February 2021 registered direct offering and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 271,158 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $10.925 per share and 35,885 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $10.45 per share. The warrants are exercisable immediately following issuance and terminate five years following issuance.
Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement dated July 21, 2020, during the year ended December 31, 2021, investors purchased 302,500 additional shares of our common stock par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $1.5 million.
On September 21, 2021, Rodney C. Keller, Jr., who served as our President and Chief Executive Officer and as a member of our board of directors, tendered his resignation from his roles as an officer, employee and director of the Company, effective immediately. Mr. Keller’s resignation from the Board was not in connection with any disagreement between Mr. Keller and the Company, its management, the Board or any committee of the Board on any matter relating to our operations, policies or practices, or any other matter. As part of the separation agreement, Mr. Keller (a) was retained as a contractor for thirty days to assist with the transition and compensated $20,833.30 in consulting fees; (b) was paid $650,000 as a separation payment; (c) was reimbursed for his out-of-pocket COBRA expenses for up to eighteen months; and (d) received acceleration of vesting in all unvested restricted stock awards and stock options. We recorded compensation expense of $3.10 million due to the accelerated vesting of such awards and severance expense of $0.65 million as a result of the separation payment during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Factors Affecting Results of Operations
Master Procurement Agreement
In March 2019, we entered into the MPA with Club Car. In partnership with Club Car and in interaction with its substantial dealer network, we have redirected our business development resources towards supporting Club Car’s enterprise and fleet sales function as Club Car proceeds in its new product introduction initiatives.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Our business, results of operations and financial condition have been adversely impacted by the coronavirus outbreak both in China and the United States. This has delayed our ability to timely procure raw materials from our supplier in China, which in turn, has delayed shipments to and corresponding revenue from customers. The pandemic and social distancing directives have interfered with our ability, and the ability of our employees, workers, contractors, suppliers and other business partners to perform our and their respective responsibilities and obligations relative to the conduct of our business. The COVID-19 pandemic poses restrictions on our employees’ and other service providers’ ability to travel on pre-sales meetings, customers’ abilities to physically meet with our employees and the ability of our customers to test drive or purchase our vehicles and shutdowns that may be requested or mandated by governmental authorities, and we expect these restrictions to continue at least through the third quarter of 2022. The pandemic adversely impacted our sales and the demand for our products in 2020 and 2021.
Tariffs
Countervailing tariffs on certain goods from China continued to have an adverse impact on raw material costs throughout 2021, and are expected to continue to do so through the beginning of 2022.
Shipping Costs and Delays
A majority of our raw materials are shipped via container from overseas vendors in China, such as Cenntro, our largest supplier. We rely heavily on third parties, including ocean carriers and truckers, in that process. The global shipping industry is experiencing a shortage of shipping capacity from China, trucking shortages, increased ocean shipping rates and increased trucking and fuel costs. As a result, our receipt of imported products has been, and may continue to be, disrupted or delayed.
The shipping industry is also experiencing issues with port congestion and pandemic-related port closures and ship diversions. A port worker strike, work slow-down or other transportation disruption in the port of Long Beach, California could significantly disrupt our business. We are currently experiencing such disruption at both ports due to multiple factors brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, such as supply and demand imbalance, a shortage of warehouse workers, truck drivers, transport equipment (tractors and trailers) and other causes, which have resulted in heightened congestion, bottlenecks and gridlock, leading to abnormally high transportation delays. This has materially and adversely affected our business and financial results for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 and could continue to materially and adversely affect our business and financial results in 2022. If significant disruptions along these lines continue, this could lead to further significant disruptions in our business, delays in shipments, and revenue and profitability shortfalls, which could adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
The global shipping industry is also experiencing unprecedented increases in shipping rates from the trans-Pacific ocean carriers due to various factors, including limited availability of shipping capacity. For example, the cost of shipping our products by ocean freight has recently increased to at least three times historical levels and will have a corresponding impact upon our profitability. Additionally, if increases in fuel prices occur, our transportation costs would likely further increase. Shipping pricing and logistical challenges have had an unfavorable impact on our margins and our ability to assemble vehicles during 2021. We expect these impacts to continue through the third quarter of 2022.
Supply Chain
Beginning in the second quarter of 2021, we offered a configuration of our 411x powered by lithium-ion battery technology. Additionally, our powered food box offerings are currently powered by lithium-ion battery technology. Our business depends on the continued supply of battery cells and other parts for our vehicles. During the year 2021, we at times experienced supply chain shortages of both lithium-ion battery cells and other critical components used to produce our vehicles, which has slowed our planned production of vehicles. We expect these shortages of lithium-ion battery cells and the varying supply limitations of other critical components to continued impacting our business through the third quarter of 2022. In addition, we could be impacted by shortages of other products or raw materials, including silicon chips that we use or our suppliers use in the production of our vehicles or parts sourced for our vehicles.
In December of 2021 we began research and development on the new 411 fleet vehicle model refresh the AYRO Z, including updates on our supply chain evolution, the offshoring/onshoring mix, our manufacturing strategy, and our annual model year refresh program. The new AYRO Z will utilize assemblies and products that reduce the Company’s dependency on Chinese imports and on-shore the supply chain to North America and European sources.
Components of Statements of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue from the sale of our four-wheeled electric vehicles, and, to a lesser extent, shipping, parts and service fees. In the past we also derived rental revenue from vehicle revenue sharing agreements with our tourist destination fleet operators, or Destination Fleet Operators (“DFOs”), and, to a lesser extent, shipping, parts and service fees. Provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, we typically recognize revenue upon shipment, as title and risk of loss are transferred to customers and channel partners at that time. Products are typically shipped to dealers or directly to end customers, or in some cases to our international distributors. These international distributors assist with import regulations, currency conversions and local language. Our vehicle product sales revenues vary from period to period based on, among other things, the customer orders received and our ability to produce and deliver the ordered products. Customers often specify requested delivery dates that coincide with their need for our vehicles.
Because these customers may use our products in connection with a variety of projects of different sizes and durations, a customer’s orders for one reporting period generally do not indicate a trend for future orders by that customer. Additionally, order patterns do not necessarily correlate amongst customers.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold primarily consists of costs of materials and personnel costs associated with manufacturing operations, and an accrual for post-sale warranty claims. Personnel costs consist of wages and associated taxes and benefits. Cost of goods sold also includes freight and changes to our warranty reserves. Allocated overhead costs consist of certain facilities and utility costs. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars, as product revenue increases.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of general and administrative, sales and marketing and research and development expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense are the most significant components of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities and utility costs.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for share-based awards based on the estimated fair value on the date of grant.
The fair value of each stock option granted to employees is estimated on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the related stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the vesting period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award. The fair value of the options granted to non-employees is measured and expensed as the options vest.
Restricted stock grants are stock awards that entitle the holder to receive shares of our common stock as the award vests over time. The fair value of each restricted stock grant is based on the fair market value price of common stock on the date of grant, and it is measured and expensed as the options vest.
We estimate the fair value of stock-based and cash unit awards containing a market condition using a Monte Carlo simulation model. Key inputs and assumptions used in the Monte Carlo simulation model include the stock price of the award on the grant date, the expected term, the risk-free interest rate over the expected term, the expected annual dividend yield and the expected stock price volatility. The expected volatility is based on a combination of the historical and implied volatility of our publicly traded, near-the-money stock options, and the valuation period is based on the vesting period of the awards. The risk-free interest rate is derived from the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant and, since we do not currently pay or plan to pay a dividend on its common stock, the expected dividend yield was zero.
Our operating expenses consist of general and administrative, sales and marketing and research and development expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense are the most significant components of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities and utility costs.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, prototype expenses, depreciation associated with assets acquired for research and development, amortization of product development costs, product strategic advisory fees, third-party engineering and contractor support costs and allocated overhead. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in new and existing products.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel and entertainment expenses and allocated overhead. Marketing programs consist of advertising, tradeshows, events, corporate communications and brand-building activities. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase modestly in absolute dollars as we expand our market segments addressed, refresh and expand our product lines, provide event support for our channel partners, and further develop potential sales channels.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources and fees for third-party professional services, and allocated overhead. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in growing our business.
Other (Expense) Income
Other (expense) income consists of income received or expenses incurred for activities outside of our core business. Other expense consists primarily of interest expense, discount on debt amortization and the related loss on extinguishment of debt as it applies to the debt discount.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of estimated income taxes due to the United States government and to the state tax authorities in jurisdictions in which we conduct business. In the case of a tax deferred asset, we reserve the entire value for future periods.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth our results of operations for each of the periods set forth below:
Revenue
Revenue was $2.68 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $1.60 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 67.3%, or $1.08 million. The increase in revenue was the result of an increase in sales of our vehicles and price per unit of the 411x, deriving from our Master Agreement with Club Car, related powered-food box sales and other vehicle options for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of goods sold and gross loss
Cost of goods sold increased by $3.00 million, or 169.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of goods sold included $0.38 million in obsolete 411 finished good inventory written off in September 2021, $0.50 million to reduce the prepaid balance to equal the projected remaining 411x builds, and $1.08 million in freight-in costs to account for increased shipping costs from China.
Gross margin percentage was (77.9)% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to (10.4)% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in gross margin percentage was primarily due to the 411 finished goods write-off, an increase in tariffs on raw materials imported from China and an increase in shipping costs due to the global COVID-19 pandemic and global supply chain constraints. Vehicle sales prices were increased in both January and October 2021 to partially offset these cost increases.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expense was $11.45 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $1.92 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $9.53 million, or 496.2%. The increase was primarily due to expenses related to consultants for our engineering, design, and research teams as we expanded the suite of option packages for our vehicles and continued the development of a planned next-generation three-wheeled vehicle, until we suspended their development pending the strategic review in the third quarter of 2021. In December of 2021 we began research and development on the new 411 fleet vehicle model refresh the AYRO Z.
We had an increase in salaries, including payments to contractors and related expenses, of $0.77 million, an increase of $8.00 million from research and development contracting for professional service and design costs and an increase in design and testing material of $0.25 million.
Sales and marketing expense
Sales and marketing expense increased by $1.00 million, or 70.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as we expanded our sales and marketing staff and marketing-related initiatives. Salaries and wages increased by $0.58 million and stock-based compensation increased by $0.06 million due to the addition of our sales and marketing resources. Discretionary marketing programs increased by $0.29 million and contracting for professional marketing services increased by $0.04 million. Additionally, depreciation expense for demonstration vehicles assigned to the sales and marketing team decreased by $0.03 million as compared to the same period in 2020.
General and administrative expenses
The majority of our operating losses from continuing operations resulted from general and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs associated with our overall operations and with being a public company and, during 2021, costs associated with severance. These costs include personnel, legal and financial professional services, insurance, investor relations, and compliance-related fees. General and administrative expense was $17.17 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $6.60 million for 2020, an increase of $10.57 million. Contracting for professional services increased by $1.13 million, primarily a result of additional audit, legal and investor relations expenses incurred to support public reporting requirements. This amount includes an increase in legal fees of $0.98 million. Salaries and related costs increased by $1.44 million due to corporate expansion and the severance payment of $0.65 million to our former chief executive officer. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $5.80 million, primarily due to the vesting acceleration terms of the former chief executive officer’s separation agreement.
Depreciation increased by $0.10 million, and rent increased $0.19 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 due to the additional rent expense related to our new office space.
Other income and expense
Other income decreased by $0.19 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, due to the forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan in the amount of $0.22 million in principal and interest effective December 29, 2020. Interest expense decreased by $0.32 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, primarily due to payoff of debt and loans during 2020. The decrease in the discount on debt was due to the debt recorded from the equity issuances associated with certain debt instruments issued prior to the Merger during the year ended December 31, 2020. A loss on the extinguishment of debt was recorded for $0.57 million in 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
We present Adjusted EBITDA because we consider it to be an important supplemental measure of our operating performance, and we believe it may be used by certain investors as a measure of our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as income (loss) from operations before interest income and expense, income taxes, depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, amortization of discount on debt, impairment of long-lived assets, stock-based compensation expense and certain non-recurring expense, including loss on extinguishment of debt and gain on debt forgiveness.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. Because of varying available valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions and the variety of equity instruments that can impact our non-cash operating expenses, we believe that providing a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes non-cash and non-recurring expenses allows for meaningful comparisons between our core business operating results and those of other companies, as well as providing us with an important tool for financial and operational decision making and for evaluating our own core business operating results over different periods of time.
Adjusted EBITDA may not provide information that is directly comparable to that provided by other companies in our industry, as other companies in our industry may calculate non-GAAP financial results differently, particularly related to non-recurring, unusual items. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to operating income or as an indication of operating performance or any other measure of performance derived in accordance with GAAP. We do not consider Adjusted EBITDA to be a substitute for, or superior to, the information provided by GAAP financial results.
Below is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss to common stockholders:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $69.16 million in cash and working capital of $72.31 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $36.54 million in cash and working capital of $38.50 million. The increase in cash and working capital was primarily a result of our capital raising activities through December 31, 2021.
Our sources of cash since inception have been predominantly from the sale of equity and debt.
On January 25, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 3,333,334 shares at an offering price of $6.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $20.00 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. In a concurrent private placement, we sold to such investors warrants to purchase, at any time on or after July 26, 2021 and on or before July 26, 2023, additional shares of common stock equal to the full amount of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 3,333,334 shares, at an exercise price of $6.93 per share.
On February 11, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 4,400,001 shares of common stock at an offering price of $9.50 per share, for gross proceeds of $41.80 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. Each purchaser was also granted the option to purchase, on or before February 16, 2022, additional shares of common stock equal to the full amount of 75% of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 3,300,001 shares, at a purchase price of $11.50 per share.
Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement dated July 21, 2020, during the year ended December 31, 2021, investors purchased 302,500 additional shares of common stock of AYRO, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $1.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 555,004 shares of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and received cash proceeds of $1.5 million.
Our business is capital-intensive, and future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the results of our strategic review, the expansion of our sales and marketing teams, the timing of new product introductions and the continuing market acceptance of our products and services. We are working to control expenses and deploy our capital in the most efficient manner.
We are evaluating other options for the strategic deployment of capital beyond our ongoing strategic initiatives, including potentially entering other segments of the electric vehicle market. We anticipate being opportunistic with our capital, and we intend to explore potential partnerships and acquisitions that could be synergistic with our competitive stance in the market.
We are subject to a number of risks similar to those of earlier stage commercial companies, including dependence on key individuals and products, the difficulties inherent in the development of a commercial market, the potential need to obtain additional capital, competition from larger companies, other technology companies and other technologies. Based on the foregoing, management believes that the existing cash at December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to fund operations for at least the next twelve months following the date of this report.
As discussed above under “Strategic Review,” we suspended all material research and development activity and expenditures, including expenses associated with our planned next-generation three-wheeled vehicle, while we conduct a strategic review of our product development strategy. In December of 2021 we began research and development on the new 411 fleet vehicle model refresh the AYRO Z.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $26.63 million in cash in operating activities, an increase in use of $16.61 million when compared to the cash used in operating activities of $10.02 million during the same period in 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily a result of R&D expenses related to the now paused three-wheeled vehicle, prepayments for inventory and manufacturing services, as well as an increase in accounts receivable, which was partially offset by a decrease of accrued expenses.
Our ability to generate cash from operations in future periods will depend in large part on profitability, the rate and timing of collections of our accounts receivable, inventory turns and our ability to manage other areas of working capital.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used cash of $0.60 million from investing activities, as compared to $2.54 million cash provided by investing activities during 2020, a decrease of $3.14 million. The net decrease was primarily due to proceeds of $3.06 million from the Merger during the year ended December 31, 2020 with no such proceeds during 2021.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of an aggregate of $58.30 million from the issuance of common stock, net of fees and expenses, and $0.10 million from the exercise of warrants for cash. In addition, we issued 555,004 shares of common stock from the exercise of stock options and received cash proceeds of $1.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of an aggregate of $39.86 million from the issuance of common stock, net of fees and expenses, $0.02 million from the exercise of options to purchase additional shares of common stock, and $3.93 million from the exercise of warrants for cash. In addition, during 2020, we received $0.50 million of debt financing from certain DropCar investors and $0.60 million of debt financing from a private investor, both of which notes were repaid upon closing of the Merger. Additionally, in May 2020, we received $0.22 million in a PPP loan from our bank, which was forgiven in December 2020. In December 2020, we were notified that the PPP loan principal and accrued interest were forgiven in full under the PPP terms, which is reflected in the non-cash section of cash flows from operating activities. The debt proceeds were netted with $1.74 million of loan repayments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. Accordingly, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
We have identified certain accounting estimates which involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial conditions or results of operations.
We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. There have been no changes to estimates during the periods presented in the filing. Historically, changes in management estimates have not been material.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements, in conformity with GAAP, requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Our most significant estimates include allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventory reserve, valuation of deferred tax asset allowance, and the measurement of stock-based compensation expenses. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Inventory Valuation
The accounting of inventory in accordance with GAAP recognizes the value of inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventories are assessed regularly for impairment and valuation reserves are established when necessary based upon a number of factors. The determination of events and assumptions utilized in our inventory valuation requires judgment. Transportation costs are included in net realizable value. Rising transportation costs deemed material by the company were evaluated, and it was determined a direct-write off of $1,080,583 was necessary to align the cost per vehicle due to these trends.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation.
Warrants and Preferred Shares
The accounting treatment of warrants and preferred share series issued is determined pursuant to the guidance provided by ASC 470, Debt, ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, as applicable. Each feature of a freestanding financial instruments including, without limitation, any rights relating to subsequent dilutive issuances, dividend issuances, equity sales, rights offerings, forced conversions, optional redemptions, automatic monthly conversions, dividends and exercise are assessed with determinations made regarding the proper classification in the Company’s financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). The Company recognizes all employee share-based compensation as an expense in the financial statements on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, based on the terms of the awards. Equity-classified awards principally related to stock options, restricted stock awards (“RSAs”) and equity-based compensation, are measured at the grant date fair value of the award. The Company determines grant date fair value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of RSAs is determined using the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the grant date. For service based vesting grants, expense is recognized ratably over the requisite service period based on the number of options or shares. For value-based vesting grants, expense is recognized via straight line expense over the expected period per grant as determined by outside valuation experts. Stock-based compensation is reversed for forfeitures in the period of forfeiture.
We estimate the fair value of stock-based and cash unit awards containing a market condition using a Monte Carlo simulation model. Key inputs and assumptions used in the Monte Carlo simulation model include the stock price of the award on the grant date, the expected term, the risk-free interest rate over the expected term, the expected annual dividend yield and the expected stock price volatility. The expected volatility is based on a combination of the historical and implied volatility of the Company’s publicly traded, near-the-money stock options, and the valuation period is based on the vesting period of the awards. The risk-free interest rate is derived from the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant and, since the Company does not currently pay or plan to pay a dividend on its common stock, the expected dividend yield was zero.
In June 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standard Update (“ASU”) 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2018-07”). ASU 2018-07 expands the guidance in ASC 718 to include share-based payments for goods and services to non-employees and generally aligns it with the guidance for share-based payments to employees. In accordance with ASU 2018-07, these stock options and warrants issued as compensation for services provided to the Company are accounted for based upon the fair value of the underlying equity instrument. The attribution of the fair value of the equity instrument is charged directly to compensation expense over the period during which services are rendered.
Basic and Diluted Loss Per Share
Basic and diluted net loss per share is determined by dividing net loss by the weighted average ordinary shares outstanding during the period. For all periods presented with a net loss, the shares underlying the ordinary share options and warrants have been excluded from the calculation because their effect would be anti-dilutive. Therefore, the weighted-average shares outstanding used to calculate both basic and diluted loss per share are the same for periods with a net loss.