ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing strategy, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
OBJECTIVE
The purpose of the Management Discussion and Analysis (the “MD&A”) is to present information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and cash flows for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 and our financial condition as of June 30, 2022. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our financial statements and notes.
OVERVIEW
We are a commercial-stage pharmaceutical company focused on commercializing novel therapeutics and consumer healthcare products and developing therapeutics for rare pediatric-onset or difficult-to-treat diseases. We operate through two business segments (i) the BioPharma segment, consisting of various prescription pharmaceutical products sold through third party wholesalers (the Rx Portfolio”), and (ii) the Consumer Health segment, which consists of various consumer health products sold directly to consumers. We generate revenue by selling our products through third party intermediaries in our marketing channels as well as directly to our customers. We currently manufacture our products for the treatment of ADHD at our manufacturing facilities and use third party manufacturers for our other prescription and consumer health products. We also have two product candidates in development, AR101 (enzastaurin) for the treatment of VEDS and Healight (endotracheal light catheter) for the treatment the treatment of severe, difficult-to-treat respiratory infections.
We have incurred significant losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $110.2 million and $58.3 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $288.5 million and $178.3 million, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing activities, including the integration of our acquisitions and development of our product pipeline.
SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENTS
Business Environment
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the global economy and create economic uncertainties. We believe COVID-19 has negatively impacted the market for prescription products, disrupted the reliability of the supply chain, and impacted the ability and efficiency of conducting clinical trials. The extent to which COVID-19 continues to negatively impact our business in the future will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the new variants of coronavirus, the actions taken to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, and the continued impact of each of these items on the economies and financial markets in the United States and abroad. While states and jurisdictions have rolled back stay-at-home and quarantine orders and reopened in phases, it is difficult to predict what the lasting impact of the pandemic will be, and if we or any of the third parties with whom we engage were to experience additional shutdowns or other prolonged business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operation and financial condition. In addition, a recurrence or impact from new strains of COVID-19 cases
could cause other widespread or more severe impacts depending on where infection rates are highest. We will continue to monitor developments as we deal with the disruptions and uncertainties relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have continued to experience significant inflationary pressure and supply chain disruptions related to the sourcing of raw materials, energy, logistics and labor during fiscal 2022. While we do not have sales or operations in Russia or Ukraine, it is possible that the conflict or actions taken in response, could adversely affect some of our markets and suppliers, economic and financial markets, costs and availability of energy and materials, or cause further supply chain disruptions. We expect that inflationary pressures and supply chain disruptions could continue to be significant across the business throughout the year.
Commercial Products
On March 23, 2022, our newly issued US patent No. 11,166,947 for Cotempla XR-ODT was listed in the U.S. FDA publication "Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations", commonly known as the "Orange Book." The Cotempla XR-ODT patent covers methods of use for the effective pediatric dosing of methylphenidate for the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The Orange Book listing extends the exclusivity period for Cotempla XR-ODT to 2038. Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc. has the right to manufacture and market its generic version of Cotempla XR-ODT under its ANDA beginning on July 1, 2026, or earlier under certain circumstances.
Development Products
AR101
On December 7, 2021, the FDA granted ODD to AR101 for the treatment of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, a group of rare inherited connective tissue disorders that includes the severe subtype VEDS. The FDA grants ODD status to drugs and biologics that are intended for the safe and effective treatment, diagnosis or prevention of rare diseases, or conditions that affect fewer than 200,000 people in the U.S. ODD affords us with certain financial incentives to support clinical development and the potential for up to seven years of market exclusivity in the U.S. upon regulatory approval.
On December 13, 2021, the FDA cleared the IND application for AR101 in VEDS to enable the initiation of the AR101 PREVEnt Trial in VEDS. We are underway with preparation activities for our PREVEnt Trial, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study evaluating once daily enzastaurin in the treatment of VEDS. The trial is expected to begin enrolling patients by early 2023.
On March 2, 2022, the European Commission granted orphan designation to AR101 (enzastaurin) for the treatment of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome. The European Medicines Agency orphan designation affords us with certain benefits and incentives, including clinical protocol assistance, differentiated evaluation procedures for Health Technology Assessments in certain countries, access to a centralized marketing authorization procedure valid in all EU member states, reduced regulatory fees and 10 years of market exclusivity.
On April 19, 2022, we were notified by the FDA that AR101 received Fast Track designation. Fast Track is a process designed to facilitate the development, and expedite the review, of drugs to treat serious conditions and fill an unmet medical need. Fast Track addresses a broad range of serious conditions, and the request can be initiated by a pharmaceutical company at any time during the development process. FDA reviews the request and decides based on whether or not the drug fills an unmet medical need in a serious condition. Once a drug receives Fast Track designation, early and frequent communication between the FDA and the sponsor is encouraged throughout the entire drug development and review process.
Healight
In November 2021, we received U.S. Patent Number 11,179,575, titled "Internal Ultraviolet Therapy," which is the first issued patent protecting the Healight investigational device and covers methods of treating a patient for an
infectious condition inside the patient's body through the insertion of a UV-light-emitting delivery tube inside a respiratory cavity of the patient at specific UV-A light wavelengths. The term of this patent extends to August of 2040.
In April 2022, our preclinical pilot study showed that administration of Healight delayed the time to development of VAP in a novel porcine model. The proof-of-concept study was conducted at Hospital Clinic de Barcelona under the supervision of principal investigator Antonio Torres, M.D., Ph.D., FERS, FCCP, ATSF, Senior Consultant, Pulmonology Department - one of the only centers in the world with access to this well-characterized porcine model of VAP caused by oropharyngeal secretions colonized by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In the study, administration of the Healight UV-A endotracheal catheter resulted in a 46% reduction in multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA C1-17) versus controls following two separate 20-minute treatments. Based on these positive data, Hospital Clinic de Barcelona and we have initiated a second, larger porcine VAP study to guide the future development of Healight for patients with VAP.
Debt and Equity Financings
On January 26, 2022, we entered into the Avenue Capital Agreement with the Avenue Capital, pursuant to which Avenue Capital provided the Company and certain of its subsidiaries with a secured $15.0 million loan. The interest rate on the loan is the greater of the prime rate and 3.25%, plus 7.4%, payable monthly in arrears. The maturity date of the loan is January 26, 2025. The proceeds from the Avenue Capital Agreement were used towards the repayment of the Deerfield Facility, which was otherwise due and payable on May 11, 2022.
In connection with the Avenue Capital Agreement, we entered into an amendment to the Eclipse Loan Agreement. Pursuant to the amendment, the Company, among other things, extended the maturity date of the Eclipse Loan Agreement to January 26, 2025 and reduced the maximum availability under the Eclipse Loan Agreement from $25.0 million to $12.5 million minus a $3.5 million availability block.
On March 7, 2022, upon closing of an underwritten public offering, we raised gross proceeds of $7.6 million from the issuance of (i) 3,030,000 shares of our common stock, (ii) pre-funded warrants (the “Pre-Funded Warrants”) to purchase up to 3,030,000 shares of common stock, and (iii) common stock purchase warrants (the “Common Warrants”) to purchase up to 6,666,000 shares of common stock (the “March 2022 Offering”). We received $6.8 million in proceeds net of underwriting fees and other expenses. In April 2022, the pre-funded warrants were exercised in full.
In August 2022, upon the closing of an underwritten public offering, we raised proceeds of $10.0 million from the issuance of (i) 21,505,814 shares of our common stock, and, in lieu of common stock to certain investors that so chose, pre-funded warrants to purchase 1,750,000 shares of our common stock, and (ii) accompanying warrants (the "Common Warrants") to purchase 23,255,814 shares of our common stock (the "Offering") We received $9.1 million in proceeds net of underwriting fees and other expenses. In August 2022, the pre-funded warrants were exercised in full.
Discontinued Products
As part of our realization of post-acquisition synergies and product prioritization, we have implemented a portfolio rationalization plan whereby we will discontinue or divest five non-core products in our BioPharma segment: Cefaclor Oral Suspension, Flexichamber, Tussionex, Tuzistra XR, and ZolpiMist. These products, collectively, contributed $2.2 million in net revenue and $0.7 million in gross loss during the year ended June 30, 2022.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Product revenue.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, net product revenue increased by $31.0 million, or 47%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by net revenue generated from the ADHD product portfolio, which we acquired in March 2021. The increase in revenue from our consumer health products was attributable to the continued growth of the e-commerce portion of the business. These increases were partially offset by decreases in other revenues related to discontinued products.
Gross margin by product portfolio
Gross margins. During the year ended June 30, 2022, gross margins increased by $23.1 million, or 79%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by net revenue increases in revenue as described above. Gross margin percentage increased to 54% for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to 44% for the same period in 2021. The improvement was primarily due improvements in gross margins in the ADHD and Pediatric product lines, a result of cost reduction efforts and greater volume, and the impairment of inventory during the year ended June 30, 2021. The reduction of gross margins in the Consumer Health Division was due to the growth of the e-commerce business, which generates lower gross margins than the direct to customer business. Others includes discontinued products described above and covid test kits for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Research and development
During the year ended June 30, 2022, research and development expense increased by $8.8 million, or 157%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. AR101 spending primarily consists of costs associated with preparing for the PREVEnt registrational clinical trial and the $2.5 million and $1.5 million milestone payments due upon receiving ODD and Fast Track designations during fiscal 2022. Spending on the ADHD product portfolio primarily consists of medical monitoring costs and costs associated with post-marketing requirements. We expect spending will be subject to material fluctuations between periods based on the timing of activities, including clinical and pre-clinical trials, of each program.
Advertising and direct marketing
During the year ended June 30, 2022, advertising and direct marketing expenses decreased by $1.0 million, or 5%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. Advertising and direct marketing expenses include direct-to-consumer marketing, advertising, sales and customer support and processing fees related to our Consumer Health segment. The reduction was primarily due to our emphasis on the e-commerce business from the direct-to-consumer business. In general, the e-commerce business generates lower gross margin percentages, but incurs lower customer acquisition costs such as advertising and direct marketing.
Other selling and marketing
During the year ended June 30, 2022, other selling and marketing expense increased $9.4 million, or 96%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The increases were primarily driven by the addition of the ADHD product portfolio and associated sales and marketing efforts in March 2021.
General and administrative
During the year ended June 30, 2022, general and administrative expense increased by $5.7 million or 22%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021, respectively. The increases were primarily driven by the additional infrastructure and spending from the acquisition of Neos (“Neos Acquisition”) in March 2021, partially offset by reduced spending by our Consumer Health segment.
Impairment expense
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we recognized total impairment expense of $75.5 million, consisting of (i) $65.8 million in goodwill, (ii) $7.1 million intangible assets, (iii) $2.0 million inventory, (iv) $0.4 million other assets and (v) $0.2 million property and equipment. The impairment expense related to write-down of assets was due to the discontinuation of commercializing certain products and products not marketed. See Note 8 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized impairment expense of $12.8 million related to impairment of the Tuzistra and Natesto licensed intangible asset, which were divested on March 31, 2021.
Amortization of intangible assets
During the year ended June 30, 2022, amortization expense of intangible assets, excluding amounts included in cost of sales, decreased by $1.9 million, or 32%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease was primarily related to licensed intangible assets that were being amortized during the year ended June 30, 2021 but have subsequently been divested or discontinued.
Other income/(expense), net
During the year ended June 30, 2022, other expense, net decreased by $1.2 million, or 58%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The decreases were primarily due to proceeds from the Natesto divestiture for the year ended June 30, 2021, partially offset by increases in interest expense from our debt for the period ended June 30, 2022.
Gain (loss) from contingent consideration
During the year ended June 30, 2022, net gain from contingent consideration decreased by $2.7 million, or 61%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The gain from contingent consideration included a $1.4 million gain from the reversal of contingent consideration liability related to Tuzistra and ZolpiMist. See Note 13 - Fair Value Considerations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Gain (Loss) on debt extinguishment
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we recognized $0.2 million gain from repayment of the Deerfield Facility. In the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized $0.3 million loss from conversion of outstanding debt to our shares of common stock.
Gain on derivative warrant liability
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we recognized $0.2 million gain from change in fair value of warrants upon the reclassification from a liability to equity warrant. See Note 13 - Fair Value Considerations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Income tax benefit
The impairment of the BioPharma segment book goodwill decreased the net deferred tax liability by $0.1 million resulting in an income tax benefit of $0.1 million during the year ended June 30, 2022.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during these periods primarily reflected our net losses, partially offset by changes in working capital and non-cash charges including goodwill and intangible asset write-down, inventory, changes in fair values of various liabilities, stock-based compensation expense, depreciation, amortization and accretion and other charges.
During fiscal 2022, net cash used in operating activities totaled $28.8 million. The use of cash was approximately $81.4 million less than the net loss primarily due to non-cash charges of depreciation, amortization and accretion, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, stock-based compensation, inventory and other assets write-downs and loss on debt extinguishment. These charges were offset by gains from change in fair values of contingent consideration and contingent value rights. In addition, our use of cash decreased due to changes in working capital including decreases in accounts receivable, inventory and prepaids, offset by a decrease in accrued liabilities and accounts payable.
During fiscal 2021, net cash used in operating activities totaled $26.0 million. The use of cash was approximately $32.3 million less than the net loss due primarily to non-cash charges of depreciation, amortization and accretion, impairment of intangible assets, stock-based compensation, inventory write-down and loss on debt extinguishment. These charges were offset by gains from change in fair values of contingent consideration and contingent value rights. In addition, our use of cash decreased due to changes in working capital including decreases in accounts receivable and inventory, offset by a decrease in accounts payable.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities is generally related to our merger and acquisitions as well as purchase of assets to support our operations.
Net cash used in investing activities of $3.2 million during the year ended June 30, 2022, was primarily due to $3.2 million payment of contingent consideration.
Net cash used in investing activities of $2.8 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, was primarily due to $15.5 million principally for the pay down of debt of Neos as part of the Neos Acquisition, $2.3 million for the Rumpus asset acquisition and $0.7 million payment of contingent considerations, partially offset by $15.7 million cash acquired due to the Neos Acquisition.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $1.5 million during the year ended June 30, 2022, was primarily from $15.0 million proceeds from long-term debt and $11.7 million net proceeds from issuance of our common stock, partially offset by $16.1 million full repayment of long-term debt, $4.1 million net reduction in our revolving loan, $4.4 million in payments of fixed payment arrangements and $0.5 million payment of debt issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $30.3 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, was primarily from $28.8 million gross proceeds from public offering of our shares in December 2021, offset by $2.6 million in related offering costs and $16.3 million gross proceeds from issuance of our common stock under the ATM, offset by $2.3 million in related offering costs. These increases were partially offset by $6.1 million in payments of fixed payment arrangements, $2.7 million paydown on the revolving loan and $1.0 million repayment of term loans.
Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have obligations related to our loan agreements, contingent considerations related to our acquisitions, milestone payments for licensed products and manufacturing purchase commitments.
We finance our operations through a combination of sales of our common stock and warrants, borrowings under our line of credit facility and cash generated from operations.
Shelf Registrations
On September 28, 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was declared effective by the SEC on October 7, 2021. This shelf registration statement covered the offering, issuance and sale by the Company of up to an aggregate of $100.0 million of its common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and units (the “2021 Shelf”). As of June 30, 2022, approximately $92.4 million remains available under the 2021 Shelf.
On June 8, 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was declared effective by the SEC on June 17, 2020. This shelf registration statement covered the offering, issuance and sale by the Company of up to an aggregate of $100.0 million of its common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and units (the “2020 Shelf”). As of June 30, 2022, approximately $43.0 million remains available under the 2020 Shelf.
In June 2020, we initiated an at-the-market offering program ("ATM"), which allow us to sell and issue shares of our common stock from time-to-time. On June 2, 2021, we terminated our “at-the-market” sales agreement with a sales agent, and on June 4, 2021, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (the “ATM Sales Agreement”) with a sales agent, pursuant to which we agreed to sell up to $30.0 million of our common stock from time to time in “at-the-market” offerings.
Since initiated in June 2020 through June 30, 2022, we issued a total of 5,524,326 shares of common stock for aggregate proceeds of $28.3 million before estimated offering costs of $2.8 million.
As of June 30, 2022, approximately $12.2 million of our common stock remained available to be sold pursuant to the ATM Sales Agreement.
Underwriting Agreements
On August 11, 2022, we closed on underwritten public offering, pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of (i) 21,505,814 shares of its common stock, (ii), pre-funded warrants to purchase 1,750,000 shares of its common stock, and (ii) accompanying warrants to purchase 23,255,814 shares of our common stock. The shares of common stock (or Pre-Funded Warrants) and the accompanying Common Warrants were issued separately but could only be purchased together in this Offering. The combined public offering price for each share of common stock and accompanying Common Warrant was $0.43, and the combined offering price for each Pre-Funded Warrant and accompanying Common Warrant is $0.429, which equals the public offering price per share of the common stock and accompanying Common Warrant, less the $0.001 per share exercise price of each Pre-Funded Warrant. The Pre-Funded Warrants were exercised in full in August 2022. The Common Warrants are exercisable at any time after the date of issuance for a period of five years from the date such Common Warrants are first exercisable. The number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the Common Warrants is subject to adjustment in certain circumstances, including a stock split of, stock dividend on, or a subdivision, combination or recapitalization of the common stock. The received gross proceeds of $10.0 million and net proceeds of approximately $9.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses.
On March 7, 2022, we closed on the March 2022 Offering, pursuant to which, we sold (i) 3,030,000 shares of our common stock, (ii) Pre-Funded Warrants to purchase up to 3,030,000 shares of common stock, and (iii) Common Warrants to purchase up to 6,666,000 shares of common stock. The shares of common stock and the Pre-Funded Warrants were each sold in combination with corresponding Common Warrants, with one Common Warrant to purchase 1.1 shares of common stock for each share of common stock or each Pre-Funded Warrant sold. The Pre-Funded Warrants have an exercise price of $0.0001 per share of common stock and were exercised in full in April 2022. The Common Warrants have an exercise price of $1.30 per share of common stock and are exercisable six months after the date of issuance and have a term of five years from the date of exercisability. We raised gross proceeds of $7.6 million through the March 2022 Offering before commission and other costs of $0.8 million. The Pre-Funded Warrants and Common Warrants have a combined fair value of approximately $5.6 million and are classified as additional paid in capital in the stockholders’ equity.
On December 10, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement, pursuant to which, we agreed to sell, in an upsized firm commitment offering, 4,166,667 shares of our common stock, to the underwriter at an offering price to the public of $6.00 per share, less underwriting discounts and commissions. In addition, pursuant to the underwriting agreement, we granted the underwriter a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 625,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price to the public, less underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriter exercised their over-allotment option in full, purchasing a total of 4,791,667 shares of common stock. We raised gross proceeds of $28.8 million through this offering. Offering costs totaled $2.6 million resulting in net cash proceeds of $26.2 million. In connection with the offering, we issued 311,458 underwriter warrants to purchase up to 311,458 shares of common stock. The exercise price per share of the underwriter warrants is $7.50 (equal to 125% of the public offering price per share for the shares of common stock sold in the offering) and the underwriter warrants have a term of five years from the date of effectiveness of the offering. The underwriter warrants are exercisable immediately. These warrants have a fair value of approximately $1.3 million and are classified as additional paid in capital in the stockholders' equity. Effective June 2, 2021, we terminated the underwriting agreement; pursuant to such termination, there will be no future sales of our common stock under this underwriting agreement.
Avenue Capital Agreement
On January 26, 2022, we entered into the Avenue Capital Agreement, pursuant to which the Company received $15.0 million loan. The interest rate on the loan is the greater of the prime rate and 3.25%, plus 7.4%, payable monthly in arrears. The maturity date of the loan is January 26, 2025. The proceeds from the Avenue Capital Agreement were used towards the repayment of outstanding debt.
In the event we prepay the outstanding principal prior to the maturity date, we will pay Avenue Capital a fee equal to (i) 3.0% of the loan if such event occurs on or before January 26 2023, (ii) 2.0% of the loan if such event occurs after January 26, 2023 but on or before January 26, 2024, and (iii) 1.0% of the loan if such event occurs after January 26,
2024 but before January 26, 2025. In addition, upon the payment in full of the obligations, we shall pay to Avenue Capital a non-refundable fee in the amount of $0.6 million (“Final Payment”). See Note 12 - Long-term Debt in the accompanying unaudited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Eclipse Loan Agreement
The Eclipse Loan Agreement, as amended, provides us with up to $12.5 million in Revolving Loans, of which up to $2.5 million may be available for short-term swingline loans, against 85% of eligible accounts receivable. The Revolving Loans bore interest at Secure Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), plus 4.50% through April 2022. Beginning in May 2022 through maturity, the Revolving Loans bear interest at the Secured Overnight Financing Rate plus 4.50%. In addition, we are required to pay an unused line fee of 0.50% of the average unused portion of the maximum Revolving Loans amount during the immediately preceding month. Interest is payable monthly in arrears. The maturity date under the Eclipse Loan Agreement, as amended, is January 26, 2025.
In the event that, for any reason, all or any portion of the Eclipse Loan Agreement is terminated prior to the scheduled maturity date, in addition to the payment of all outstanding principal and unpaid accrued interest, we are required to pay a fee equal to (i) 2.0% of the Revolving Loans commitment if such event occurs on or before January 26, 2023, (ii) 1.0% of the Revolving Loans commitment if such event occurs after January 26, 2023 but on or before January 26, 2024, and (iii) 0.5% of the Revolving Loans commitment if such event occurs after January 26, 2024 but on or before January 26, 2025. We may permanently terminate the Eclipse Loan Agreement with at least five business days prior notice. See Note 11 - Line of Credit in the accompanying unaudited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
As a result of our acquisitions and licensing agreements, we are contractually and contingently obliged to pay, when due, various fixed and contingent milestone payments. See Note 19 - Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying unaudited consolidated financial statements for further information.
On May 12, 2022, the Company entered into an agreement with Tris to terminate the License, Development, Manufacturing and Supply Agreement dated November 2, 2018 (the “License Agreement”). Pursuant to such termination, the Company agreed to pay Tris a total of approximately $6 million to $9 million, which reduced our total liability for minimum payments by approximately $8.0 million from the original License Agreement. The settlement payment will be paid in three installments from December 2022 through July 2024.
Upon closing of the acquisition of a line of prescription pediatric products from Cerecor, Inc. in October 2019, we assumed payment obligations that require us to make fixed and product milestone payments. As of June 30, 2022, up to $6.3 million of fixed and product milestone payments remain.
In connection with the February 2020 acquisition of Innovus Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (the “Innovus Acquisition”), all of Innovus’s shares were converted to our common stock and CVRs, which represents contingent additional consideration of up to $16.0 million payable to satisfy future performance milestones. As of June 30, 2022, up to $5.0 million of potential CVR milestone payments remain.
In connection with our Innovus Acquisition, we assumed a contingent obligation which required us to make milestone payment of $0.5 million, between fiscal year 2026 through fiscal year 2033 to Novalere, if and when certain levels of FlutiCare sales are achieved.
In connection with our acquisition of the Rumpus assets, upon satisfaction of milestones, we may be required to pay up to $67.5 million in regulatory and commercial-based earn-out payments to Rumpus. Under the licensing agreement with Denovo Biopharma LLC (“Denovo”), we are required to make a payment of $0.6 for a license fee in April 2022 and upon achievement of regulatory and commercial milestones, up to $101.7 million. Under the licensing agreement with Johns Hopkins University (“JHU”), upon achievement of regulatory and commercial milestone, we may
be required to pay up to $1.6 million to JHU. In fiscal 2022, two milestones payable to Rumpus were achieved totaling $4.0 million, which were paid in 2,188,940 shares of common stock and $2.6 million in cash.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting policies to the notes to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenue from product sales through our BioPharma segment and Consumer Health segment. We evaluate our contracts with customers to determine revenue recognition using the following five-step model: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations and if they are distinct; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) a performance obligation is satisfied.
Net product sales in the BioPharma segment consist of sales of prescription pharmaceutical products under the Rx Portfolio, principally to a limited number of wholesale distributors and pharmacies in the United States. Rx product revenue is recognized at the point in time that control of the product transfers to the customer in accordance with shipping terms (i.e., upon delivery), which is generally “free-on-board” destination when shipped domestically within the United States and “free-on-board” shipping point when shipped internationally consistent with the contractual terms.
The Company makes estimates of the net sales price, including estimates of variable consideration to be incurred on the respective product sales (known as “Gross to Net” adjustments). Estimating gross to net adjustments and applying the constraint on variable consideration requires the use of significant management judgment and other market data.
The Gross to Net adjustments include:
● Savings offers The Company offers savings programs for its patients covered under commercial payor plans in which the cost of a prescription to such patients is discounted.
● Prompt payment discounts Prompt payment discounts are based on standard programs with wholesalers.
● Wholesale distribution fees Wholesale distribution fees are based on definitive contractual agreements for the management of the Company’s products by wholesalers.
● Rebates The Rx Portfolio products are subject to commercial managed care and government managed Medicare and Medicaid programs whereby discounts and rebates are provided to participating managed care organizations and federal and/or state governments. Calculations related to rebate accruals are estimated based on historical information from third-party providers.
● Wholesaler chargeback The Rx Portfolio products are subject to certain programs with wholesalers whereby pricing on products is discounted below wholesaler list price to participating entities. These entities purchase products through wholesalers at the discounted price, and the wholesalers charge the difference between their acquisition cost and the discounted price back to the Company.
● Returns Wholesalers’ contractual return rights are limited to defective product, product that was shipped in error, product ordered by customer in error, product returned due to overstock, product returned due to dating or product returned due to recall or other changes in regulatory guidelines. The return policy for expired product allows the wholesaler to return such product starting six months prior to expiry date to twelve months post expiry date. The Company analyzes return data available from sales since inception date to determine a reliable return rate.
Savings offers, rebates and wholesaler chargebacks reflect the terms of underlying agreements, which may vary. Accordingly, actual amounts will depend on the mix of sales by product and contracting entity. Future returns may not follow historical trends. Our periodic adjustments of our estimates are subject to time delays between the initial product sale and ultimate reporting and settlement of deductions. We continually monitor these provisions and do not believe variances between actual and estimated amounts have been material.
A 10% increase or decrease in these estimates impacts net sales by a corresponding increase or decrease of approximately $17.0 million.
We generate Consumer Health Segment product revenue from sales of various consumer health products through e-commerce platforms and direct-to-consumer marketing channels utilizing our proprietary Beyond Human marketing and sales platform. Revenue is generally recognized “free-on-board” shipping point, as those are the agreed-upon contractual terms. Taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction that are collected by us from a customer are excluded from revenue. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight after control over a product has transferred to a customer are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are included in cost of sales
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials, work in process and finished goods and are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined on a first-in, first-out basis. Until objective and persuasive evidence exists that regulatory approval has been received and future economic benefit is probable, pre-launch inventories are expensed into research and development. Post-FDA approval, manufacturing costs for the production of our products are being capitalized into inventory. We periodically review the composition of our inventories in order to identify obsolete, slow-moving, excess or otherwise unsaleable items. Inventory items are written down to net realizable value in the period an impairment is identified. Net realizable value estimates are subject to projections of future plans, sales and price levels, which may vary from actual results.
We incurred charges of $1.7 million and $7.3 million to reduce the carrying value of inventory to net realizable value during the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, primarily as a result of the discontinuance of non-core products.
Stock-based compensation expense
Stock-based compensation awards, including stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units are recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values on the date of grant. We calculate the fair value of options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Restricted stock and restricted stock unit grants are valued based on the estimated grant date fair value of our common stock. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including stock price volatility and the expected life of stock options. The application of this valuation model involves assumptions that are highly subjective, judgmental, and sensitive in the determination of compensation cost. The expected term of stock options is determined according to the “simplified method,” which is the
midpoint between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. The expected stock price volatility for stock option awards is based on our historical stock price volatility over the expected term. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect commensurate with the expected life assumption. We have not paid and do not anticipate paying cash dividends. Forfeitures are adjusted for as they occur.
There is a high degree of subjectivity involved when using option pricing models to estimate stock-based compensation. There is currently no market-based mechanism or other practical application to verify the reliability and accuracy of the estimates stemming from these valuation models. Such estimates may not be indicative of the fair value that would be observed in a market transaction between a willing buyer and willing seller. Estimated option values increase and decrease as assumed volatility and estimated lives increase and decrease. If factors change and we employ different assumptions when valuing our options, the compensation expense that we record in the future may differ significantly from what we have historically reported. If significant forfeitures occur in the future, compensation expense may be significantly reduced in future reporting periods.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We assess impairment of long-lived assets annually and when events or changes in circumstances indicates that their carrying value amount may not be recoverable. Long-lived assets consist of property and equipment, net and goodwill and other intangible assets, net. Circumstances which could trigger a review include but are not limited to: (i) significant decreases in the market price of the asset; (ii) significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal or regulatory factors; (iii) changes in business plans or (iv) expectations that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. If the estimated future undiscounted cash flows, excluding interest charges, from the use of an asset are less than the carrying value, a write-down would be recorded to reduce the related asset to its estimated fair value. Such estimates involve projections of future sales and costs, which may vary from actual results. Declines in the outlook for the related products, particularly soon after fair-value measurement upon acquisition or prior impairment, can negatively impact our ability to recover the carrying value and can result in an impairment charge.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, in connection with the decision to discontinue commercializing or divesting certain products within the BioPharma segment that have minimal revenue and gross margin contribution, the Company recorded $4.9 million impairment expense for the write-down of intangible assets consisting of (i) $2.6 million for AcipHex, (ii) $1.4 million for ZolpiMist, (iii) $0.5 million for Tussionex, (iv) $0.2 million for Cefaclor and (v) $0.2 million for the Neos tradename. Additionally, our Consumer Health segment recorded an impairment of $2.2 million related to products no longer being marketed and products that have been underperforming.
During the year ended June 31, 2021, the Company recorded $12.8 impairment expense in the BioPharma segment consisting of (1) $4.3 million in connection with the divestiture of Natesto and (2) $8.5 million for write-down of Tuzistra licensed asset. These products generated $0.4 million and $1.0 million of revenue during the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Goodwill
Goodwill is recorded as the difference between the fair value of the purchase consideration and the fair value of the net identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired. As described in footnote 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our financial statements, Goodwill is reviewed for impairment at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an intangible asset may not be recoverable. If, after assessing events or circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative impairment test by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit with the carrying value. If the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, an impairment charge is recorded in the amount of the difference. The fair value of a reporting unit is estimated using a combination of a market multiple and a discounted cash flow approach. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires the use of estimates, assumptions and judgment. The principal estimates and assumptions that we use include prospective financial information (revenue growth, operating margins, and capital expenditures), future market conditions, weighted average costs of capital, a terminal growth rate, comparable multiples of publicly traded companies in our industry, and the
earnings metrics and multiples utilized. We believe that the estimates and assumptions used in impairment assessments are reasonable. We have determined that we have two reporting units that require periodic review for goodwill impairment, the BioPharma segment, and the Consumer Health segment.
During fiscal 2022, the Company’s market capitalization significantly declined. The decline was considered a qualitative factor that led management to assess whether an impairment had occurred. Management’s evaluation indicated that the goodwill related to one of its reporting units within the BioPharma segment and Consumer Health segment was potentially impaired and performed a quantitative impairment test. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge of $65.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2022.
Contingent Consideration
We estimate the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities related to business acquisitions based on projected payment dates, discount rates, probabilities of payment, and projected revenues. Projected contingent payment amounts are discounted back to the current period using a discounted cash flow methodology.
The fair value of the contingent value rights was based on a model in which each individual payout was deemed either (a) more likely than not to be paid out or (b) less likely than not to be paid out. From there, each obligation was then discounted at a 30% discount rate to reflect the overall risk to the contingent future payouts pursuant to the CVRs. This value is then re-measured for future expected payout as well as the increase in fair value due to the time value of money. These gains or losses, if any, are included as a component of operating cash flows.
These contingent liabilities are remeasured each period with changes in fair value recognized in income. Discounts associated with estimated probabilities of milestone achievements and projected revenues are subject to significant judgment.
Warrants
Equity classified warrants are valued using a Black-Scholes model at issuance and are not remeasured. Liability classified warrants are carried at fair value using lattice valuation model. Changes in the fair value of liability classified warrants in subsequent periods are recorded as a gain or loss on remeasurement and reported as a component of cash flows from operations. All of our liability-classified warrants expired in August 2022.
Research and Development
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. At each period end, we corroborate the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include those related to fees paid to:
o vendors in connection with discovery and preclinical development activities;
o CROs in connection with preclinical studies and testing; and
o CMOs in connection with the process development and scale up activities and the production of materials.