Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations. Factors that could cause such differences include those described in the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report. We undertake no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements.
OVERVIEW
The Company achieved sales of $1,258.8 million in 2021, an increase of $134.5 million, or 12.0%, from 2020. Organic sales (net sales excluding both foreign currency translation, acquisition, and divestiture impacts) increased by $119.6 million, or 10.6%, including increases of $111.5 million, or 14.5%, at Industrial and $8.1 million, or 2.3% at Aerospace. The Company completed the sale of its Seeger business on February 1, 2020, reducing sales by $5.3 million in the 2021 period relative to the prior year period. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies increased net sales within the Industrial segment by approximately $20.2 million. Operating income increased 21.6% from $123.4 million in 2020 to $150.0 million in 2021 and operating margin increased from 11.0% in 2020 to 11.9% in 2021.
Impact of COVID-19
Global industrial and aerospace end markets came under significant pressure in 2020 as a result of COVID-19, restricting the level of global economic activity and causing a significant contraction in the economy. COVID-19 continued to present challenges across our businesses in 2021, with impacts including labor disruptions, supply chain constraints, inflationary pressures resulting in increased freight and raw material costs, amongst others. The Company has remained focused on cost management and productivity initiatives to mitigate these impacts, in addition to maintaining the safety of our employees, particularly throughout a recent resurgence of COVID-19 in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Throughout the pandemic and in support of continuing its manufacturing efforts, the Company continues to take a number of steps to protect its employees, suppliers and customers, as their safety and well-being is priority. The Company instituted additional precautions to comply with health and safety guidelines and to protect its employees, including enhanced deep cleaning, staggered shifts, temperature checking, use of face masks, practicing social distancing and limiting non-employees at our locations, amongst other safety related policies and procedures. Many of the Company's office workers in our manufacturing facilities, as well as the Corporate and segment headquarters, continue to work remotely, where possible. The Company’s global supply chain management team continues to monitor and manage its ability to operate effectively given recent disruptions within its supply chain. Ongoing communications with the Company's suppliers to identify and mitigate risk and to manage inventory levels have continued. Notwithstanding the Company's continued operations, COVID-19 has had and may have further negative impacts on its operations, customers and supply chain despite the preventative and mitigating measures being taken. Uncertainties remain with regard to the impact of COVID-19 on our customers and customer demand for our products and services, as well as customer restrictions on our ability to visit their sites or otherwise access their employees. The Company will continue to monitor its facilities to ensure that they are in compliance with its safety requirements although the Company's facilities have generally operated at normal levels throughout 2020 and 2021.
The Company, as noted above, has continued to actively manage costs throughout the pandemic. To better align costs with the current business environment, the Company has taken several actions, which included restructuring and workforce reductions in 2020. Resulting pre-tax charges of $19.1 million were recorded in 2020, including $18.2 million and $0.9 million of charges that impacted operating income and Other Expense (Income), respectively. Pre-tax charges of $1.0 million were additionally recorded during 2021. See additional discussion within "Results of Operations” below.
Business Transformation
Acquisitions and strategic relationships with our customers have been a key growth driver for the Company, and we continue to seek alliances which foster long-term business relationships. These acquisitions have allowed us to extend into new or adjacent markets, expand our geographic reach, and commercialize new products, processes and services. The Company continually evaluates its business portfolio to optimize product offerings and maximize value. We have significantly transformed our business with our entrance into new markets, including most recently automation, and we continue to pursue strategic additions that align with our portfolio of differentiated products.
Management Objectives
Management is focused on continuing the Company's transformation by executing on its profitable growth strategy comprised of the following elements:
•Build a world-class Company focused on high margin, high growth businesses
•Leverage the Barnes Enterprise System ("BES") as a significant competitive advantage
•Expand and protect our intellectual property to deliver differentiated solutions
•Create value for all stakeholders.
The successful execution of this strategy requires making value-enhancing investments in organic growth (new products, processes, systems, services, markets and customers) and strategic acquisitions while divesting of businesses or existing product lines to effectively redeploy capital. Management remains focused on a deeper deployment of BES across the Company to advance commercial excellence, operational excellence and financial excellence.
The combined benefits from growth investment and execution of the strategic enablers are expected to generate long-term value for the Company's shareholders, customers and employees.
Our Business
The Company consists of two operating segments: Industrial and Aerospace.
Key Performance Indicators
Management evaluates the performance of its reportable segments based on the sales, operating profit, operating margins and cash generation of the respective businesses. Each segment has standard key performance indicators (“KPIs”), a number of which are focused on employee safety-related metrics (total recordable incident rate and lost time incident rate), customer metrics (on-time-delivery and quality), internal effectiveness and productivity/efficiency metrics (sales effectiveness, global sourcing, operational excellence, functional excellence, cost of quality, days working capital and return on invested capital) and specific KPIs on profitable growth.
Key Industry Data
In both segments, management tracks a variety of economic and industry data as indicators of the health and outlook of a particular sector.
At Industrial, key data for the manufacturing operations include the Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing PMI Composite Index (and similar indices for European and Asian-based businesses); the Bureau of Economics Industrial Production Index ("the IPI"); IHS-Markit worldwide forecasts for light vehicle production, as well as new model introductions and existing model refreshes; North American heavy duty vehicle production; interconnection consulting hot runner systems worldwide report for auto, medical, personal care and packaging industries; and global GDP growth forecasts.
At Aerospace, management of the Aftermarket business monitors the number of aircraft in the active fleet, the number of aircraft temporarily or permanently taken out of service, aircraft utilization rates for the major airlines, engine shop visits, airline profitability, aircraft fuel costs and passenger traffic. The Aerospace OEM business regularly tracks orders, backlog and deliveries for each of the major aircraft manufacturers, as well as engine purchases made for new aircraft. Management also monitors annual appropriations for the U.S. defense market related to purchases of new or used aircraft and engine components.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Sales
The Company reported net sales of $1,258.8 million in 2021, an increase of $134.5 million, or 12.0%, from 2020. Organic sales increased by $119.6 million, including increases of $111.5 million and $8.1 million at Industrial and Aerospace, respectively. The year-over-year increase at Industrial was driven by organic sales increases across the Industrial business units, driven primarily by recovering end-markets within each of the businesses, although continuing pressures resulting from semiconductor shortages and global supply chain sourcing constraints impacted recent automotive and broader industrial production. These pressures, largely associated with the continued effects and resurgence of COVID-19, impacted sales volumes within Industrial during the second half of 2021. Within Aerospace, the sales improvement relative to the 2020 period was driven by a volume increase within the Aerospace OEM business, whereas the Aerospace Aftermarket business was down slightly. The Company completed the sale of its Seeger business on February 1, 2020, reducing sales by $5.3 million during the 2021 period relative to the 2020 period. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies increased net sales within the Industrial segment by approximately $20.2 million. The Company's international sales increased by 14.6% year-over-year while domestic sales increased by 8.2%. Excluding the impact of foreign currency translation on sales, however, the Company's international sales in 2021 increased by 11.5% from 2020.
Expenses and Operating Income
(1)Sales less cost of sales
Cost of sales in 2021 increased 11.5% from 2020 (as compared with the 12.0% increase in net sales noted above) and gross profit margin increased slightly in 2021. Gross margins were relatively flat at both Industrial and Aerospace, with the mix between the segments resulting in a slight improvement. At Industrial, gross profit increased primarily as a result of the profit contribution of higher sales volumes. Gross profit margins at Industrial during the 2021 and 2020 periods remained flat as the profit contribution of increased sales volume was partially offset by an increase in global sourcing costs, including increased freight and raw material. Within Aerospace, gross profit and gross profit margins remained relatively flat in 2021 driven by lower volumes on a full year basis within the higher margin Aftermarket businesses as compared to the 2020 period, largely offset by cost savings and productivity initiatives taken by management. Selling and administrative expenses in 2021 increased 9.0% from the 2020 period. Sales, however, increased 12.0% between the 2021 and 2020 periods. As a percentage of sales, selling and administrative costs decreased from 24.9% in 2020 to 24.2% in the 2021 period. The decrease in selling and administrative costs as a percentage of sales was driven by the absence of the $18.2 million of pre-tax charges related to restructuring and workforce actions and $2.5 million of divestiture charges related to the completion of the Seeger sale. Partially offsetting this decrease were investments in growth and innovation, and an increase in employee related costs, including incentive compensation within both segments. Operating income in 2021 increased 21.6% to $150.0 million from the 2020 period and operating income margin increased from 11.0% in the 2020 period to 11.9% in the 2021 period, primarily driven by the items noted above.
Interest expense
Interest expense in 2021 increased $0.3 million to $16.2 million from 2020, primarily as a result of the impact of higher average interest rates, partially offset by decreased borrowings during the period.
Other expense (income), net
Other expense (income), net in 2021 was $6.0 million compared to $5.9 million in 2020. Other expense (income) during the 2021 and 2020 periods includes other components of pension expense (income) of $2.4 million and $1.5 million, respectively. Other expense (income) also includes foreign currency losses of $0.6 million in the 2021 period compared with losses of $1.5 million in the 2020 period.
Income Taxes
The Company's effective tax rate was 21.9% in 2021, compared with 37.6% in 2020. The decrease in the effective tax rate in 2021 was primarily due to the absence of tax expense related to the completed sale of the Seeger business in 2020, a benefit related to a realignment of tax basis goodwill and intangibles (discussed below), a benefit related to the Mutual Aid Process ("MAP") approval (discussed below), a favorable mix in earnings based on tax jurisdictions and a decrease in the global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI") tax.
During the second quarter of 2021, the Italian tax authorities released tax guidance related to the application of tax basis realignment rules for intangible property ("Realignment") which provides Italian taxpayers with the opportunity to step up the basis of goodwill and intangibles to their fair market value and amortize the step up over 18 years for tax purposes in exchange for paying a 3% tax on the step up, payable over a three years period. The Company opted to elect the Realignment in June 2021 and accordingly recorded a tax payable of $3.0 million and a long-term tax payable of $6.0 million. The Company made its first required installment payment of $3.0 million during the third quarter of 2021, reducing the long-term tax payable accordingly. The Company also recorded a deferred tax asset of $83.9 million related to the Realignment. Accounting guidance requires that when a deferred tax asset is realigned for tax purposes, a corresponding revaluation reserve also be recorded. Under Italian tax rules, any dividends paid out of this revaluation reserve are subject to tax at a 24% rate. Accordingly, the Company recorded a deferred tax liability of $72.2 million related to the potential 24% tax due on any dividends, paid out of the revaluation reserve. The deferred tax asset and liability balances have been presented on a net basis on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company also recorded a one-time $2.7 million benefit to the provision related to this election and related accounting. In December 2021 the Italian government increased the amortization period to 50 years; however the change has no impact on the accounting for the transaction as reported above.
In 2019 and 2017, the Company recorded additional income taxes resulting from audits at certain subsidiaries in Germany. The Company filed applications with the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") under the MAP to allow for offsetting positions within the US tax filings for the Germany-related adjustments. In 2021 the MAP applications were approved by the IRS. The Company recognized a tax benefit of $2.0 million in 2021 to reflect the tax benefit realized as a result of the IRS approval.
The Aerospace and Industrial segments have a number of multi-year tax holidays in Singapore, China and Malaysia. The previous tax holiday in China expired at the end of 2020. The Company re-applied for the holiday and it was approved in December 2021. As a result of this tax holiday, the China tax rate was reduced from 25% to 15% and is effective for a three year period commencing January 1, 2021 (retroactively). Aerospace was granted an income tax holiday for operations recently established in Malaysia. This holiday commenced effective November 2020 (retroactively) and remains effective for a period of ten years. The Singapore tax holiday is scheduled to expire in December 2022. These holidays are subject to the Company meeting certain commitments in the respective jurisdictions.
During 2021, the Company repatriated $68.3 million, compared to $85.0 million in 2020. Pursuant to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Act”), neither dividend was taxable in the U.S in 2021. The Act, which was enacted in 2017, made broad and complex changes to the U.S. Tax Code and included, but was not limited to, requiring a one-time Transition Tax on certain unrepatriated accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries of the Company (payable over eight years) and exempted foreign dividends paid to the U.S. during the year from taxation if such earnings were included within the Transition Tax.
In 2022, the Company expects the effective tax rate to approximate 26%, an increase from the rate of 21.9% in 2021. The increase in the effective tax rate is driven primarily by the absence of the tax benefits recognized in 2021 relating to the realignment of tax basis of goodwill and intangibles and the MAP approval. An unfavorable projected earnings mix is also expected to contribute to the increase in the effective tax rate in 2022.
See Note 14 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate to the consolidated effective income tax rate.
Income and Income Per Share
Basic and diluted net income per common share increased for 2021 as compared to 2020 due to the increase in net income year over year. Basic and diluted weighted average common shares outstanding were consistent year over year and were only slightly impacted by the repurchase of 396,000 and 100,000 shares during 2020 and 2021, respectively, as part of the Company's publicly announced Repurchase Program as well as the issuance of additional shares for employee stock plans.
Financial Performance by Business Segment
Industrial
Sales at Industrial were $896.5 million in 2021, an increase of $126.4 million, or 16.4%, from 2020. Organic sales increased by $111.5 million, or 14.5%, during 2021, with increased volumes across each of the businesses, primarily driven by a recovery within industrial end markets and the lessened impacts of COVID-19 on a full-year basis. The deepening impacts of COVID-19 during the second half of the year, and more specifically a resurgence during the fourth quarter of 2021, caused additional pressure on Industrial. This pressure drove further semiconductor shortages, global supply chain sourcing constraints and labor shortages, with these factors continuing to impact recent automotive and broader industrial production. On a sequential basis, Industrial sales declined in the fourth quarter of 2021 relative to the third quarter of 2021, primarily a result of the factors noted above. Volumes within our broader transportation markets improved during 2021, albeit tempered by the semiconductor shortage. Sales within our medical markets remained solid in 2021, consistent with this market trend throughout the pandemic. On a full year basis, Automation business saw strong year-over-year organic sales growth, sequential sales declined in the fourth quarter relative to the third quarter, driven by the macroeconomic trends discussed above, although sequential orders in the fourth quarter increased slightly. Personal care and packaging end markets demonstrated softness on a year-over-year basis, although orders in both markets improved sequentially during the fourth quarter of 2021 relative to the third quarter. The Company completed the sale of its Seeger business on February 1, 2020, reducing sales by $5.3 million during the 2021 period relative to the 2020 period. The impact of foreign currency translation increased sales by approximately $20.2 million as the U.S. dollar weakened against foreign currencies.
Operating profit in 2021 at Industrial was $97.7 million, an increase of $31.1 million, or 46.8% from 2020. Operating profit benefited from the impact of increased organic sales volumes, partially offset by an increase in employee related costs, including incentive compensation, and investments in growth and innovation. Global sourcing also impacted the current period as supply chain constraints drove freight and raw material cost increases across the broader industry. The prior year period included $15.9 million of restructuring charges, primarily employee severance and other termination benefits, and $2.5 million of divestiture charges related to the completion of the Seeger sale. Operating margin increased from 8.6% in the 2020 period to 10.9% in the 2021 period, primarily driven by the absence of these restructuring and divestiture items.
Outlook:
In Industrial, management remains focused on generating organic sales growth through the introduction of new products and services and by leveraging the benefits of its diversified products and global industrial end-markets. This being the case, our end markets continue to recover from the ongoing impacts of COVID-19 and increasing supply chain constraints. Markets within our key regions of North America, Europe and China, although having demonstrated recovery throughout the first half of the year, softened during the second half as supply chain disruptions impacted demand and shipments across most Industrial businesses and regions. General industrial end markets have shown significant year-over-year improvement, although order rates declined sequentially during the fourth quarter of 2021. For overall industrial end-markets, the manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index ("PMI") are above 50 in most regions. PMI within the United States and Europe, however, have shown slight deterioration since the third quarter of 2021, whereas China has remained stable. Global light vehicle production in 2021 was relatively flat as compared with 2020, largely a result of the impacts of the semiconductor shortage, tempering overall strength within the transportation markets. Production of light vehicles is being forecasted to meaningfully improve in 2022 although the semiconductor shortage may continue to impact near-term automotive builds. Management expects this shortage to continue into 2022, with an expectation that semiconductor chip supply will improve as the year goes on. Our customers and the markets we serve may impose emissions reduction or other environmental standards and requirements, including our conventional fuel-based automotive markets, thereby impacting sales volumes within our automotive end markets. Management also tracks closely the impact of pricing changes and lead times on raw materials and freight, given the increasing pressure of supply chain constraints. Management remains focused on labor constraints that impacted the business throughout 2021 and as we enter 2022. Within our Molding Solutions business, global medical markets remain healthy and are expected to remain favorable given the recent demands of COVID-19, an aging population and expanded medical applications. The automotive hot runner and tool and die markets remain strong following the release of projects with automotive original equipment manufacturers related to model launches, including new electric vehicles. Orders within the packaging market have improved on both a year-over-year and sequential basis. Sales volumes at certain of our businesses is dependent upon the need for equipment used to produce plastic products, which may be significantly influenced by the demand for plastic products, the capital investment needs of companies in the plastic injection molding and plastics processing industries, changes in technological advances and changes in laws or regulations such as those related to single-use plastics, product and packaging composition, and recycling. Automation end-markets continue to trend positively from a year-over-year standpoint. Although order activity declined sequentially during the second half of 2021, we continue to focus on further expansion into adjacent end-markets. As noted above, our sales were positively impacted by $20.2 million from fluctuations in foreign currencies. To the extent that the U.S. dollar fluctuates relative to other foreign currencies, our sales may be impacted relative to the prior year periods. The relative impact on operating profit is not expected to be as significant as the impact on sales as most of our businesses have expenses primarily denominated in local currencies, where their revenues reside, however operating margins may be impacted. Management is focused on sales growth through innovation, acquisition and expanding geographic reach. Strategic investments in new technologies, manufacturing processes and product development are expected to provide benefits over the long term and management continues to evaluate such opportunities.
The Company is focused on the proactive management of costs to mitigate the ongoing impacts of COVID-19 and the continuing risks of supply chain constraints on operating profit. Management also remains focused on strategic investments and new product and process introductions, as well as driving productivity by leveraging BES. The Company continues to manage its cost structure to align with the intake of orders and sales given remaining uncertainty within certain end-markets as we enter 2022. Management will continue to explore opportunities for additional cost savings, while working closely with vendors and customers as it relates to the timing of deliveries and pricing initiatives. It is anticipated that operating profit will continue to be impacted by changes in sales volume, mix and pricing, inflation, labor and freight costs, utilities and the levels of investments in growth and innovation that are made within each of the Industrial businesses. Operating profit may also be impacted by enactment of or changes in tariffs, trade agreements and trade policies that may affect the cost, lead times and/or availability of goods, including but not limited to, steel and aluminum. Costs associated with new product and process introductions, restructuring and other cost initiatives, strategic investments and the integration of acquisitions may negatively impact operating profit.
Aerospace
Aerospace recorded sales of $362.4 million in 2021, a 2.3% increase from 2020. Sales increased 5% within the OEM business and declined 3% within the Aftermarket Maintenance Repair and Overhaul ("MRO") and spare parts businesses
relative to the 2020 period. On a sequential basis, Aerospace sales improved in each sequential quarter, with Aftermarket sales demonstrating strong growth in the second half of 2021. Aftermarket sales, in fact, increased sequentially by 24% between the first and second half of 2021, with growth continuing to trend upwards as the business exited the year. The year-over-year increase in OEM sales was driven by growing narrow body airframe production including the return to flight of the Boeing 737 MAX. Sales within OEM, although having increased since the comparable 2020 period as well as sequentially during each of the 2021 quarters, continued to experience the impact of earlier reductions in engine and airframe build schedules, in addition to higher levels of inventory within the supply chain earlier in the year. The order schedules of our OEM customers stabilized throughout 2021 as customers continue to normalize their aircraft production schedules. Within Aftermarket, airline traffic and aircraft utilization have improved significantly during the second half of 2021, not withstanding the recent COVID-19 disruptions. The MRO business continued to demonstrate recovery as the distribution of vaccines increased, additional domestic health and travel restrictions were lifted and passenger traffic improved. Although Aerospace continues to demonstrate gradual signs of a recovery, a return to pre-COVID-19 levels is expected to take several years. See Outlook section below. Sales within the segment are largely denominated in U.S. dollars and therefore were not significantly impacted by changes in foreign currency.
Operating profit at Aerospace decreased 7.9% from 2020 to $52.3 million. The operating profit decrease resulted from the profit impact of decreased volumes within the higher margin Aftermarket businesses, partially offset by a volume increase at OEM, as discussed above. An increase in employee related costs, including incentive compensation, also impacted operating profit in the current period, partially offset by favorable productivity. The comparable prior year period included $2.3 million of restructuring charges, primarily employee severance and other termination benefits, whereas the 2021 period included $0.9 million of restructuring charges. Operating margin decreased from 16.0% in the 2020 period to 14.4% in the 2021 period, primarily a result of the impacts of the items discussed above.
Outlook:
Sales in the Aerospace OEM business are based on the general state of the aerospace market driven by the worldwide economy and are supported by its order backlog through participation in certain strategic commercial and defense-related engine and airframe programs. OEM sales and orders grew in 2021 relative to the similar 2020 period, although management expects orders to be tempered entering 2022 as customer aircraft production schedules continue to normalize, albeit at lower levels. The Company expects, however, that the OEM business will see recovery in demand for its manufactured components as aircraft production rates at Boeing and Airbus are increasing, though lower than pre-pandemic levels. Narrow body airframe production is ramping, whereas wide body airframe production remains under pressure. The duration and depth of the aerospace market disruptions remain uncertain at this time, however a full recovery to pre-pandemic levels is expected to take several years. Aerospace management continues to work with customers to evaluate engine and airframe build schedules, giving management the ability to react timely to such changes. Management is also working closely with suppliers to align raw material schedules with production requirements. Management also remains focused on labor constraints that impacted the business throughout 2021 and as we enter 2022. The business remains focused on executing long-term agreements while expanding our share of production on key programs. Backlog at OEM was $680.1 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of 18.9% since December 31, 2020, at which time backlog was $572.0 million. Approximately 40% of OEM backlog is expected to be recognized over the next 12 months. If COVID-19 continues to have a material impact on the aerospace industry, including our more significant OEM customers, it will continue to materially affect our Aerospace business and results of operations. The Aerospace OEM business may also be impacted by changes in the content levels on certain platforms, changes in customer sourcing decisions, adjustments to customer inventory levels, commodity and labor availability and pricing, vendor sourcing capacity and the use of alternate materials. Additional impacts may include the redesign of parts, quantity of parts per engine, cost schedules agreed to under contract with the engine and airframe manufacturers, as well as the pursuit and duration of new programs. Fluctuations in fuel costs and potential changes in regulatory requirements could impact airlines' decisions on maintaining, deferring or canceling new aircraft purchases, in part based on the value associated with new fuel efficient technologies and targets established by airlines to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
COVID-19 continues to impact our Aerospace Aftermarket businesses. Reduced aircraft utilization, increased levels of aircraft removed from service and reduced airline profitability are expected to continue to impact our business in the mid-term. The Aftermarket business has, however, showed strong signs of a recovery during 2021 as orders have sequentially increased during each quarter. Domestic and international passenger traffic improved, the distribution of vaccines increased and certain domestic health and travel restrictions were lifted. Travel restrictions, especially on an international basis, continue to impact wide body aircraft utilization and corresponding Aftermarket orders, although freight-related air traffic remains strong. Sales in the Aerospace Aftermarket business may continue to be impacted by inventory management and changes in customer sourcing, deferred or limited maintenance activity during engine shop visits and the use of surplus (used) material during the engine repair and overhaul process. Management believes that its Aerospace Aftermarket business continues to be competitively positioned based on well-established long-term customer relationships, including maintenance and repair contracts in the MRO
business and long-term Revenue Sharing Programs ("RSPs") and Component Repair Programs ("CRPs"). The MRO business may also be impacted by airlines that closely manage their aftermarket costs as engine performance and quality improves. Fluctuations in fuel costs and potential changes in regulatory requirements and their corresponding impacts on airline profitability and behaviors within the aerospace industry could also impact levels and frequency of aircraft maintenance and overhaul activities, and airlines' decisions on maintaining, deferring or canceling new aircraft purchases, in part based on the economics associated with new fuel efficient technologies.
Given the pressures on sales growth resulting from COVID-19, the Company remains focused on the proactive management of costs and improved productivity to mitigate continued pressure on operating profit. Certain cost savings actions taken in the prior year remain in effect and have been critical in partially offsetting the lower profit contribution of lower Aftermarket sales. Aerospace will continue to explore opportunities for additional productivity in 2022, including working closely with vendors and customers as it relates to the timing of deliveries and pricing initiatives. Management also remains focused on strategic investments and new product and process introductions. Driving productivity through the application of BES continues as a key initiative. Operating profit is expected to be affected by the impact of the changes in sales volume noted above, mix and pricing, particularly as they relate to the higher profit Aftermarket RSP spare parts business, and investments made in each of its businesses. Operating profits may also be impacted by potential changes in tariffs, trade agreements and trade policies that may affect the cost and/or availability of goods and labor constraints. Costs associated with new product and process introductions, the physical transfer of work to other global regions, additional productivity initiatives and restructuring activities may also negatively impact operating profit.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Management assesses the Company's liquidity in terms of its overall ability to generate cash to fund its operating and investing activities. Of particular importance in the management of liquidity are cash flows generated from operating activities, capital expenditure levels, dividends, capital stock transactions, effective utilization of surplus cash positions overseas and adequate lines of credit. The Company currently maintains sufficient liquidity and will continue to evaluate ways to enhance its liquidity position as it navigates through the disrupted business environment that has resulted from COVID-19.
The Company believes that its ability to generate cash from operations in excess of its internal operating needs is one of its financial strengths. Management continues to focus on cash flow and working capital management, and anticipates that operating activities in 2022 will generate sufficient cash to fund operations. See additional discussion regarding currently available debt facilities below. The Company continues to invest within its businesses, with its estimate of 2022 capital spending to be approximately $60 million.
In October 2014, the Company entered into a Note Purchase Agreement (“Note Purchase Agreement”), among the Company and New York Life Insurance Company, New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation and New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation Institutionally Owned Life Insurance Separate Account, as purchasers, for the issuance of $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.97% senior notes due October 17, 2024 (the “3.97% Senior Notes”). The 3.97% Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and pay interest semi-annually on April 17 and October 17 of each year at an annual rate of 3.97%. The 3.97% Senior Notes will mature on October 17, 2024 unless earlier prepaid in accordance with their terms. Subject to certain conditions, the Company may, at its option, prepay all or any part of the 3.97% Senior Notes in an amount equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 3.97% Senior Notes so prepaid, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to the date of prepayment, plus the Make-Whole Amount, as defined in the Note Purchase Agreement, with respect to such principal amount being prepaid. The Note Purchase Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants that are similar to the covenants required under the Amended Credit Agreement, as discussed below. At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants under the Note Purchase Agreement.
On October 8, 2020, the Company entered into the sixth amendment to its fifth amended and restated revolving credit agreement with Bank of America (the “Sixth Amendment”) and the first amendment to the Note Purchase Agreement with New York Life (the “First NPA Amendment” and, collectively with the Sixth Amendment, the "Amendments"). The Sixth Amendment maintained the borrowing availability of $1,000.0 million along with access to request an additional $200.0 million through an accordion feature. The Sixth Amendment and the First NPA Amendment provided for an increase in the Company’s maximum ratio of Consolidated Senior Debt, as defined, to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined, from 3.25 times (or, if a certain permitted acquisition above $150.0 million is consummated, 3.50 times) to 3.75 times in each case at the end of the four fiscal quarters, beginning with December 31, 2020, and regardless of whether a permitted acquisition, as defined, is consummated, providing additional financing flexibility and access to liquidity. Additionally, the Sixth Amendment requires the Company to maintain a maximum ratio of Consolidated Total Debt, as defined, to Consolidated EBITDA, of not more than 3.75 times in each case, at the end of the four fiscal quarters, beginning with December 31, 2020 and regardless of whether a permitted
acquisition, as defined, is consummated. Furthermore, the First NPA Amendment provides for (i) adjustments to the ratio of Consolidated Total Debt to Consolidated EBITDA to conform to a more restrictive total leverage ratio that may be required under the Sixth Amendment, (ii) an increase in the amount of allowable add-back for restructuring charges when calculating Consolidated EBITDA from $15.0 million to $25.0 million and (iii) a required fee payment equal to 0.50% per annum times the daily outstanding principal amount of the note during each of the four fiscal quarters, following the quarter ended December 31, 2020, if the Company’s Senior Leverage Ratio, as defined, exceeds 3.25 times. In October 2020, the Company paid fees and expenses of $1.4 million in conjunction with executing the Amendments. Such fees have been deferred within Other Assets on the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheet and are being amortized on the Consolidated Statements of Income.
On February 10, 2021, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries entered into the sixth amended and restated senior unsecured revolving credit agreement (the "Amended Credit Agreement") and retained Bank of America, N.A. as the Administrative Agent for the lenders. The Amended Credit Agreement maintains the $1,000.0 million of availability under the facility, while increasing the available borrowings under the accordion feature from $200.0 million to $250.0 million (aggregate availability of $1,250.0 million) and extends the maturity date through February 2026. The Amended Credit Agreement also adjusts the interest rate to either the Eurocurrency rate, as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement, plus a margin of 1.175% to 1.775% or the base rate, as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement, plus a margin of 0.175% to 0.775%, depending on the Company's leverage ratio at the time of the borrowing. Multi-currency borrowings, pursuant to the Amended Credit Agreement, bear interest at their respective interbank offered rate (i.e. Euribor) or 0.00% (higher of the two rates) plus a margin of between 1.175% and 1.775%. As with the earlier facility, the Company's borrowing capacity is limited by various debt covenants in the Amended Credit Agreement, as described further below. The Amended Credit Agreement required the Company to maintain a Senior Debt Ratio of not more than 3.75 times at the end of each fiscal quarter ending on or before September 30, 2021, after which the ratio reverted to 3.25 times (or, if a permitted acquisition above $150.0 million is consummated, 3.50 times at the end of each of the first four fiscal quarters ending after the consummation of any such acquisition). In addition, the Amended Credit Agreement requires the Company to maintain a Total Debt Ratio of not more than 3.75 for each fiscal quarter (or, if a permitted acquisition above $150.0 million is consummated, 4.25 times at the end of each of the first four fiscal quarters ending after the consummation of any such acquisition). A ratio of Consolidated EBITDA to Consolidated Cash Interest Expense, as defined, of not less than 4.25, is required at the end of each fiscal quarter. The Amended Credit Agreement also contemplates the potential replacement of LIBOR (as defined below) with a successor financing rate, pursuant to the intent of the United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority to phase out use of LIBOR. See additional discussion immediately below regarding the Company's ongoing evaluation related to this potential change in financing rates. The Company paid fees and expenses of $4.3 million in conjunction with executing the Amended Credit Agreement. Such fees have been deferred within Other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and will be amortized into interest expense on the Consolidated Statements of Income through its maturity. The Company subsequently amended the Credit Agreement on October 11, 2021, defining certain applicable multi-currency borrowing rates that may be used as replacement rates for LIBOR, which is expected to be discontinued by reference rate reform. See Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements, as well as discussion below.
The United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), announced its intent to phase out the use of LIBOR by December 31, 2021. The U.S. Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, a steering committee comprised of large U.S. financial institutions, identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) as its preferred benchmark alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR. Published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, SOFR represents a measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight, collateralized by U.S. Treasury securities, and is calculated based on directly observable U.S. Treasury-backed repurchase transactions. The Company’s Amended Credit Agreement and corresponding interest rate swap are tied to LIBOR, with each maturing in February 2026, as noted above. In March 2021, the ICE Benchmark Association announced that it will extend the publication of overnight, 1, 3, 6 and 12 month LIBOR rates until June 30, 2023, while ceasing publication of all other LIBOR rates including 1 week and 2 month rates. The Company's Amended Credit Agreement was further amended in October 2021 to address the replacement of LIBOR, defining certain applicable multi-currency borrowing rates that may be used as a replacement. The Company is continuing to monitor the potential impact of the replacement of LIBOR, but does not anticipate a material impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all applicable covenants. The Company anticipates continued compliance under the Agreements in each of the next four quarters. The Company's most restrictive financial covenant is the Senior Debt Ratio, which required the Company to maintain a ratio of Consolidated Senior Debt to Consolidated EBITDA of not more than 3.25 times at December 31, 2021. The actual ratio at December 31, 2021 was 2.44 times, as defined.
In 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company acquired 0.1 million shares, 0.4 million shares and 0.9 million shares of the Company's common stock, respectively, under the Repurchase Program at a cost of $5.2 million, $15.6 million and $50.3
million, respectively. Management will continue to evaluate additional repurchases based on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. See "Part II - Item 2 - Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds".
Operating cash flow may be supplemented with external borrowings to meet near-term business expansion needs and the Company's current financial commitments. The Company has assessed its credit facilities in conjunction with the Amended Credit Facility and currently expects that its bank syndicate, comprised of 12 banks, will continue to support its recently executed Amended Credit Agreement, which matures in February 2026. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $504.7 million unused and available for borrowings under its $1,000.0 million Amended Credit Facility, subject to covenants in the Company's Amended Credit Agreement. At December 31, 2021, additional borrowings of $325.6 million of Total Debt including $201.7 million of Senior Debt would have been allowed under the financial covenants. The Company intends to use borrowings under its Amended Credit Agreement to support the Company's ongoing growth initiatives. The Company continues to analyze potential acquisition targets and end markets that meet our strategic criteria with an emphasis on proprietary, highly-engineered industrial technologies. The Company believes its credit facilities and access to capital markets, coupled with cash generated from operations, are adequate for its anticipated future requirements. The Company maintains communication with its bank syndicate as it continues to monitor its cash requirements and available costs of borrowing within the market.
The Company had no borrowings under short-term bank credit lines at December 31, 2021.
The Company entered into an interest rate swap agreement (the "2017 Swap") on April 28, 2017, with one bank, which converted the interest on the first $100.0 million of the Company's one-month LIBOR-based borrowings from a variable rate plus the borrowing spread to a fixed rate of 1.92% plus the borrowing spread. The 2017 Swap expired on January 31, 2022. On March 24, 2021, the Company entered into a new interest rate swap agreement (the "2021 Swap") with this same bank that commenced on January 31, 2022 and that converted the interest on the first $100.0 million of the Company's one-month LIBOR-based borrowings from a variable rate plus the borrowing spread to a fixed rate of 1.17% plus the borrowing spread. The 2021 Swap will expire on January 30, 2026. These interest rate swap agreements (the "Swaps") remain in place at December 31, 2021 and are accounted for as cash flow hedges. At December 31, 2021, the Company's total borrowings were comprised of approximately 34% fixed rate debt and 66% variable rate debt. At December 31, 2020, the Company's total borrowings were comprised of approximately 30% fixed rate debt and 70% variable rate debt.
The funded status of the Company's pension plans is dependent upon many factors, including actual rates of return that impact the fair value of pension assets and changes in discount rates that impact projected benefit obligations. The unfunded status of the pension plans decreased from $55.0 million at December 31, 2020 to $22.3 million at December 31, 2021 as the fair value of the pension plan assets increased and the projected benefit obligations ("PBOs") decreased, following an update to certain actuarial assumptions. The Company recorded $29.8 million of non-cash after-tax increases in stockholders equity (through other non-owner changes to equity) when recording the current year adjustments for changes in the funded status of its pension and postretirement benefit plans as required under accounting for defined benefit and other postretirement plans. This increase in stockholders equity resulted primarily from changes in actuarial assumptions, primarily an increase in discount rates, the amortization of actuarial losses and prior service costs recorded earlier and favorable variances between expected and actual returns on pension plan assets.
In 2021, the Company made no discretionary contributions to its U.S Qualified pension plans. The Company expects to contribute approximately $4.6 million to its various defined benefit pension plans in 2022. No discretionary contributions to the U.S. Qualified pension plans are currently planned in 2022. See Note 12 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
As noted above, the U.S. government enacted the Act on December 22, 2017. The Company completed its computation of the Transition Tax as required pursuant to SAB 118 in 2018, resulting in a final net Transition Tax expense of $86.7 million. The Company elected to pay the Transition Tax over the allowed eight-year period. The installment payments for the Transition Tax are not expected to have a material impact on the liquidity or capital resources of the Company. The Company expects to make the payments through the use of available cash or borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement.
The Company completed the sale of the Seeger business to Kajo Neukirchen Group effective February 1, 2020. Gross proceeds received were 39.0 million Euros ($42.9 million) after consideration of post-closing adjustments, which were made during 2020, pursuant to the terms of the SPA. The Company yielded net cash proceeds of $36.1 million after consideration of cash sold and transaction costs. Resulting tax charges of $4.2 million were recognized in the first quarter of 2020 following the completion of the sale. The Company utilized the proceeds from the sale to reduce debt under the Amended Credit Agreement.
At December 31, 2021, the Company held $102.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, the majority of which was held by foreign subsidiaries. These amounts have no material regulatory or contractual restrictions and, on a long term basis, are expected to primarily fund international investments. The Act changed the impact of U.S taxation on foreign distributions. The Company is continuously evaluating its position regarding the potential repatriation of overseas cash. The evaluation of potential repatriation is dependent upon several variables, including foreign taxation of dividends and the impact of withholding tax. The Company repatriated $68.3 million to the U.S. during 2021.
The Company’s efforts to comply with numerous federal, state and local laws and regulations applicable to its business and products often results in capital expenditures. The Company makes capital expenditures to design and upgrade its aerospace and industrial products to comply with or exceed standards applicable to the industries we serve. The Company’s ongoing HSE compliance program also results in capital expenditures. Regulatory and HSE considerations are a part of significant capital expenditure decisions; however, expenditures during 2021 related solely to regulatory compliance were not material.
Any future acquisitions are expected to be financed through cash, borrowings and equity, or a combination thereof. We may from time to time seek to retire or repurchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity securities, in open market purchases, under a Rule 10b5-1 trading plan, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
Cash Flow
________________________________________
NM - Not meaningful
Operating activities provided $167.8 million in 2021 compared to $215.5 million in 2020. Operating cash flows in the 2021 period were positively impacted by improved operating results compared to the 2020 period; however, this was offset by the absence of $99.6 million of cash generated by working capital in the 2020 period which was driven by a reduction in accounts receivable. The 2021 period includes a use of cash for working capital of $3.2 million.
Investing activities used $29.8 million in 2021 and $4.2 million in 2020. Net cash proceeds of $36.1 million from the sale of the Seeger business are included in investing activities for the 2020 period. See Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. In 2021, investing activities included capital expenditures of $34.1 million compared to $40.7 million in 2020. The Company expects capital spending in 2022 to approximate $60 million. Capital expenditures relate to both maintenance and support of growth initiatives, which include the purchase of equipment to support new products and services, and are expected to be funded primarily through cash flows from operations.
Cash used by financing activities in 2021 included a net decrease in borrowings of $67.4 million compared to a net decrease of $174.2 million in 2020. Proceeds from the issuance of common stock were $1.4 million and $2.0 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021, the Company repurchased 0.1 million shares of the Company's stock at a cost of $5.2 million compared with the purchase of 0.4 million shares at a cost of $15.6 million in 2020. Total cash used to pay dividends was $32.4 million in both the 2021 and 2020 periods. Withholding taxes paid on stock issuances were $1.4 million in the 2021 period and $3.4 million in the 2020 period. Other financing cash flows during 2021 and 2020 included $0.8 million of net cash payments and $5.6 million of net cash proceeds, respectively, related to the settlement of foreign currency hedges related to intercompany financings. Other financing cash flows in the 2021 period also included $4.3 million of payments made in conjunction with executing the Amended Credit Agreement and $4.2 million of payments related to the residual interest in a subsidiary. Other financing cash flows in the 2020 period also included $1.4 million of payments made in conjunction with executing amendments to the Amended Credit Agreement and the Note Purchase Agreement.
Debt Covenants
As noted above, borrowing capacity is limited by various debt covenants in the Company's debt agreements. Following is a reconciliation of Consolidated EBITDA, a key metric in the debt covenants, to the Company's net income (in millions):
The Amended Credit Agreement allows for certain adjustments within the calculation of the financial covenants. Other adjustments consist primarily of restructuring charges, due diligence and transaction expenses and net gains on the sale of assets as permitted under the Amended Credit Agreement. The Company's financial covenants are measured as of the end of each fiscal quarter. At December 31, 2021, additional borrowings of $325.6 million of Total Debt including $201.7 million of Senior Debt would have been allowed under the covenants. Senior Debt includes primarily the borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 3.97% Senior Notes and the borrowings under the lines of credit. The Company's unused committed credit facilities at December 31, 2021 were $504.7 million; however, the borrowing capacity was limited by the debt covenants to $325.6 million of Total Debt and $201.7 million of Senior Debt at December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
At December 31, 2021, the Company had the following contractual obligations and commitments:
(1)Long-term debt obligations represent the required principal payments under such agreements. As noted above, the Company entered into an Amended Credit Agreement on February 10, 2021, extending the maturity of the $1,000.0 million facility from February 2022 to February 2026.
(2)Interest payments under long-term debt obligations have been estimated based on the borrowings outstanding and market interest rates as of December 31, 2021. The Amended Credit Agreement extends the maturity of the facility and the timing of corresponding interest payments through February 2026.
(3)The Company’s operating lease payments included herein reflect the future minimum undiscounted fixed lease payments, which represent the basis for calculating the Company’s operating lease liabilities as of December 31, 2021. Refer to Note 19 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4)The amounts do not include purchase obligations reflected as current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. The purchase obligation amount includes all outstanding purchase orders as of the balance sheet date as well as the minimum contractual obligation or termination penalty under other contracts.
(5)The amount included in “Less Than 1 Year” reflects anticipated contributions to the Company’s various pension plans. Anticipated contributions beyond one year are not determinable.
(6)Amounts reflect anticipated benefit payments under the Company’s other postretirement benefit plans based on current actuarial assumptions. Expected benefit payments, as presented above, do not extend beyond 2031. See Note 12 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(7)Amounts reflect anticipated long-term payments related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that was enacted on December 22, 2017. Payments are allowed over an eight-year period. See Note 14 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The amount payable in 2022 is included within accrued liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The above table does not reflect unrecognized tax benefits as the timing of the potential payments of these amounts cannot be determined. See Note 14 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
OTHER MATTERS
Inflation
Inflation generally affects the Company through its costs of labor, equipment, raw materials, freight and utilities. The Company strives to offset these items by price increases, commodity price escalator provisions, operating improvements, and other cost-saving initiatives. In certain end markets, implementing price increases may be difficult and there is no assurance that the Company will be successful. From time to time, the Company may encounter difficulties in obtaining certain raw materials or components necessary for production due to supply chain constraints and logistical challenges, which may also negatively impact the pricing of materials and components sourced or used by the Company. Beginning in 2021 and into 2022, for example, raw material availability and inflationary pressures have impacted certain of our business. See "Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The most significant areas involving management judgments and estimates are described below. Actual results could differ from such estimates.
Inventory Valuation: Inventories are valued at the lower of cost, determined on a first-in, first-out basis, or net realizable value. The primary components of cost included in inventories are raw material, labor and overhead. Provisions are made to reduce excess or obsolete inventories to their estimated net realizable value. The process for evaluating the value of excess and obsolete inventory often requires the Company to make subjective judgments and estimates concerning future sales levels, quantities and prices at which such inventory will be sold in the normal course of business and estimated costs. Estimates of excess and obsolete inventory may differ from actual results due to changes in market value, channels of distribution, customer preferences and overall economic and market conditions. Accelerating the disposal process or changes in estimates based on future sales potential or estimated costs may necessitate future adjustments to these provisions.
Revenue recognition: Revenue is recognized by the Company when control of the product or solution is transferred to the customer. Control is generally transferred when products are shipped or delivered to customers, title is transferred, the significant risks and rewards of ownership have transferred, the Company has rights to payment and rewards of ownership pass to the customer. Customer acceptance may also be a factor in determining whether control of the product has transferred. Although revenue is generally transferred at a point in time, a certain portion of businesses with customized products or contracts in which the Company performs work on customer-owned assets requires the use of an over time recognition model as certain contracts meet one or more of the established criteria pursuant to the accounting standards governing revenue recognition. Also, service revenue is recognized as control transfers, which is concurrent with the services being performed. The estimation of both total revenue and cost at completion includes a number of variables and requires significant judgement. A portion of our Aerospace OEM business as well as a portion of our Molding Solutions Products business has an estimate at completion process in which management reviews the progress and execution of our performance obligations for significant contracts with revenue recognized under an over time model. Factors considered in these estimates include, but are not limited to, performance under the contract, progress towards completion, identified risks and opportunities, sourcing determinations
and related changes in estimates of costs to be incurred. The potential exists that there will be a material change in estimates or assumptions used to calculate revenue recognized under an over time model and as a result changes to these estimates could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. Adjustments to net sales, cost of sales and the related impact to operating income are recognized as necessary. Revenue recognized from performance obligations satisfied in previous periods was not material in 2021, 2020 and 2019. See Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Business Acquisitions, Intangible Assets and Goodwill: Assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination are recorded under the acquisition method of accounting at their estimated fair values at the dates of acquisition. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $955.4 million and $271.1 million of goodwill and identifiable intangible assets related to acquisitions, respectively. Goodwill represents the cost of acquisitions in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying identifiable net assets of acquired businesses. Identifiable intangible assets acquired in business acquisitions include customer relationships, patents and technology and trademarks/trade names. The fair value of acquired customer relationship intangibles was determined as of the acquisition dates based on estimates and judgments regarding expectations for the future after-tax cash flows arising from customer relationships that existed on the acquisition date over their estimated lives, less a contributory assets charge, all of which is discounted to present value using an appropriate discount rate. The fair value of the patents and technology and trademark/trade name intangible assets were determined utilizing the relief from royalty method which is a form of the income approach. Under this method, an after-tax royalty rate based on market royalty rates is applied to projected revenue associated with the patents/technology and trademark/trade name and discounted to present value using an appropriate discount rate. See Note 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to impairment testing annually or more frequently if an event or change in circumstances indicates that the fair value of a reporting unit has been reduced below its carrying value. Management completes its annual impairment assessments during the second quarter of each year as of April 1. The Company utilizes the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the Step 1 quantitative goodwill impairment test in accordance with applicable accounting standards. Under the qualitative assessment, management considers relevant events and circumstances including but not limited to macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall unit performance and events directly affecting a unit. If the Company determines that the Step 1 quantitative impairment test is required, management estimates the fair value of the reporting unit primarily using the income approach, which reflects management’s cash flow projections, and also evaluates the fair value using the market approach. Inherent in management’s development of cash flow projections are assumptions and estimates, including those related to future earnings and growth rates and the weighted average cost of capital. The Company compares the fair value of the reporting unit with the carrying value of the reporting unit. If the fair values were to fall below the carrying values, the Company would recognize a non-cash impairment charge to income from operations for the amount by which the carrying amount of any reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, assuming the loss recognized does not exceed the total amount of goodwill for the reporting unit. Based on our second quarter assessment, the estimated fair value of the Automation reporting unit, which represents the October 2018 acquisition of Gimatic, exceeded its carrying value while the estimated fair value of each of the remaining reporting units significantly exceeded their carrying values. There was no goodwill impairment at any reporting units in 2021. Based on our assessments, a ten percentage point decrease in the fair value of any reporting unit would not impact our conclusion that goodwill was not impaired. Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside the control of management, and these assumptions and estimates can change in future periods as a result of both Company-specific and overall economic conditions, including the impacts of COVID-19. Management’s quantitative assessment includes a review of the potential impacts of current and projected market conditions from a market participant’s perspective on reporting units’ projected cash flows, growth rates and cost of capital to assess the likelihood of whether the fair value would be less than the carrying value. The Company also completed its annual impairment testing of its trade names, indefinite-lived intangible assets, in the second quarter of 2021 and determined that there were no impairments.
The Company executed an SPA to sell Seeger in December 2019 and subsequently classified the assets and liabilities of Seeger as "held for sale" on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2019. Pursuant to the required accounting guidance, the Company allocated $15.0 million of goodwill from the Engineered Components ("EC") reporting unit to Seeger based on the estimated relative fair values of the business to be disposed of and the portion of the reporting unit that will be retained. The Company subsequently recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $5.6 million related to the goodwill that was allocated to Seeger. The impairment charge was recorded within Selling and Administrative expenses on the Consolidated Statement of Income for the period ended December 31, 2019. The Company assessed the goodwill within the remaining EC reporting unit and determined that there was no further impairment. See Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company assesses the impairment of the identifiable finite-lived intangible assets subject to amortization whenever significant events or significant changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company did not identify any impairments related to such intangible assets during 2021.
Aerospace Aftermarket Programs: The Company participates in aftermarket RSPs under which the Company receives an exclusive right to manufacture and supply designated aftermarket parts over the life of the related aircraft engine program to our customer, GE. As consideration, the Company has paid participation fees, which are recorded as intangible assets. The carrying value of these intangible assets was $147.5 million at December 31, 2021. The Company records amortization of the related asset as sales dollars are being earned based on a proportional sales dollar method. Specifically, this method amortizes each asset as a reduction to revenue based on the proportion of sales under a program in a given period to the estimated aggregate sales dollars over the life of that program which reflects the pattern in which economic benefits are realized.
The Company also participates in CRPs with GE which provide for, among other items, the right to sell certain aftermarket component repair services for CFM56, CF6, CF34 and LM engines directly to other customers over the life of the engine program as one of a few GE licensed suppliers. In addition, the CRPs extended certain existing contracts under which the Company provides these services directly to GE. Our total investments in CRPs as of December 31, 2021 equaled $111.8 million, all of which have been paid. At December 31, 2021, the carrying value of the CRPs was $76.2 million. The Company recorded the CRP payments as an intangible asset which is recognized as a reduction of sales over the remaining life of these engine programs based on the estimated sales over the life of such programs. This method reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the CRPs are realized.
The recoverability of each asset is subject to significant estimates about future revenues related to the programs' aftermarket parts and services. The Company evaluates these intangible assets for recoverability and updates amortization rates on an agreement by agreement basis for the RSPs and on an individual asset basis for the CRPs. The assets are reviewed for recoverability periodically including whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. Annually, the Company evaluates the remaining life of these assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization. Management updates revenue projections, which include a comparison of actual experience against projected revenue and industry projections. The potential exists that actual revenues will not meet expectations due to a change in market conditions, including, for example, the replacement of older engines with new, more fuel-efficient engines or the Company's ability to capture additional production share within the aftermarket business. A shortfall in future revenues may indicate a triggering event requiring a write down or further evaluation of the recoverability of the assets or require the Company to accelerate amortization expense prospectively dependent on the level of the shortfall. Management considered the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the broader aerospace end markets during its evaluation of these intangible assets in 2021. The Company has not identified any impairment of these assets, although changes in projected RSP and CRP revenue has impacted amortization rates that will be applied prospectively. See Note 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits: Accounting policies and significant assumptions related to pension and other postretirement benefits are disclosed in Note 12 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. As discussed further below, the significant assumptions that impact pension and other postretirement benefits include discount rates, mortality rates and expected long-term rates of return on invested pension assets.
The Company selected the expected long-term rate of return of its U.S. defined benefit plans based on consideration of historical and projected rates of return on the weighted target asset mix of our pension investments. The target mix reflects a 65% equity investment target and a 35% target for fixed income and cash investments (in aggregate). The equity investment of 65% is more heavily weighted on global equity investment targets, rather than U.S. targets. The historical rates of return for the Company's defined benefit plans were calculated based upon compounded average rates of return of published indices. Management selected a long-term expected rate of return on its U.S. pension assets of 7.25%. The long-term rates of return for non-U.S. plans were selected based on actual historical rates of return of published indices that reflect the plans’ target asset allocations.
The discount rate used for the Company’s U.S. pension plans reflects the rate at which the pension benefits could be effectively settled. At December 31, 2021, the Company selected a discount rate of 2.95% based on a bond matching model for its U.S. pension plans. Market interest rates have increased in 2021 as compared with 2020 and, as a result, the discount rate used to measure pension liabilities increased from 2.65% at December 31, 2020. The discount rates for non-U.S. plans were selected based on highly rated long-term bond indices and yield curves that match the duration of the plan’s benefit obligations.
A one-quarter percentage point change in the assumed long-term rate of return on the Company’s U.S. pension plans as of December 31, 2021 would impact the Company’s 2022 pre-tax income by approximately $1.0 million. A one-quarter percentage point decrease in the discount rate on the Company's U.S. pension plans as of December 31, 2021 would also
decrease the Company’s 2022 pre-tax income by approximately $1.1 million. The Company reviews these and other assumptions at least annually.
The Company recorded $29.8 million of non-cash after-tax increases in stockholders equity (through other non-owner changes to equity) when recording the current year adjustments for changes in the funded status of its pension and postretirement benefit plans as required under accounting for defined benefit and other postretirement plans. This increase in stockholders equity resulted primarily from changes in actuarial assumptions, primarily an increase in discount rate, the amortization of actuarial losses and prior service costs recorded earlier (including curtailment and settlement charges resulting from actions taken during 2021) and favorable variances between expected and actual returns on pension plan assets.
During 2021, the fair value of the Company’s pension plan assets increased by $7.2 million and the projected benefit obligation decreased by $25.6 million. The decrease in the projected benefit obligation included payments of benefits to plan participants of $29.5 million, a $14.5 million (pre-tax) decrease due to actuarial gains resulting primarily from a change in the discount rates used to measure pension liabilities partially offset by annual service and interest costs of $6.5 million and $12.7 million, respectively. Changes to other actuarial assumptions in 2021 did not have a material impact on our stockholders equity or projected benefit obligation. Actual pre-tax gains on total pension plan assets were $33.1 million compared with an expected pre-tax return on pension assets of $27.9 million. Pension expense for 2022 is expected to decrease from $7.8 million in 2021 to $3.8 million.
Income Taxes: As of December 31, 2021, the Company had recognized $22.0 million of deferred tax assets, net of valuation reserves. The realization of these benefits is dependent, in part, on the amount and timing of future taxable income in jurisdictions where the deferred tax assets reside. For those jurisdictions where the expiration dates of tax loss carryforwards or the proposed operating results indicate that realization is unlikely, a valuation allowance is provided. Management currently believes that sufficient taxable income should be earned in the future to realize the deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances recorded.
The valuation of deferred tax assets requires significant judgment. Management’s assessment that the deferred tax assets will be realized represents its estimate of future results; however, there can be no assurance that such expectations will be met. Changes in management’s assessment of achieving sufficient future taxable income could materially increase the Company’s tax expense and could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and the results of operations.
Additionally, the Company is exposed to certain tax contingencies in the ordinary course of business and records those tax liabilities in accordance with the guidance for accounting for uncertain tax positions. For tax positions where the Company believes it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, the Company has recorded the largest amount of tax benefit with a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. For those income tax positions where it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be sustained, no tax benefit is recognized in the financial statements. A change in judgement that results in subsequent recognition, derecognition or change in measurement of a tax position taken in a earlier period will be recognized in the period that the change occurred. We do not anticipate a significant change in our unrecognized tax benefits within the next twelve months. The Company or its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, and various state and foreign jurisdictions. With a few exceptions, tax years remaining open to examination in significant foreign jurisdictions include tax years 2016 and forward and for the U.S. include tax years 2016 and forward. See Note 14 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. A one percentage point increase/decrease in our tax rate would have affected our 2021 earnings by $1.3 million. Changes in judgement related to tax positions taken in previous periods was not material in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
As noted above, a significant portion of revenue is generated by foreign locations. Current guidance requires the recognition of a tax liability under the assumption that foreign earnings will be repatriated in the future, unless the Company can assert that the earnings are indefinitely reinvested. Management’s annual assessment in determining whether the earnings are indefinitely reinvested is based on an analysis of U.S. cash requirements and working capital requirements of the foreign operations, including capital expenditures, combined with any limitations, such as dividend restrictions or local law limits, which would limit possible repatriation. The Company has recognized a deferred tax liability for U.S. taxes of $0.2 million on $3.5 million of undistributed earnings of its international subsidiaries, earned before 2017 and the application of the Transition Tax implemented by the Act. All remaining earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested as defined per the indefinite reversal criterion within the accounting guidance for income taxes.
Stock-Based Compensation: The Company accounts for its stock-based employee compensation plans at fair value on the grant date and recognizes the related cost in its consolidated statement of income in accordance with accounting standards related to share-based payments. The fair values of stock options are estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model based on certain assumptions. The fair values of service and performance based share awards are determined based on the fair market value of the Company’s stock price on the grant date. The fair values of market based performance share awards are
determined using the Monte Carlo valuation method. Compensation expense is based on fair value and is recorded each period based upon a probability assessment of achieving performance goals. See Note 13 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
EBITDA
Earnings before interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for 2021 was $235.1 million compared to $205.1 million in 2020. EBITDA is a measurement not in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The Company defines EBITDA as net income plus interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization which the Company incurs in the normal course of business. The Company does not intend EBITDA to represent cash flows from operations as defined by GAAP, and the reader should not consider it as an alternative to net income, net cash provided by operating activities or any other items calculated in accordance with GAAP, or as an indicator of the Company’s operating performance. The Company’s definition of EBITDA may not be comparable with EBITDA as defined by other companies. The Company believes EBITDA is commonly used by financial analysts and others in the industries in which the Company operates and, thus, provides useful information to investors. Accordingly, the calculation has limitations depending on its use.
Following is a reconciliation of EBITDA to the Company’s net income (in millions):