ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion is an analysis of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and financial condition as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes.
In addition to the historical information contained herein, this Form 10-K includes "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of such term in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements are subject to many risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including its effects on the economic environment, our customers and our operations, as well as any changes to federal, state or local government laws, regulations or orders in connection with the pandemic; the ability of the Company to implement its strategy and expand its lending operations; changes in interest rates and other general economic, business and political conditions, including changes in the financial markets; changes in business plans as circumstances warrant; risks related to mergers and acquisitions; changes in benchmark interest rates used to price loans and deposits, including changes in tax laws, regulations and guidance; and other risks detailed from time to time in filings made by the Company with the SEC. Readers should note that the forward-looking statements included herein are not a guarantee of future events, and that actual events may differ materially from those made in or suggested by the forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements generally can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as "will," "propose," "may," "plan," "seek," "expect," "intend," "estimate," "anticipate," "believe," "continue," or similar terminology. Any forward-looking statements presented herein are made only as of the date of this document, and we do not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements to reflect changes in assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events, or otherwise.
GAAP Reconciliation and Management Explanation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Some of the financial measures included in this report are not measures of financial condition or performance recognized by GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures include tangible common shareholders' equity and tangible book value per common share. Our management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in its analysis of our performance, and we believe that providing this information to financial analysts and investors allows them to evaluate capital adequacy.
The following presents these non-GAAP financial measures along with their most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP:
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company bases those estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under current circumstances, results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Estimates are evaluated on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Accounting policies, as described in detail in the notes to the Company’s consolidated financial statements, are an integral part of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. A thorough understanding of these accounting policies is essential when reviewing the Company’s reported results of operations and financial position. Management believes that the critical accounting policies and estimates listed below require the Company to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain. At December 31, 2021, the most critical of these significant accounting policies in understanding the estimates and assumptions involved in preparing our consolidated financial statements were the policies related to the allowance for loan losses, and fair value measurement of SBA servicing rights and residential loans held for sale and residential derivatives, which are discussed more fully below.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is calculated with the objective of maintaining a reserve sufficient to absorb estimated probable losses. Management's determination of the appropriateness of the allowance is based on periodic evaluations of the loan portfolio, lending-related commitments, and other relevant factors. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires numerous estimates, including the loss content for internal risk ratings, collateral values, and the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows. In addition, management may include qualitative adjustments intended to capture the impact of other uncertainties in the lending environment such as underwriting standards, current economic and political conditions, and other factors affecting the credit quality. Changes to one or more of the estimates used could result in a different estimated allowance for loan losses.
Fair Value Measurements
Mortgage derivatives, loans held for sale, investments, and certain other loans are recorded at fair value on a recurring basis. Additionally, from time to time, other assets and liabilities may be recorded at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, such as impaired loans, other real estate, SBA servicing rights, and certain other assets and liabilities. Fair value is an estimate of the exchange price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer
a liability in an orderly transaction (i.e., not a forced transaction, such as a liquidation or distressed sale) between market participants at the measurement date and is based on the assumptions market participants would use when pricing an asset or liability. Fair value measurement and disclosure guidance establishes a three-level hierarchy for disclosure of assets and liabilities recorded at fair value. Valuations generated from model-based techniques that use at least one significant assumption not observable in the market are considered Level 3 and reflect estimates of assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Changes in these estimates that are likely to occur from period to period, or the use of different estimates that the Company could have reasonably used in the current period, could have a material impact on the Company’s financial position or results of operation.
Further, the Company is an emerging growth company. The JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected to take advantage of this extended transition period. This means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies do so. This may make the Company’s financial statements not comparable with those of public companies which are neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Overview
The following discussion and analysis presents our financial condition and results of operations on a consolidated basis. However, because we conduct all of our material business operations through the Bank, the discussion and analysis relates to activities primarily conducted at the subsidiary level. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements.
As a one-bank holding company, we generate most of our revenue from interest on loans and gain-on-sale income derived from the sale of loans into the secondary market. Our primary source of funding for our loans is deposits. We are dependent on noninterest income, which is derived primarily from residential loan fee income and net gain on the sales of the guaranteed portion of government guaranteed loans. Our largest expenses are interest on those deposits and salaries plus related employee benefits. We measure our performance through our net interest income after provision for loan losses, return on average assets, and return on average common equity, while maintaining appropriate regulatory leverage and risk-based capital ratios.
Recent Developments
Application to Convert to a National Bank. On January 3, 2022, BayFirst Financial Corp.’s operating subsidiary, First Home Bank submitted an application to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to convert to a national banking association under the name BayFirst National Bank.
First Quarter Common Stock Dividend. On January 27, 2022, BayFirst’s Board of Directors declared a first quarter 2022 cash dividend of $0.08 per common share. The dividend was paid on March 15, 2022, to shareholders of record at the close of business on March 1, 2022.
NSPP Amendment. Effective January 25, 2022, BayFirst Financial Corp. amended and restated its Non-Qualified Stock Purchase Plan. All employees and Directors of the Company and its affiliates are eligible to participate in the NSPP. All employees are eligible to purchase shares of Company stock through payroll deduction, subject to a maximum of 10% of their pay, through the NSPP. Directors may purchase shares of common stock with deductions of any amount from their Directors’ board fees.
The Company will purchase shares on Nasdaq as soon as practicable after the end of each calendar quarter. If sufficient shares are not so acquired, the Company will issue shares from its authorized but unissued shares. In addition, each calendar year, the Board of Directors of the Company may authorize a discount up to 10% of the purchase price for shares purchased by employees during that year. Directors are not eligible for the discount.
Management Change. On February 1, 2022, the Company announced strategic promotions of two individuals who have played pivotal roles in the Company’s overall success to date. Tom Zernick has been promoted to President of First Home
Bank. Robin Oliver has been promoted to Chief Operating Officer of BayFirst while remaining the Company’s Chief Financial Officer.
New Board of Director. On February 10, 2022, the Company’s board of directors appointed Sheryl WuDunn as a director of the Company.
Board of Director Resignation. On March 4, 2022, Trifon Houvardas resigned from the Boards of Directors of BayFirst Financial Corp. and First Home Bank.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic. Significant progress has been made to combat the outbreak of COVID-19; however, the global pandemic has adversely impacted a broad range of industries in which the Company’s customers operate and could still impair their ability to fulfill their financial obligations to the Company. While employee availability has had no material impact on operations to date, a resurgence of COVID-19 has the potential to create widespread business continuity issues for the Company.
Our branch locations are currently open and operating during normal business hours. We continue to take additional precautions within our branch locations, including enhanced cleaning procedures, to ensure the safety of our customers and our employees.
In addition, we have taken deliberate actions toward our goal of ensuring that we have the balance sheet strength to serve our clients and communities, including increasing our liquidity and manage our assets and liabilities in order to maintain a strong capital position; however, future economic conditions are subject to significant uncertainty. Uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic include the duration of any COVID-19 outbreaks and any related variants, the availability and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines, the impact to our customers, employees and vendors and the impact to the economy as a whole. COVID-19 had a significant adverse impact on our business, financial position and operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020. While the economy began to recover in 2021, uncertainty still exists, but we believe we are well-positioned to operate effectively through the present economic environment.
Results of Operations
BayFirst’s operating results depend on our net interest income, which is the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, consisting primarily of deposits. Net interest income is determined by the difference between yields earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities (“interest rate spread”) and the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Our interest rate spread is affected by regulatory, economic, and competitive factors which influence interest rates, loan demand, and deposit flows. In addition, our operating results can be affected by the level of nonperforming loans, as well as the level of our noninterest income, and our noninterest expenses, such as salaries and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment costs, and income taxes.
We are dependent on noninterest income, which is derived primarily from residential loan fee income and net gain on the sales of the guaranteed portion of government guaranteed loans. We operate residential mortgage loan production offices in a number of states. We sell a substantial portion of the mortgage loans that we originate on the secondary market which generates gains on the sale of these loans. Additionally, while we retained some of our government guaranteed loans on our balance sheet, we sell both the guaranteed balance of our government guaranteed loans, as well as a percentage of the unguaranteed portions of such loans. This activity generates gains on sales on the guaranteed portions of the loans.
Net Income
We had net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $24.62 million, or $5.74 per diluted common share, compared to net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $12.70 million or $3.01 per diluted common share. The increase of $11.92 million in net income was due to a $13.80 million gain from the sale of PPP loans in the second quarter of 2021, an increase in residential loan fee income, and a decrease in provision for loan loss expense, partially offset by an increase in noninterest expenses, particularly salary and commission expenses.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income was $40.24 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $6.79 million or 20.30% compared to net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $33.45 million. This increase was primarily due to an increase in interest income on loans which included an increase of $864 thousand in PPP origination fees recognized and a decrease in interest expense on deposits and PPPLF liquidity facility. The net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 3.23% compared to 2.88% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due to the same factors noted above with respect to the increase in net interest income.
Average Balance Sheet and Analysis of Net Interest Income
The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated, information regarding: (i) the total dollar amount of interest and dividend income of BayFirst from interest-earning assets and the resultant average yields; (ii) the total dollar amount of interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities and the resultant average cost; (iii) net interest income; (iv) interest rate spread; (v) net interest margin; and (vi) ratio of average interest-earning assets to average interest-bearing liabilities. Loans in nonaccrual status, for the purposes of the following computations, are included in the average loan balances. FRB, FHLB, and FNBB restricted equity holdings are included in other interest-earning assets. The Company did not have a significant amount of tax-exempt assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The tables below present the effects of volume and rate changes on interest income and expense for the periods indicated. Changes in volume are changes in the average balance multiplied by the previous period’s average rate. Changes in rate are changes in the average rate multiplied by the average balance from the previous period. The net changes attributable to the combined impact of both rate and volume have been allocated proportionately to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate. Loans in nonaccrual status, for the purposes of the following computations, are included in the average loan balances. FRB, FHLB, and FNBB restricted equity holdings are included in other interest-earning assets. The Company did not have a significant amount of tax-exempt assets.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses is charged to operations to increase the total allowance to a level deemed appropriate by management and is based upon the volume and type of lending we conduct, industry standards, the amount of nonperforming loans, general economic conditions, particularly as they relate to our market area, and other factors that may affect our ability to collect on the loans in our portfolio.
We recorded a negative provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $3.50 million compared to a $16.90 million provision for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $20.40 million in the provision for loan losses was primarily due to the changes in the economic factors in our ALLL model. During 2020 and the first quarter of 2021, we increased the qualitative factors in the allowance for loan losses calculation for the decline in economic indicators caused by the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in significant provision expense in those periods. As asset quality remained stable during the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2021 and as many of the Company’s SBA loans were bolstered by additional government support, additional provision for loan losses was not deemed necessary. During the year ended December 31, 2021, net loan charge-offs totaled $4.21 million compared to $6.48 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our ALLL was $13.45 million at December 31, 2021 and $21.16 million at December 31, 2020.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Noninterest income was $117.58 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $19.88 million or 20.35% from $97.70 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the $13.80 million gain from the sale of PPP loans in the second quarter of 2021 and an increase in residential loan fee income of $2.87 million primarily due to $528.84 million more loans sold during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Noninterest expense was $128.84 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $30.37 million or 30.85% from $98.47 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in salaries, benefits and commissions, marketing and business development expense and data processing expense. The majority of the increase in these expenses was related to building the Company’s infrastructure in various functions to support strategic initiatives and planned growth strategies.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense was $7.86 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $4.79 million over income tax expense of $3.08 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the increase in pre-tax earnings and a one-time tax benefit of $969 thousand in the first quarter of 2020 as a result of the CARES Act signed into law in March of 2020. The effective income tax rate was 24.20% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 19.49% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Refer to Note 12 - Income Taxes in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for a reconciliation between expected and actual income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financial Condition
Investment Securities
The amortized costs, gross unrealized gains and losses, and estimated fair values of investment securities available for sale at December 31, 2021 are summarized as follows:
The Company had one security held to maturity at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 which matures in August 2039. The security is a debt security to a government-sponsored enterprise and its amortized cost was $2 thousand and $41 thousand, the unrecognized loss was $0 and $2 thousand, and the fair value was $2 thousand and $39 thousand at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
The investment securities available for sale were purchased during the year ended December 31, 2021 and, therefore, had been in an unrealized loss position for less than 12 months at December 31, 2021. The unrealized loss has not been recognized into income because the issuers continue to make timely principal and interest payments and are of high credit quality. Additionally, management does not intend to sell, and it is likely that management will not be required to sell the security prior to its anticipated recovery. The decline in fair value is largely due to changes in interest rates and other market conditions. Therefore, the Company does not consider these investment securities to be other-than-temporarily impaired at December 31, 2021.
No securities were pledged as of December 31, 2021 and there were no sales of securities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
All securities have contractual remaining maturities of more than 10 years. Actual timing may differ from contractual maturities if issuers have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties.The weighted average market yield of all securities was 1.21%.
Loan Portfolio Composition
Through the efforts of our management and loan officers, we have been able to achieve loan growth by taking advantage of the economic recovery and consolidation in our markets. Senior management and loan officers have continued to develop new sources of loan referrals, particularly among centers of local influence and real estate professionals, and have also enjoyed repeat business from loyal customers in the markets the Bank serves. We have no concentration of credit in any industry that represents 10% or more of our loan portfolio. The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio, including LHFS as of the dates indicated.
In general, construction loans are originated as construction-to-permanent loans. Third party take-out financing, where applicable, is typically in the form of permanent first mortgage conforming loans. The decrease in the PPP balances was due to sale during the second quarter of 2021 of $326.32 million and forgiveness of loans by the SBA.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we originated approximately $196.43 million in loans through conventional lending channels, $169.47 million in loans through CreditBench (our SBA lending platform), exclusive of PPP loans, $329.32 million of PPP loans, and $2.22 billion through the Residential Mortgage Lending Division. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we originated approximately $79.50 million in loans through conventional lending channels, $101.08 million through CreditBench, exclusive of PPP loans, $876.60 million of PPP loans, and $1.92 billion through the Residential Mortgage Lending Division. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company originated $329.32 million and sold $326.32 million in PPP loans. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company originated $876.60 million and purchased $22.40 million in PPP loans.
Loan Maturity/Rate Sensitivity
The following table shows the contractual maturities of our loans at December 31, 2021. Loan balances in this table include loans held for investment at fair value, loans held for investment at amortized cost, discount on retained balances of loans sold, discount on PPP loans purchased, and deferred loan costs.
The following table shows our loans with contractual maturities of greater than one year that have fixed or adjustable interest rates at December 31, 2021.
Credit Risk
The Bank’s primary business is making commercial, consumer, and real estate loans. This activity inevitably has risks for potential loan losses, the magnitude of which depends on a variety of economic factors affecting borrowers, which are beyond our control. We have developed policies and procedures for evaluating the overall quality of our credit portfolio and the timely identification of potential problem loans. Management’s judgment as to the adequacy of the allowance is based upon a number of assumptions about the economic environment that it believes impacts credit quality as of the balance sheet date that it believes to be reasonable, but which may or may not prove accurate. Thus, there can be no assurance that charge-offs in future periods will not exceed the ALLL, or that additional increases in the ALLL will not be required.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The Bank must maintain an adequate ALLL based on a comprehensive methodology that assesses the probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio. We maintain an ALLL based on a number of quantitative and qualitative factors, including levels and trends of past due and nonaccrual loans, asset classifications, loan grades, change in volume and mix of loans, collateral value, historical loss experience, size and complexity of individual credits and economic conditions. Provisions for loan losses are provided on both a specific and general basis. Specific allowances are provided for impaired credits for which the expected/anticipated loss is measurable. General valuation allowances are determined by a portfolio segmentation based on collateral type with a further evaluation of various quantitative and qualitative factors noted above.
We periodically review the assumptions and formulate methodologies by which additions are made to the specific and general valuation allowances for loan losses in an effort to refine such allowances in light of the current status of the factors described above. The methodology is presented to and approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors. Future additional provisions to the loan loss reserve may be made as appropriate as new loans are originated or as existing loans may deteriorate.
All adversely classified loans are evaluated for impairment. If a loan is deemed impaired, it is evaluated for potential loss exposure. The evaluation occurs at the time the loan is classified and on a regular basis thereafter (at least quarterly). This evaluation is documented in a status report relating to a specific loan or relationship. Specific allocation of reserves on impaired loans considers the value of the collateral, the financial condition of the borrower, and industry and current economic trends. We review the collateral value, cash flow, and tertiary support on each impaired credit. Any deficiency outlined by a real estate collateral evaluation analysis, or cash flow shortfall, is accounted for through a specific allocation for the loan.
For performing loans which are evaluated collectively, we perform a portfolio segmentation based on loan type. The government guaranteed loan balances are included in the collectively evaluated for portfolio balances. The loss factors for each segment are calculated using actual loan loss history for each segment of loans over the most recent one to three years, depending on the segment and vintage year of the loans in the segment of SBA loans. The Bank’s actual loss experience is supplemented with other economic factors based on the risks present for each portfolio segment.
These economic factors include consideration of the following: levels of, and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans; levels of, and trends in charge-offs and recoveries; migration of loans to the classification of special mention, substandard, or doubtful; trends in volume and terms of loans; effects of any changes in risk selection and underwriting standards; other changes in lending policies, procedures, and practices; experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; national and local economic trends and conditions; industry conditions; and effects of changes in credit concentration.
While management believes our ALLL is adequate as of December 31, 2021, future adjustments to our allowance may be necessary if economic conditions differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the determination.
Nonperforming Assets. At December 31, 2021, we had $3.97 million in nonperforming assets, excluding government guaranteed loan balances, and our ALLL represented 2.30% of total loans held for investment. At December 31, 2020, we had $3.33 million in nonperforming assets, excluding government guaranteed loan balances, and our ALLL represented 1.72% of total loans held for investment. Total loans at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, include government guaranteed loans, as well as PPP loans which have no reserves allocated to them. ALLL as a percentage of loans, not including loans held for sale and government guaranteed loan balances, was 4.04% at December 31, 2021, compared to 7.24% at December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth certain information on nonaccrual loans, 90 day past due accruing loans, and foreclosed assets, the ratio of such loans and foreclosed assets to total assets as of the dates indicated, and certain other related information.
The following table sets forth information with respect to activity in the ALLL for the periods shown:
The following table details net charge-offs to average loans outstanding by loan category for the years ended December 31:
We recorded a negative provision for loan losses of $3.50 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision of $16.90 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2020 and the first quarter of 2021, we increased the qualitative factors in the allowance for loan losses calculation for the decline in economic indicators caused by the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in significant provision expense in those periods. As asset quality remained stable during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2021 and as many of the Company’s SBA loans were bolstered by additional
government support, additional provision for loan losses was not deemed necessary. Since 2016, the Company’s loan losses have been incurred primarily in its SBA unguaranteed loan portfolio, particularly loans originated under the SBA 7(a) Small Loan Program. The Small Loan Program represents loans of $350,000 or less and such loans carry an SBA guarantee of 75% to 85% of the loan, depending on the original principal balance. The default rate on loans originated in the SBA 7(a) Small Loan Program is significantly higher than the Bank’s other SBA 7(a) loans, conventional commercial loans, or residential mortgage loans.
Nonperforming assets to total assets, excluding government guaranteed loan balances, were 0.43%, as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 0.22% as of December 31, 2020. Since the majority of the Company’s loan portfolio consisted of SBA loans, most of which received from the SBA principal and interest payments under Section 1112 of the CARES Act during 2020 and 2021, asset quality trends may appear more favorable than they otherwise would without the SBA’s support under the CARES Act.
As of December 31, 2021, a total of 24 loans with principal balances of $1.37 million were under payment deferrals. Of those, 23 were government guaranteed loans with $1.11 million in outstanding unguaranteed balances. As expected, the level of SBA loans on deferral increased with the expiration of the Section 1112 payment support afforded under the CARES Act at which point certain borrowers requested payment deferrals. With the Economic Aid Act signed into law on December 27, 2020, Section 1112 CARES Act payments were extended, with some stipulations, which assisted the majority of our SBA borrowers for three months and, depending on the type of business, up to eight months of additional principal and interest payments with a cap of $9,000 per month per borrower, beginning in February 2021. Although the Company’s asset quality trends indicate minimal stress on the portfolio, management incorporated a qualitative measure in the allowance for loan losses calculation to account for losses inherent in our portfolio but have not surfaced in our credit quality indicators.
SBA and Other Government Guaranteed Loans
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, information regarding our SBA and other government guaranteed lending activity, excluding PPP loans.
We make government guaranteed loans throughout the United States. The following table sets forth, at the dates indicated, information regarding the geographic disbursement of our SBA loan portfolio. The “All Other” category includes states with less than 5% in any period presented.
As part of the Bank’s strategic decision to be an active local and national PPP lender, the Bank developed and used local marketing efforts and a nationwide, online application platform. As a result of these efforts, the Bank originated $329.32 million in PPP loans during the year ended December 31, 2021 and $876.96 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Bank used the Federal Reserve’s PPPLF to match fund the vast majority of those amounts. The following table reflects the Bank’s PPP lending activity for the periods indicated.
Residential Mortgage Loans
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, information regarding our residential mortgage lending activity.
Deposits
General. In addition to deposits, sources of funds available for lending and for other purposes include loan repayments and proceeds from the sales of loans. Loan repayments are a relatively stable source of funds, while deposit inflows and outflows are influenced significantly by general interest rates and market conditions. Borrowings, as well as available lines of credit, may be used on a short-term basis to compensate for reductions in other sources, such as deposits at less than projected levels.
Deposits. Deposits are attracted principally from within our primary service area of Pinellas, Hillsborough, Manatee, Pasco, and Sarasota Counties, Florida. We offer a wide selection of deposit instruments including demand deposit accounts, NOW
accounts, money-market accounts, regular savings accounts, certificate of deposit accounts, and retirement savings plans (such as IRA accounts).
Certificate of deposit rates are set to encourage longer maturities as cost and market conditions will allow. Deposit account terms vary, with the primary differences being the minimum balance required, the time period the funds must remain on deposit and the interest rate. We emphasize commercial banking relationships in an effort to increase demand deposits as a percentage of total deposits. Deposit interest rates are set by management at least monthly or more often if conditions require it, based on a review of loan demand, deposit flows for the previous period and a survey of rates among competitors and other financial institutions in Florida.
The amounts of each of the following categories of deposits, at the dates indicated, are as follows:
At December 31, 2021, we held approximately $273.18 million of deposits that exceeded the FDIC insurance limit.
The following table provides information on the maturity distribution of the time deposits exceeding the FDIC insurance limit of $250,000 as of December 31, 2021.
Other Borrowings
In June 2021, the Company issued $6.00 million of Subordinated Debentures (the “Debentures”) that mature June 30, 2031 and are redeemable after five years. The Debentures carry interest at a fixed rate of 4.50% per annum for the initial five years of their term and carry interest at a floating rate for the final five years of their term. Under the terms of the Debentures, the floating rates are based on a SOFR benchmark plus 3.78% per annum. The Debentures were issued to redeem a $6.00 million Subordinated Debenture which was issued in December 2018 and which carried interest at a fixed rate of 6.875% per annum.
The balance of Subordinated Debentures outstanding at the Company, net of offering costs, amounted to $5.99 million and $5.95 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
In March 2020, the Company renegotiated the terms of its outstanding senior debt and combined its line of credit and term note into one amortizing note with quarterly principal and interest payments with interest at prime (3.25% at December 31, 2021). The new note matures on March 10, 2029 and the balance of the note was $3.30 million and $3.75 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The note is secured by 100% of the stock of the Bank and requires the Company to comply with certain loan covenants during the term of the note.
In April 2020, the Company entered into the PPPLF. The advances accrued interest at 0.35% per annum and matured at various dates equal to the maturity date of the PPP loan collateral pledged to secure the advance which ranged from April 15, 2022 to August 27, 2025 as of December 31, 2021. On the maturity date of each advance, the Company shall repay the advance plus accrued interest. The balances outstanding on this facility were $69.65 million and $881.26 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. In the first quarter of 2022, the Company repaid the remaining balance of the advance.
Capital Resources
Shareholders' equity is influenced primarily by earnings, dividends, the Company's sales and repurchases of its common and preferred stock and changes in accumulated other comprehensive income caused primarily by fluctuations in unrealized gains or losses, net of taxes, on available for sale investment securities.
Shareholders' equity increased $25.22 million to $96.29 million at December 31, 2021 as compared to $71.07 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in shareholders' equity was primarily impacted by $24.62 million of net income generated during the year ended December 31, 2021 and the issuance of common stock. The common stock was issued under the non-qualified stock purchase plan of $662 thousand, the dividend reinvestment plan of $389 thousand, and employee stock ownership plan of $366 thousand. Additionally, the bank issued preferred stock with net proceeds of $727 thousand and common stock with net proceeds of $856 thousand. These increases were partially offset by decreases of $420 thousand of accumulated other comprehensive income due to increases in net unrealized losses on available-for-sale securities, $1.01 million of dividends declared on our preferred stock, and $1.06 million of dividends declared on our common stock during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The following table summarizes the changes in our shareholders' equity for the periods indicated below:
We strive to maintain an adequate capital base to support our activities in a safe and sound manner while at the same time attempting to maximize shareholder value. We assess capital adequacy against the risk inherent in our balance sheet, recognizing that unexpected loss is the common denominator of risk and that common equity has the greatest capacity to absorb unexpected loss.
The Bank is subject to regulatory capital requirements imposed by various regulatory banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and discretionary actions by banking regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on BayFirst’s and the Bank’s financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, we must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of our assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. Our capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors.
In 2020, the Federal banking regulatory agencies adopted a rule to simplify the methodology for measuring capital adequacy for smaller, uncomplicated banks. This CBLR is calculated as the ratio of tangible equity capital divided by
average total consolidated assets. CBLR tangible equity is defined as total equity capital, prior to including minority interests, and excluding accumulated other comprehensive income, deferred tax assets arising from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, goodwill, and other intangible assets (other than mortgage servicing assets). Under the proposal, a qualifying organization may elect to use the CBLR framework if its CBLR is greater than 9%. The Bank has elected not to use the CBLR framework.
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Bank's capital ratios were in excess of the requirement to be "well capitalized" under the regulatory guidelines.
As of the dates indicated, the Bank met all capital adequacy requirements to which it is subject. The Bank’s actual capital amounts and percentages are as shown in the table below:
(1) To be considered “adequately capitalized” under the FDIC’s Prompt Corrective Action regulations.
(2) To be considered “well capitalized” under the FDIC’s Prompt Corrective Action regulations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Bank is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business. These financial instruments primarily include unfunded loan commitments, undisbursed loans in process, unfunded lines of credit, and standby letters of credit. The Bank uses these financial instruments to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit, interest rate, and liquidity risk. These do not present unusual risks and management does not anticipate any accounting losses that would have a material effect on the Bank.
A summary of the amounts of the Bank’s financial instruments, with off-balance sheet risk as of the dates indicated, is as follows:
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since some of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. Management evaluates each customer’s credit worthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained if deemed necessary by the Bank upon extension of credit is based on management’s credit evaluation of the counterparty.
Standby letters-of-credit are conditional lending commitments that we issue to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party and to support private borrowing arrangements. Essentially, letters of credit issued have expiration dates
within one year of the issue date. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending credit. The Bank may hold collateral supporting those commitments. Newly issued or modified guarantees that are not derivative contracts have been recorded on the Bank’s balance sheet at their fair value at inception.
In general, loan commitments and letters of credit are made on the same terms, including with respect to collateral, as outstanding loans. Each customer’s creditworthiness and the collateral required are evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
Contractual Obligations
In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Total contractual obligations at December 31, 2021 were $134.97 million, a decrease of $829.61 million from $964.59 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $811.61 million in PPP Liquidity Facility as a result of PPP loan forgiveness.
The following tables present our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Liquidity
Liquidity management is the process by which we manage the flow of funds necessary to meet our financial commitments on a timely basis and at a reasonable cost and to take advantage of earnings enhancement opportunities. These financial commitments include withdrawals by depositors, credit commitments to borrowers, expenses of our operations, and capital expenditures. The Bank generally maintains a liquidity ratio of liquid assets to total assets, excluding PPP loans pledged to the PPPLF, of at least 7.0%. Liquid assets include cash and due from banks, federal funds sold, interest-bearing deposits with banks and unencumbered investment securities available-for-sale. Our on-balance sheet liquidity ratio at December 31, 2021 was 16.76%, as compared to 8.37% at December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Bank purchased investment securities, all of which were classified as investment securities available for sale. The fair value of all of our investment securities available for sale totaled $30.89 million at December 31, 2021.
During each of the four quarters of 2021, the Bank paid a dividend of $250 thousand to BayFirst. Prior to that, the Bank retained its earnings to support its growth. Therefore, BayFirst’s liquidity had historically been dependent soley on funds received from the issuance and sale of debt and equity securities. BayFirst’s liquidity needs are to make interest payments on its debt obligations, dividends on shares of its Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Convertible Preferred Stock, and common stock, and payment of certain operating expenses. As of December 31, 2021, BayFirst held $2.55 million in cash and cash equivalents.
A description of BayFirst’s and the Bank’s debt obligations is set forth below under the heading “Other Borrowings.”