ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward Looking Statement Notice
Certain statements made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are “forward-looking statements” (within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995) regarding the plans and objectives of management for future operations. Such statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results, performance or achievements of Bantec, Inc. and Subsidiaries (“we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company”) to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements included herein are based on current expectations that involve numerous risks and uncertainties. The Company’s plans and objectives are based, in part, on assumptions involving the continued expansion of business. Assumptions relating to the foregoing involve judgments with respect to, among other things, future economic, competitive and market conditions and future business decisions, all of which are difficult or impossible to predict accurately and many of which are beyond the control of the Company. Although the Company believes its assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate and, therefore, there can be no assurance the forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report will prove to be accurate. In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements included herein, the inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation by the Company or any other person that the objectives and plans of the Company will be achieved.
Overview
Bantec, Inc. is a product and service company targeting the U.S. Government, state governments, municipalities, hospitals, universities, manufacturers and other building owners. Bantec also provides product procurement, distribution, and logistics services through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Howco Distributing Co., (“Howco”) (collectively, the “Company”) to the United States Department of Defense and Defense Logistics Agency. The Company established Bantec Sanitizing in fiscal 2021, which offers sanitizing products and equipment through its new store bantec.store. Bantec Construction, LLC was established to perform general contracting, currently the plan for the company is to provide general contracting for projects emanating from Bantec Sanitizing for floor, wall and ceiling installation of materials that are easily sanitized. The Company has operations based in Little Falls, New Jersey and Vancouver, Washington. The Company continues to seek strategic acquisitions and partnerships that offer us an opportunity to grow sales and profit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2021, we had $1,205,058 in current assets, including $985,953 in cash, compared to $593,405 in current assets, including $164,014 in cash, at September 30, 2020. Current liabilities at September 30, 2021 totaled $15,914,650 compared to $16,807,686 at September 30, 2020. The increase in current assets from September 30, 2020 to September 30, 2021 is primarily due to the sales of common stock for cash thereby increasing cash by $821,939, slightly offset by decreases in accounts receivable of $221,003. The decrease in current liabilities from September 30, 2020 to September 30, 2021 is primarily due to the decrease in: accounts payable of approximately $166,000, convertible notes payable and related premiums of approximately $648,000, slightly offset by increases in accrued expenses of approximately $721,000. While we have revenues as of this date, no significant construction, environmental or drone revenues are anticipated until we are implementing our full strategic plan of acquisitions and organic growth. We must raise cash to implement our strategy to grow and expand per our business plan. We anticipate over the next 12 months the cost of being a reporting public company will be approximately $250,000.
We are currently issuing shares under the S-1 offering but expect to raise additional proceeds with debt securities, and/or more loans, however if sufficient funding is not available, we would be required to cease business operations. As a result, investors would lose all of their investment. Under the terms of our credit agreement with TCA, all potential new investments must first be reviewed and approved by TCA, which may constrain our options for new fundraising. However, we have been in contact with the receiver for the TCA management companies and funds and do not expect any such objections over investment opportunities.
We anticipate our short-term liquidity needs to be approximately $7,500,000 which will be used to satisfy certain of our existing current liabilities and we expect gross profits of approximately $1,000,000. To meet these needs, we intend to complete our equity financing and refinance or restructure certain existing liabilities. Once this is completed, and we implement our sales and marketing plan to sell UAV products, we anticipate minimal long-term liquidity needs which we expect to meet through equity financing or short-term borrowings.
Additionally, we will have to meet all the financial disclosure and reporting requirements associated with being a publicly reporting company. Our management will have to spend additional time on policies and procedures to make sure it is compliant with various regulatory requirements, especially that of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. This additional corporate governance time required of management could limit the amount of time management has to implement the business plan and may impede the speed of its operations.
The following is a summary of the Company’s cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities:
2021, Net cash used in operating activities of $1,576,648, is largely the result of net losses of $1,882,071, net gain on debt extingushment, partially offset by non-cash charges for premiums on stock settled debt of $407,186 and increases in account payable and accrued expenses of $703,927.
2021, Cash used in investing of $44,650 is due to purchase of patents and related legal fees to register and protect the patent.
2021, Cash provided by financing activities is largely the result of stock sales for cash of $3,083,930 and cash received from issuance of convertible notes totaling $487,500, somewhat offset by repayments of various debts including fee notes and other financing arrangements at Howco having a net repayment of approximately $128,000. Refer also to the Consolidated Statements of Changes in Cash Flows included in the financial statement section of this report.
Results of Operations
Year Ended September 30, 2021 and 2020
We generated sales of $2,422,996 and $4,455,186 for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, we reported cost of goods sold of $1,553,516 and $3,351,438, respectively. The decrease in sales and cost of goods sold for the 2021 period is primarily due to liquidity shortfalls impacting inventory availability.
For the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, we reported selling, general, and administrative expenses of $2,834,856 as compared to $2,830,140, an increase of approximately $4,700 or 0.2%. For the year ended September 30, 2021, selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional and consulting fees of approximately $905,000, payroll costs of approximately $1,549,000, and other expenses of approximately $380,000, including rent of approximately $67,000, and travel related costs of approximately $33,000. For the year ended September 30, 2020, selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional and consulting fees of approximately $757,000, payroll costs of approximately $1,793,000, other expenses of approximately $179,000, rent of approximately $68,000, and travel related costs of approximately $33,000. For the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, payroll costs and professional consulting fees included stock-based compensation of approximately $251,000 and $127,000, respectively. The slight increase in selling, general, and administrative costs for the 2021 periods is primarily due to the increases in professional fees and other SGA, partially offset by compensation costs.
For the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, depreciation expense amounted to approximately $7,000 and $11,000, respectively, and is related to the depreciation for demonstration drones.
For the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, interest and financing costs amounted to approximately $1,440,000 and $1,598,000, respectively. The decrease in interest and financing costs is due primarily to the settlement of debt.
During the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 the Company incurred net gains on debt extinguishment of approximately $1,537,000 and net losses on debt extinguishment of approximately $993,000, respectively.
As a result, we reported a net loss of $1,882,071, or $0.001 per common share, and $4,328,318, or $0.05 per common share, for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the recoverability of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.
For the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company has incurred a net loss of $1,882,071 and used cash in operations of $1,576,648. The working capital deficit, stockholders’ deficit and accumulated deficit was $14,709,592, $14,796,078 and $32,956,840, respectively, at September 30, 2021. On September 6, 2019 the Company received a default notice on its payment obligations under the senior secured credit facility agreement, defaulted on its Note Payable - Seller in September 2017, and has since defaulted on other notes. As of September 30, 2021, the Company has received demands for payment of past due amounts from several consultants and service providers. The Company is in negotiation with the receiver appointed by the court related to the senior secured creditor’s claim and has proposed a preliminary settlement. It is management’s opinion that these matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of twelve months from the issuance date of this report. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon management’s ability to further implement its business plan and raise additional capital as needed from the sales of stock or debt. The Company continues to implement cost-cutting measures and restructuring or setting up payment plans with vendors and service providers and is raising equity financing through a private placement, and is working to restructure and repay its obligations. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be required should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly evaluate the accounting policies and estimates that we use to prepare our consolidated financial statements. In general, management’s estimates are based on historical experience, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the facts and circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management.
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include the allowance for bad debt on accounts receivable, reserves on inventory, valuation of intangible assets for impairment analysis, valuation of the lease liability and related right-of-use asset, valuation of stock-based compensation, the valuation of derivative liabilities and the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets.
We have identified the accounting policies below as critical to our business operations.
Accounts Receivable
Trade receivables are recorded at net realizable value consisting of the carrying amount less the allowance for doubtful accounts, as needed. Factors used to establish an allowance include the credit quality of the customer and whether the balance is significant. The Company may also use the direct write-off method to account for uncollectible accounts that are not received. Using the direct write-off method, trade receivable balances are written off to bad debt expense when an account balance is deemed to be uncollectible.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company acquired a patent for a new product during the year ended September 30, 2021. The Company capitalized acquisition and related legal fees related to the patent totaling $44,650. The capitalized amount will be amortized over the next three years. Impairment will be tested annually or as indicators of impairment are available.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Impairment is determined by comparing the carrying value of the long-lived assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from use of the assets and their ultimate disposition. In instances where impairment is determined to exist, the Company writes down the asset to its fair value based on the present value of estimated future cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
Effective October 1, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue From Contracts With Customers, which is effective for public business entities with annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017. This new revenue recognition standard (new guidance) has a five-step process: a) Determine whether a contract exists; b) Identify the performance obligations; c) Determine the transaction price; d) Allocate the transaction price; and e) Recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied. The Company’s initial application of ASC 606 did not have a material impact on its financial statements and disclosures and there was no cumulative effect of the adoption of ASC 606.
The Company sells a variety of products to government entities. The purchase orders received specifies each item and its manufacturer; the Company only needs to fulfill the performance obligation by shipping the specified items. No other performance obligations exist under the terms of the contracts. The Company recognizes revenue for the agreed upon sales price when the product is shipped to the customer, which satisfies the performance obligation.
During the year-ended September 30, 2021, the Company through its subsidiary Howco entered into contracts to package products for a third-party company servicing the same government customer base. The contracts were on job lot basis as shipped to Howco for packaging. The customer was billed upon completion each job lot at which time revenue was recognized.
The Company sells drones and related products manufactured by third parties to various parties. The Company also offers technical services related to drone utilization and performs other services. The Company began offering insulation jackets for commercial and government facilities to insulate and monitor heating and cooling equipment. Contracts for drone related products and services and insulating jacket related sales will be evaluated using the five-step process outline above. There have been no material sales for drone products or other services for which full compliance with performance obligations has not been met. Sales of insulation jackets have not yet commenced. Upon significant sales for drone products and services and insulation jackets, the Company will disaggregate sales by these lines of business and within the lines of business to the extent that the product or service has different revenue recognition characteristics.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of ASC 718 - “Compensation -Stock Compensation”, which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee or director is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively, the vesting period). The ASC also requires measurement of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award. The Company utilizes the Black-Sholes option pricing model and uses the simplified method to determine expected term because of lack of sufficient exercise history. Additionally, effective October 1, 2016, the Company adopted the Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-09 (“ASU 2016-09”), Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting. Among other changes, ASU 2016-09 permits the election of an accounting policy for forfeitures of share-based payment awards, either to recognize forfeitures as they occur or estimate forfeitures over the vesting period of the award. The Company has elected to recognize forfeitures as they occur and the cumulative impact of this change did not have any effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
As of October 1, 2018, the Company has early adopted ASU 2018-7 Compensation-Stock Compensation which conforms the accounting for non-employees to the accounting treatment for employees. The new standard replaces using a fair value as of each reporting date with use of the calculated fair value as of the grant date. The implementation of the standard provides for the use of the fair market value as of the adoption date, rather than using the value as of the original grant date. Therefore, the values calculated and reported at September 30, 2018 become a proxy for the grant date value. The Company utilizes the Black-Sholes option pricing model and uses the simplified method to determine expected term because of lack of sufficient exercise history. There was no cumulative effect on the adoption date.
Derivative Liabilities
The Company has certain financial instruments that are derivatives or contain embedded derivatives. The Company evaluates all its financial instruments to determine if those contracts or any potential embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with ASC 810-10-05-4 and 815-40. This accounting treatment requires that the carrying amount of any derivatives be recorded at fair value at issuance and marked-to-market at each balance sheet date. In the event that the fair value is recorded as a liability, as is the case with the Company, the change in the fair value during the period is recorded as either other income or expense. Upon conversion, exercise or repayment, the respective derivative liability is marked to fair value at the conversion, repayment or exercise date and then the related fair value amount is reclassified to other income or expense as part of gain or loss on extinguishment.
Convertible Notes with Fixed Rate Conversion Options
The Company may enter into convertible notes, some of which contain, predominantly, fixed rate conversion features, whereby the outstanding principal and accrued interest may be converted by the holder, into common shares at a fixed discount to the market price of the common stock at the time of conversion. This results in a fair value of the convertible note being equal to a fixed monetary amount. The Company records the convertible note liability at its fixed monetary amount by measuring and recording a premium, as applicable, on the Note date with a charge to interest expense in accordance with ASC 480 - “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”.
Net Loss Per Share
Basic loss per share is calculated by dividing the loss attributable to stockholders by the weighted-average number of shares outstanding for the period. Diluted loss per share reflects the potential dilution that could occur if securities or other contracts to issue common stock were exercised or converted into common stock or resulted in the issuance of common stock that shared in the earnings (loss) of the Company. Diluted loss per share is computed by dividing the loss available to stockholders by the weighted average number of shares outstanding for the period and dilutive potential shares outstanding unless such dilutive potential shares would result in anti-dilution.
Lease Accounting
In February 2016, the FASB issued a new accounting standard on leases. The new standard, among other changes, will require lessees to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability on the balance sheet for all leases. The lease liability will be measured at the present value of the lease payments over the lease term. The right-of-use asset will be measured at the lease liability amount, adjusted for lease prepayments, lease incentives received and the lessee’s initial direct costs (e.g. commissions). The new standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim reporting periods within those annual reporting periods. The adoption will require a modified retrospective approach for leases that exist or are entered into after the beginning of the earliest period presented.