Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the sections titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. The last day of our fiscal year is January 31. Our fiscal quarters end on April 30, July 31, October 31, and January 31. Our fiscal years ended January 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 are referred to herein as fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 is presented below. A discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 can be found in the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our final prospectus filed with the SEC on July 22, 2021 pursuant to Rule 424(b), which is hereby incorporated by reference herein.
Overview
Couchbase provides a leading modern database for enterprise applications. Our mission is to empower enterprises to build, manage and operate modern mission-critical applications. Enterprises rely on Couchbase to power the core applications their businesses depend on, with the highest performance, reliability, scalability and agility requirements and for which there is no tolerance for disruption or downtime. Any compromise of these requirements could cause these applications to fail-stopping or delaying package delivery for shipping companies, interrupting reservations for travel companies or causing product shortages in stores for retailers.
Our database is versatile and works in multiple configurations, from cloud to multi- or hybrid-cloud to on-premise environments to the edge in truly distributed environments with flexibility in and between those environments. We have architected our database to fuse the trusted strengths of relational databases with the flexibility, performance, and scale of NoSQL in the cloud. Our cloud-native platform provides a powerful modern database that serves the needs of both enterprise architects and application developers. Combined with our performance at scale, we believe this power enables customers to run their most important applications with the effectiveness they require, with the efficiency they desire and in the modern infrastructure environments they demand.
With nearly every aspect of our lives being transformed by digital innovation, enterprises are charged with building applications that enable delightful and meaningful customer experiences. Enterprises are increasingly reliant on applications, which in turn rely on databases to store, retrieve and operationalize data into action. Today, applications are operating at a scale, speed and dynamism unheard of just a decade ago. There is an increasing diversity of application types, modalities and delivery and consumption models, and the volume, velocity and variety of data on which they rely is growing at an exponential rate. Consequently, the demand on enterprises and their databases is growing exponentially.
While legacy database technologies were built to the highest performance and reliability requirements of their generation, they are approaching the limits for which they were designed. The underlying architecture of these technologies has not changed significantly, while the requirements of the applications they need to support are changing dramatically. Legacy database technologies are buckling under the pressure of digital transformation, as they were not built to update and respond in microseconds, enable rich, customized user experiences and perform without latency.
We designed Couchbase to give enterprises a database for the modern cloud world. Our platform combines the best capabilities of a relational database, like SQL transactions and ACID guarantees, with the flexibility and scalability of a NoSQL database. This allows enterprises to confidently accelerate strategic initiatives such as more quickly moving business-critical applications into the cloud, improving application flexibility and increasing developer agility. For our customers, we facilitate a seamless transition from legacy relational databases to our modern database resulting in better application scalability, user experience and security at the pace that works for them. We deliver this modern database as
both a customer-managed product and as a fully-managed DBaaS that is managed by Couchbase. Our DBaaS, called Couchbase Capella, supports a broad set of use cases, reducing a customer’s need to buy, deploy and manage additional databases or supporting technologies.
We sell our platform through our direct sales force and our growing ecosystem of partners. Our platform is broadly accessible to a wide range of enterprises, as well as governments and organizations. We have customers in a range of industries, including retail and e-commerce, travel and hospitality, financial services and insurance, software and technology, gaming, media and entertainment and industrials. We focus our selling efforts on the largest global enterprises with the most complex data requirements, and we have introduced a new cloud-based managed offering for enterprises looking for a turnkey version of our platform.
We have achieved significant growth over our operating history. For fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020, our revenue was $123.5 million, 103.3 million and $82.5 million, respectively, representing period-over-period growth rates of 20% and 25%, respectively. As of January 31, 2022 and 2021, our ARR was $132.9 million and $107.8 million, respectively, representing period-over-period growth of 23%. For fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020, our net loss was $58.2 million, $40.0 million and $29.3 million, respectively, as we continued to invest in the growth of our business to capture the massive opportunity that we believe is available to us.
Our Business Model
We generate the substantial majority of our revenue from sales of subscriptions, which accounted for 93%, 94% and 94% of our total revenue in fiscal 2020, 2021 and 2022, respectively. We derive substantially all of our subscription revenue from the Enterprise Edition of our Couchbase platform, which includes Couchbase Server, our flagship product, and Couchbase Mobile. The Couchbase platform is licensed per node, which we define as an instance of Couchbase running on a server. Our subscription pricing is based on the computing power and memory per instance, as well as the chosen service level. We offer three different support levels: the Platinum level offers 24/7 support and the shortest response time of 30 minutes; the Gold level offers 24/7 support with a response time of 2 hours; and the Silver level offers 7am-5pm local time support, 5 days a week. These response times are for incidences of the highest severity level, which we identify as level P1. The initial response time for levels P2 and P3, which are less severe, are longer.
The non-cancelable term of our subscription arrangements typically ranges from one to three years but may be longer or shorter in limited circumstances and is typically billed annually in advance. The timing and billing of large, multi-year contracts can create variability in revenue and deferred revenue between periods.
We also derive subscription revenue from Couchbase Capella, our fully-managed DBaaS. Couchbase Capella is licensed using an on-demand consumption model or an annual credit model, which removes the need to license different node types separately. Couchbase Capella pricing delivers superior customer flexibility relative to other CSPs as on-demand pricing allows customers to pay only for what they use based on hourly pricing and the credits purchased through our annual credit model expire only at the end of a 12-month period, rather than ratably throughout the year. We also provide automatic conversion to on-demand consumption when credits expire or are exhausted. Couchbase Capella credits can be purchased upfront to provide cost savings with volume discounts available based on credit quantity. We offer three pricing levels for Couchbase Capella, based on the support response time. Revenue from Couchbase Capella was not material for fiscal 2022 or 2021.
We also generate revenue from services, which represented 7%, 6% and 6% of our total revenue in fiscal 2020, 2021 and 2022, respectively. Our services revenue is derived from our professional services related to the implementation or configuration of our platform and training. We have invested in building our services organization because we believe it plays an important role in customer success, ensuring that our customers fulfill their digital transformation agendas while leveraging our platform, accelerating our customers’ realization of the full benefits of our platform and driving increased adoption of our platform.
Our go-to-market strategy is focused on large enterprises recognized as leaders in their respective industries who are attempting to solve complicated business problems by digitally transforming their operations. As a result, Couchbase powers some of the largest and most complex enterprise applications worldwide. Through our highly instrumented “sell-to” go-to-market motion, we have built a direct sales organization that understands the strategic needs of enterprises as well as a marketing organization that emphasizes our enablement of digital transformation through our no-compromises approach to performance, resiliency, scalability, agility and TCO savings.
We complement our “sell-to” go-to-market motion with a “buy-from” go-to-market motion, which is focused on targeting the application developer community to drive adoption of our platform. To accomplish this, we have and plan to continue to invest in Couchbase Capella, our fully-managed DBaaS offering. We also offer free Community Editions of some of our products, free trials of our Enterprise Edition of Couchbase Server and Couchbase Capella products and a web browser-based demonstration version of Couchbase Server to further accelerate application developer adoption. We believe these offerings lead to future purchases of the Enterprise Edition. While our Community Edition includes the core functionality of Couchbase Server, it is not suited for mission-critical deployments, as it offers only limited functionality around the scaled performance and security that enterprises require and no direct customer support from Couchbase.
We also continuously grow and cultivate our cloud provider partner and technology provider ecosystem. A significant portion of our revenue in fiscal 2022 and 2021 was attributable to our partner ecosystem.
We employ a land-and-expand model centered around our platform offerings, which have a rapid time to production and time to value for our customers, and our sales and customer success organizations, which proactively guide customers to realize strategic and transformative use cases and drive greater adoption of our platform and services. Our marketing organization is focused on building our brand reputation and awareness, which drive customer interest and demand for our platform. As part of these efforts, we host Couchbase Connect.ONLINE, a technical conference for application developers and enterprise architects, which showcases compelling customer testimonials and various use cases of our platform. Our Couchbase Connect offering also provides application developers with helpful resources to help them learn more about our platform, including access to on-demand instructional webinars. We also offer Couchbase Playground, allowing application developers to access Couchbase’s API and Couchbase Academy, which includes role-specific training courses. Application developers are also able to collaborate and discuss specific topics related to our platform on our forum.
Impact of COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate its impact have significantly curtailed the movement of people, goods and services worldwide, including in the geographic areas in which we conduct our business operations and from which we generate our revenue. It has also caused societal and economic disruption and financial market volatility, resulting in business shutdowns and reduced business activity. We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on our business and results of operations, primarily as a result of:
•delaying or pausing digital transformation and expansion projects and negatively impacting IT spending, which has caused potential customers to delay or forgo purchases of subscriptions for our platform and services, and which has caused some existing customers to request concessions including extended payment terms or better pricing, fail to renew subscriptions, reduce their usage or fail to expand their usage of our platform;
•restricting our sales operations and marketing efforts, reducing the effectiveness of such efforts in some cases and delaying or lengthening our sales cycles;
•delaying collections or resulting in an inability to collect accounts receivable, including as a result of customer bankruptcies; and
•delaying the delivery of professional services and training to our customers.
Many of our customers in industries and segments that the COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected, such as consumer-facing travel and hospitality, in-store retail and in-person entertainment, or COVID-19 impacted customers, had reduced, or failed to expand, their usage of our platform. Further, our ability to add new customers, particularly COVID-19 impacted customers, was negatively impacted by the economic environment of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic may cause us to continue to experience the foregoing challenges in our business in the future and could have other effects on our business, including disrupting our ability to develop new offerings and enhance existing offerings, market and sell our products and services and conduct business activities generally.
Despite the impacts described above, we believe the COVID-19 pandemic has the longer term potential to accelerate the trend of enterprises seeking to modernize and re-architect their mission-critical applications and the building of new applications to allow them to function in the cloud. The constraining of IT budgets could also further accelerate the adoption and expansion of our platform, as it can effectively support mission-critical applications while providing significant TCO benefits.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also driven some cost savings to our business. We have experienced slower growth in certain operating expenses due to reduced business-related travel, deferred hiring for some positions and the virtualization or cancellation of customer and employee events.
Following the challenges that we experienced due in large part to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen continued growth in our business. For example, our customers in COVID-19 impacted industries showed signs of recovery as spending increased across this cohort after a challenging period and our sales productivity has improved. More broadly, we believe this growth may accelerate as businesses begin to reopen, as our investments in Couchbase Capella continue to gain traction and as our sales and marketing organization is able to operate at full capacity, and as existing and prospective COVID-19 impacted customers continue to recover. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our industry continues to evolve, and the full impact on our financial condition and results of operations and the broader economic recovery remains uncertain, including as a result of outbreaks and variants. See the section titled “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Industry and Business-The global COVID-19 pandemic has harmed and could continue to harm our business and results of operations” for more information regarding risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Continuing to Acquire New Customers
We grow our subscription revenue by acquiring new customers. The size of our customer base may vary from period to period for several reasons, including the length of our sales cycle, the effectiveness of our sales and marketing efforts, enterprise application development cycles and the corresponding adoption rates of modern applications that require database solutions like ours. Additionally, our revenue has and will vary as new customers purchase our products due to the fact that we recognize a portion of such subscription revenue upfront. As digital transformation continues to accelerate, we believe that Couchbase Capella, our fully-managed DBaaS offering, will become increasingly popular as a result of its compelling pricing model, ease of operation, lower TCO, time to market and flexibility. We will continue to offer Couchbase Capella and provide flexible, highly available and differentiated economical options to capture new customers.
Continuing to Expand Within Existing Customers
A significant part of our growth has been, and we expect will continue to be, driven by expansion within our existing customer base. Growth of our revenue from our existing customers results from increases in the scale of their deployment for existing use cases, or when customers utilize our platform to address new use cases. In addition, our professional services organization helps customers deploy new use cases and optimize their existing implementations. Our revenue from our subscription offerings varies depending on the scale and performance requirements of our customers’ deployments. We are focusing on growing our subscription revenue, particularly from enterprises, while delivering professional services and training to support this growth. We have been successful in expanding our existing customers’ adoption of our platform as demonstrated by our dollar-based net retention rate of over 115% in seven of the past eight quarters.
Our dollar-based net retention rate for any period equals the simple arithmetic average of our quarterly dollar-based net retention rate for the four quarters ending with the most recent fiscal quarter. To calculate our dollar-based net retention rate for a given quarter, we start with the ARR, or Base ARR, attributable to our customers, or Base Customers, as of the end of the same quarter of the prior fiscal year. We then determine the ARR attributable to the Base Customers as of the end of the most recent quarter and divide that amount by the Base ARR.
Continuing to Invest in Growth
We expect to continue to invest in our offerings, personnel, geographic presence and infrastructure in order to drive future growth, as well as to pursue adjacent opportunities. We expend research and development resources to drive innovation in our proprietary software to constantly improve the functionality and performance of our platform and to increase the deployment models available to our customers. We anticipate continuing to increase our headcount to ensure that our product development organization drives improvements in our product offerings, our sales and marketing organization can maximize opportunities for growing our business and revenue and our general and administrative organization efficiently supports the growth of our business as well as our effective operation as a public company.
Key Business Metrics
Annual Recurring Revenue
We define ARR as of a given date as the annualized recurring revenue that we would contractually receive from our customers in the month ending 12 months following such date. Based on historical experience with customers, we assume all contracts will be automatically renewed at the same levels unless we receive notification of non-renewal and are no longer in negotiations prior to the measurement date. ARR excludes revenue from on-demand arrangements and services. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, and does not represent our revenue under U.S. GAAP on an annualized basis, as it is an operating metric that can be impacted by contract start and end dates and renewal dates. ARR is not intended to be a replacement for forecasts of revenue. Although we seek to increase ARR as part of our strategy of targeting large enterprise customers, this metric may fluctuate from period to period based on our ability to acquire new customers and expand within our existing customers. We believe that our ARR is an important indicator of the growth and performance of our business.
Customers
We calculate our total number of customers at the end of each period. We include in this calculation each customer account that has an active subscription contract with us or with which we are negotiating a renewal contract at the end of a given period. Each party with which we enter into a subscription contract is considered a unique customer and, in some cases, a single organization may be counted as more than one customer. Our customer count is subject to adjustments for acquisitions, consolidations, spin-offs and other market activity. We believe that our number of customers is an important indicator of the growth of our business and future revenue trends.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Margin
We define non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin as gross profit and gross margin, respectively, excluding stock-based compensation expense recorded to cost of revenue. We use non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin in conjunction with GAAP financial measures to assess our performance, including in the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance.
Non-GAAP Operating Loss and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
We define non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating margin as loss from operations and operating margin, respectively, excluding stock-based compensation expense and litigation-related expenses. We use non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating margin in conjunction with GAAP measures to assess our performance, including in the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance.
Non-GAAP Net Loss and Non-GAAP Net Loss Per Share
We define non-GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders as net loss attributable to common stockholders excluding stock-based compensation expense and litigation-related expenses. We use non-GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders and non-GAAP net loss per share attributable to common stockholders in conjunction with GAAP measures to assess our performance, including in the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash used in operating activities less purchases of property and equipment, which includes capitalized internal-use software costs. We believe free cash flow is a useful indicator of liquidity that provides our management, board of directors and investors with information about our future ability to generate or use cash to enhance the strength of our balance sheet and further invest in our business and pursue potential strategic initiatives. For fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, our free cash flow included cash paid for interest on our long-term debt of $0.6 million, $6.0
million and $3.8 million, respectively. For the year ended January 31, 2020, our free cash flow included cash received from a litigation settlement, net of expenses, of $2.3 million.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue from sales of subscriptions and services. Our subscription revenue is primarily derived from term-based software licenses to our platform sold in conjunction with post-contract support, or PCS. PCS bundled with software licenses includes internet, email and phone support, bug fixes and the right to receive unspecified software updates and upgrades released when and if available during the subscription term. The software license and PCS revenue is presented as “License” and “Support and other,” respectively, in our consolidated statements of operations. License revenue is recognized upon transfer when our customer has received access to our software. PCS revenue, or “Support,” is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement beginning on the date when access to the subscription is made available to our customer. The non-cancelable term of our subscription arrangements typically ranges from one to three years but may be longer or shorter in limited circumstances. “Other” revenue was not material for the periods presented. Our services revenue is derived from our professional services related to the implementation or configuration of our platform and training. Services revenue is recognized over time based on input measures for professional services and upon delivery for training.
We expect our revenue may vary from period to period based on, among other things, the timing and size of new subscriptions, the proportion of term license contracts that commence within the period, the rate of customer renewals and expansions and timing and delivery of professional services and training.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of subscription revenue primarily consists of personnel-related costs associated with our customer support organization, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation, expenses associated with software and subscription services dedicated for use by our customer support organization, third-party cloud infrastructure expenses, amortization of costs associated with capitalized internal-use software related to Couchbase Capella and allocated overhead. There is no cost of revenue associated with our license revenue. We expect our cost of subscription revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our subscription revenue increases and as we continue to amortize capitalized internal-use software costs related to Couchbase Capella.
Cost of services revenue primarily consists of personnel-related costs associated with our professional services and training organization, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation, costs of contracted third-party partners for professional services, expenses associated with software and subscription services dedicated for use by our professional services and training organization, travel-related expenses and allocated overhead. We expect our cost of services revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our services revenue increases.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Our gross profit and gross margin have been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the average sales price of our subscriptions and services, the mix of subscriptions and services we sell and the associated revenue, the mix of geographies into which we sell and transaction volume growth. We expect our gross profit and gross margin to fluctuate in the near term depending on the interplay of these factors, and for gross margin to decline modestly in the long term as we introduce additional platform capabilities and product offerings and continue to expand our client base outside of the United States.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, bonuses, benefits, sales commissions and stock-based compensation expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, expenses associated with software and subscription services dedicated for use by our research and development organization, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and allocated overhead. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in the features and functionalities of our platform. We expect research and development expenses to fluctuate as a percentage of revenue in the near term, but to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term as we achieve greater scale in our business.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, expenses associated with software and subscription services dedicated for use by our sales and marketing organization, costs of general marketing and promotional activities, amortization of deferred commissions, fees for professional services related to sales and marketing, travel-related expenses and allocated overhead. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our sales and marketing efforts to attract new customers and deepen our engagement with existing customers. We expect sales and marketing expenses to fluctuate as a percentage of revenue in the near term as we continue to invest in growing the reach of our platform through our sales and marketing efforts, but to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term as we achieve greater scale in our business.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs associated with our finance, legal, human resources and other administrative personnel. In addition, general and administrative expenses include non-personnel costs, such as fees for professional services such as external legal, accounting and other professional services, expenses associated with software and subscription services dedicated for use by our general and administrative organization, certain taxes other than income taxes and allocated overhead. We expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations and professional services. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in the growth of our business and operate as a publicly-traded company. We expect general and administrative expenses to fluctuate as a percentage of revenue in the near term, but to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term as we achieve greater scale in our business.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest, prepayment penalties and end-of-term charges for our term loan and interest charges for our Credit Facility.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign currency gains and losses related to the impact of transactions denominated in a foreign currency, gain on a legal settlement and interest income.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We recorded a full valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets as we have determined that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. The cash tax expenses are impacted by each jurisdiction’s individual tax rates, laws on the timing of recognition of income and deductions and availability of NOLs and tax credits. Our effective tax rate could be adversely affected to the extent earnings are lower than anticipated in countries that have lower statutory rates and higher than anticipated in countries that have higher statutory rates.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
______________
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue:
*Represents less than 1%
Note: Certain figures may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021
Revenue
Subscription revenue increased by $19.4 million, or 20%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in subscription revenue was due to an increase in revenue from existing customers and new customers, as we increased our customer base from 541 customers as of January 31, 2021 to 590 customers as of January 31, 2022. Approximately 91% of the increase in revenue was attributable to growth from existing customers, and the remaining increase was attributable to new customers.
Services revenue increased by $0.9 million, or 14%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in services revenue was primarily due to an increase in the number of professional services hours performed.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of subscription revenue increased by $2.5 million, or 40%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in cost of subscription revenue was primarily due to an increase of $1.2 million in personnel-related costs associated with increased headcount and an increase of $1.2 million related to the amortization of costs associated with capitalized internal-use software related to Couchbase Capella.
Cost of services revenue increased by $0.7 million, or 13%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in cost of services revenue was primarily due to an increase of $0.8 million in personnel-related costs associated with increased headcount, which was partially offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in travel-related costs due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Gross margin decreased during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to the amortization of capitalized internal-use software related to Couchbase Capella which began in the second half of fiscal 2021.
Research and Development
Research and development increased by $12.6 million, or 32%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase of $11.8 million in personnel-related costs associated with increased headcount.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing increased by $19.1 million, or 27%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to an increase of $16.3 million in personnel-related costs associated with increased headcount and an increase of $1.4 million in sales and marketing program expenses primarily associated with costs of general marketing and promotional activities as we continue to expand our sales and marketing efforts to attract new customers and deepen our engagement with existing customers.
General and Administrative
General and administrative increased by $8.5 million, or 55%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase of $4.2 million in personnel-related costs associated with increased headcount and an increase of $3.3 million in additional professional fees and other corporate expenses associated with being a publicly traded company.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $6.3 million, or 91%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to the termination of our term loan in January 2021, which was replaced by our Credit Facility that bears interest at a lower rate and has a lower loan balance than our term loan. Additionally, the Credit Facility was paid down in the third quarter of fiscal 2022, resulting in further decreases in interest expense.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net decreased by $1.4 million, or 127%, during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease in other income (expense), net was primarily due to an increase in net foreign currency transaction losses of $1.3 million during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021.
Provision for Income Taxes
The changes in provision for income taxes during the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021 was not material.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations through subscription revenue from customers accessing our platform and services revenue, and in July 2021, we completed our IPO with net proceeds totaling $214.9 million. We also have a Credit Facility to obtain up to $40.0 million in debt financing. In the third quarter of fiscal 2022, we repaid in full the $25.0 million aggregate then outstanding principal balance under our Credit Facility. We have incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations for the last several years, including fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020. As of January 31, 2022, we had an accumulated deficit of $342.0 million.
As of January 31, 2022, we had $206.0 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, availability under the Credit Facility, which is described in Note 7 of our notes to the consolidated financial statements, and cash provided by sales of subscriptions to our platform and sales of our services will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements and cash expenditures for at least the next 12 months. As a result of our revenue growth plans, both domestically and internationally, we expect that losses and negative cash flows from operations may continue in the future. Our future cash requirements will depend on many factors, including our subscription revenue growth rate, subscription renewals, billing timing and frequency, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced platform features and functionality and the continued market adoption of our platform. We may in the future pursue acquisitions of businesses, technologies, assets and talent.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, our competitive position could weaken, and our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
We typically invoice our subscription customers annually in advance. Therefore, a substantial source of our cash is from such prepayments, which are included on our consolidated balance sheets as deferred revenue. Deferred revenue consists of billed fees for our subscriptions, prior to satisfying the criteria for revenue recognition, which are subsequently recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of January 31, 2022, remaining performance obligations, including both deferred revenue and non-cancelable contracted amounts, were $161.6 million. We expect to recognize revenue of $98.0 million on these remaining performance obligations over the next 12 months, with the remaining balance recognized thereafter.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for fiscal 2022 of $41.6 million primarily consisted of our net loss of $58.2 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $28.0 million and net cash outflows of $11.4 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily reflected a $20.5 million increase in deferred commissions related to increased sales during the period and a $6.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets. Additionally, there was a $0.7 million increase in accounts receivable related to timing of billings and collections. This was partially offset by a $10.0 million increase in deferred revenue due to timing of billings and a $7.0 million increase in accrued compensation and benefits primarily due to increased headcount, higher bonus and commissions accruals during the period, and employee contributions related to the ESPP.
Cash used in operating activities for fiscal 2021 of $39.2 million primarily consisted of our net loss of $40.0 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $18.0 million and net cash outflows of $17.2 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily reflected a $13.5 million increase in deferred commissions related to increased sales during the period and a $5.5 million increase in accounts receivable related to timing of billings and collections.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2022 of $92.0 million consisted of purchases of short-term investments net of maturities and sales of $91.2 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.8 million.
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021 of $22.4 million consisted of net purchases of short-term investments of $19.6 million and cash paid for purchases of property and equipment of $2.8 million.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2022 of $192.4 million primarily consisted of proceeds from the completion of our IPO of $214.9 million, net of underwriters’ discounts and commissions, and proceeds from stock option exercises of $7.5 million offset by the payment of deferred offering costs of $4.9 million and payment of debt of $25.0 million.
Cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2021 of $80.5 million consisted of net proceeds from the issuance of Series G redeemable convertible preferred stock of $104.3 million, net proceeds from borrowings of $31.4 million and proceeds from stock option exercises of $2.2 million. This was offset by net payments on borrowings of $57.4 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations consist of purchase obligations and operating lease commitments. Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions and the approximate timing of the transaction. These obligations relate to third-party cloud infrastructure agreements and subscription arrangements. Our operating lease commitments relate primarily to our office facilities.
For further information on our commitments and contingencies, refer to Note 8 in the consolidated financial statements contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors and other business partners with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. Additionally, we entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers that require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers. To date, no demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements, and there are no claims that we are aware of that could reasonably be expected to have a material effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Our subscription revenue is primarily derived from term-based software licenses sold in conjunction with PCS. PCS bundled with software licenses includes internet, email and phone support, bug fixes and the right to receive unspecified software updates and upgrades released when and if available during the subscription term. The software license and PCS revenue is presented as “License” and “Support and other,” respectively, in our consolidated statements of operations. License revenue is recognized upon transfer when our customer has received access to our software. PCS revenue, or “Support,” is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement beginning on the date when access to the subscription is made available to our customer. The non-cancelable term of our subscription arrangements typically ranges from one to three years but may be longer or shorter in limited circumstances. We typically bill subscription revenue annually in advance. “Other” revenue was not material for the periods presented. Our services revenue is derived from professional services for the implementation or configuration of our platform and training. Services revenue is recognized over time based on input measures for professional services and upon delivery for training.
Determining whether the software license and the related PCS are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or as a single performance obligation requires significant judgment. We have concluded that the software license, which is recognized upon transfer to the customer, and PCS, which is recognized over the term of the arrangement, are two separately identifiable performance obligations.
Arrangements that include multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on the relative SSP of the performance obligation. Determining the relative SSP for contracts that contain multiple performance obligations requires significant judgement. When appropriate, we determine SSP based on the price at which the performance obligation has previously been sold through past transactions. We determine SSP for performance obligations with no observable evidence using adjusted market, cost plus or residual methods. When the SSP of a subscription including bundled software license and PCS is highly variable and the contract also includes additional performance obligations with observable SSP, we first allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations with established SSPs and then apply the residual approach to allocate the remaining transaction price to the subscription.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all stock awards based on the grant-date fair value of the awards. The fair value of restricted stock units is estimated using the current market price of our common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options granted under the 2021 Equity Incentive Plan, and purchase rights issued to employees under the 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or the ESPP, is based on the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Stock-based compensation expense for service-based vesting restricted stock units and stock options are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. Stock-based compensation expense related to the 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan is recognized on a straight-line basis over the offering period.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of our common stock, the expected option term, expected volatility of our stock price over the expected term, expected risk-free interest rate over the expected option term, and expected dividend yield. The assumptions used to determine the
fair value of the option awards represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment.
Our assumptions and estimates are as follows:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. Prior to our IPO, the fair value was determined by our board of directors with input from management and contemporaneous independent third-party valuations. Subsequent to our IPO, the fair value of our common stock is based on the daily average selling price on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
•Expected Term. The expected term represents the weighted-average period the stock-based awards are expected to remain outstanding and is calculated using the simplified method, as we do not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method calculates the expected term as the midpoint between the vesting date and the contractual expiration date of the option.
•Expected Volatility. The expected stock price volatility assumption was determined by examining the historical volatilities for industry peers, as we do not have sufficient trading history for our common stock.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments whose term was consistent with the option’s expected term.
•Dividend Yield. We utilize a dividend yield of zero. We do not currently declare or pay dividends on common stock, nor do we expect to do so in the foreseeable future.
Market-Based RSUs
The fair value of market-based performance restricted stock unit awards is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model that utilizes significant assumptions, including volatility, that determine the probability of satisfying the market condition stipulated in the award. Due to the limited history of trading of our common stock, we determined expected volatility based on a peer group of publicly traded companies. We recognize expense over the requisite service period regardless of whether the market-based performance conditions are satisfied, adjusted for pre-vesting forfeitures as they occur.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an “emerging growth company” to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an “emerging growth company” or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.