Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following commentary should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The discussion and analysis of our financial condition as of December 31, 2020 and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, included in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, can be found in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on April 29, 2021 (2020 Annual Report), which revised and superseded the Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Description of the Company and Business Segments
We manage our global operations based on four segments, consisting of the following geographic segments related to our legacy Baxter business: Americas, EMEA and APAC, and a new global segment for our recently acquired Hillrom business. The Americas, EMEA and APAC segments provide a broad portfolio of essential healthcare products, including acute and chronic dialysis therapies; sterile IV solutions; infusion systems and devices; parenteral nutrition therapies; inhaled anesthetics; generic injectable pharmaceuticals; and surgical hemostat and sealant products. These products are used by hospitals, kidney dialysis centers, nursing homes, rehabilitation centers, doctors’ offices and patients at home under physician supervision. The Hillrom segment provides digital and connected care solutions and collaboration tools, including smart bed systems, patient monitoring and diagnostic technologies, respiratory health devices and advanced equipment for the surgical space. Our global footprint and the critical nature of our products and services play a key role in expanding access to healthcare in emerging and developed countries. We expect to continue to evaluate our business structure as we integrate Hillrom and any changes as a result of that evaluation could impact the composition of our reportable segments in the future.
For financial information about our segments, see Note 17 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Business Combinations and Asset Acquisitions
Hillrom
On December 13, 2021, we completed the previously announced acquisition of all outstanding equity interests of Hillrom for a purchase price of $10.5 billion. Including the assumption of Hillrom's outstanding debt obligations, the enterprise value of the transaction was approximately $12.8 billion. Under the terms of the transaction agreement, Hillrom shareholders received $156.00 in cash per each outstanding Hillrom common share.
Prior to our acquisition of Hillrom, Hillrom was a global medical technology leader whose products and services help enable earlier diagnosis and treatment, optimize surgical efficiency, and accelerate patient recovery while simplifying clinical communication and shifting care closer to home. Hillrom made those outcomes possible through digital and connected care solutions and collaboration tools, including smart bed systems, patient monitoring and diagnostic technologies, respiratory health devices, advanced equipment for the surgical space and more, delivering actionable, real-time insights at the point of care. Refer to Note 2 and Note 5 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the Hillrom acquisition and related financing arrangements.
PerClot
On July 29, 2021, we acquired certain assets related to PerClot Polysaccharide Hemostatic System (PerClot), including distribution rights for the U.S. and specified territories outside of the U.S., from CryoLife, Inc. for an upfront purchase price of $25 million and the potential for additional cash consideration of up to $36 million, which had an acquisition-date fair value of $28 million, based upon regulatory and commercial milestones. PerClot is an absorbable powder hemostat indicated for use in surgical procedures, including cardiac, vascular, orthopedic, spinal, neurological, gynecological, ENT and trauma surgery as an adjunct hemostat when control of bleeding from capillary, venous, or arteriolar vessels by pressure, ligature, and other conventional means is either ineffective or impractical. Refer to Note 2 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the acquisition of PerClot.
Transderm Scop
On March 31, 2021, we acquired the rights to Transderm Scop (TDS) for the U.S. and specified territories outside of the U.S. from subsidiaries of GlaxoSmithKline for an upfront purchase price of $60 million including the cost of acquired inventory and the potential for additional cash consideration of $30 million, which had an acquisition-date fair value of $24 million, based upon regulatory approval of a new contract manufacturer by a specified date. We previously sold this product under a distribution license to the U.S. institutional market. TDS is indicated for post-operative nausea and vomiting in the U.S. and motion sickness in European markets. Refer to Note 2 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the acquisition of TDS.
Caelyx and Doxil
On February 17, 2021, we acquired the rights to Caelyx and Doxil, the branded versions of liposomal doxorubicin, from a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson for specified territories outside of the U.S for approximately $325 million in cash. We previously acquired the U.S. rights to this product in 2019. Liposomal doxorubicin is a chemotherapy medicine used to treat various types of cancer. Refer to Note 2 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the acquisition of Caelyx and Doxil.
Seprafilm Adhesion Barrier
In February 2020, we completed the acquisition of the product rights to Seprafilm Adhesion Barrier (Seprafilm) from Sanofi for approximately $342 million in cash. Seprafilm is indicated for use in patients undergoing abdominal or pelvic laparotomy as an adjunct intended to reduce the incidence, extent and severity of postoperative adhesions between the abdominal wall and the underlying viscera such as omentum, small bowel, bladder, and stomach, and between the uterus and surrounding structures such as tubes and ovaries, large bowel, and bladder. Refer to Note 2 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the acquisition of Seprafilm.
Financial Results
Our global net sales totaled $12.8 billion in 2021, an increase of 10% over 2020 on a reported and 7% on a constant currency basis. International sales totaled $7.6 billion in 2021, an increase of 12% compared to 2020 on a reported basis and 8% on a constant currency basis. Sales in the United States totaled $5.2 billion in 2021, an increase of 6% compared to 2020. Refer to the Net Sales discussion in the Results of Operations section below for more information related to changes in net sales on a constant currency basis.
Net income attributable to Baxter stockholders totaled $1.3 billion, or $2.53 per diluted share, in 2021. Net income in 2021 included special items which resulted in a net decrease to net income of $552 million, or $1.08 per diluted share. Our special items are discussed in the Results of Operations section below.
Our financial results included R&D expenses totaling $534 million in 2021, which reflects our focus on balancing investments to support our new product pipeline with efforts to optimize overall R&D spending.
Our financial position remains strong, with operating cash flows from continuing operations totaling $2.2 billion in 2021. We have continued to execute on our disciplined capital allocation framework, which is designed to optimize stockholder value creation through reinvestment in our businesses, dividends and share repurchases, as well as acquisitions and other business development initiatives as discussed in the Strategic Objectives section below.
Capital expenditures totaled $743 million in 2021 as we continue to invest across our businesses to support future growth, including additional investments in support of new and existing product capacity expansions. Our investments in capital expenditures in 2021 were focused on projects that improve production efficiency and enhance manufacturing capabilities to support our business growth.
We also continued to return value to our stockholders in the form of dividends. During 2021, we paid cash dividends to our stockholders totaling $530 million. Additionally, in 2021 we repurchased 7.3 million shares through cash repurchases pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 repurchase plans. For information on our share repurchase plans, see Note 8 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Strategic Objectives
We continue to focus on several key objectives to successfully execute our long-term strategy to achieve sustainable growth and deliver enhanced stockholder value. Our diversified and broad portfolio of medical products that treat life-threatening acute or chronic conditions and our global presence are core components of our strategy to achieve these objectives. We are focused on three strategic factors as part of our pursuit of industry leading performance: optimizing our core portfolio globally; operational excellence focused on streamlining our cost structure and enhancing operational efficiency; and maintaining a disciplined and balanced approach to capital allocation.
Optimizing the Core Portfolio Globally
Our global product portfolio optimization strategy identifies products that we believe to have characteristics of core growth, products that we expect to provide us with a core return on capital, products that we intend to maintain or manage differently and products that we consider to be strategic bets. For products with core growth characteristics, we look to invest for long-term, higher margin growth. For products that we expect to generate a core return on capital, we seek to optimize our return on investment and to maintain or enhance our market position. For products that we intend to maintain or manage differently, we look to sustain or reposition our underlying investment. Finally, we are evaluating our market position and investment strategy for products that we consider to be strategic bets.
As part of our portfolio management strategy, we seek to optimize our position in product areas where we have a stable, profitable business model and identify and alter investments in products that have reached the end of their life cycles or for which market positions have evolved unfavorably. In the course of doing so, we expect to continue to reallocate capital to more promising opportunities or business groupings, as described above. Additionally, to the extent we identify areas that do not align with our longer-term objectives, we will look to exit or divest these businesses while also continuing to identify new opportunities to enhance future performance.
As part of this strategy, we are shifting our investments to drive innovation in product areas where we have compelling opportunities to serve patients and healthcare professionals while advancing our business and we are accelerating the pace in which we bring these advances to market. We are in the midst of launching several new products, geographic expansions and line extensions including in such areas as chronic and acute renal care, smart pump technology, hospital pharmaceuticals and nutritionals, surgical sealants, and more. These comprise a mix of entirely new offerings, improvements on existing technologies, and the expansion of current products into new geographies. We are also evaluating product development opportunities that leverage the newly acquired Hillrom portfolio.
Operational Excellence
In recent years, we have undertaken a comprehensive review of all aspects of our operations and are actively implementing changes in line with our business goals. As part of our pursuit of improved margin performance, we are working to optimize our cost structure and we are critically assessing optimal support levels in light of our ongoing portfolio optimization efforts and the Hillrom integration. We intend to continue to actively manage our cost structure to help ensure that we are committing resources to the highest value uses. Such high value activities include supporting innovation, building out the portfolio, expanding patient access and accelerating growth for our stockholders.
Maintaining Disciplined and Balanced Capital Allocation
Subject to market conditions and our investment grade targets, our capital allocation strategies include the following:
•reinvest in the business by funding opportunities that are positioned to deliver sustainable growth, support our innovation efforts and improve margin performance;
•return capital to stockholders through dividends and share repurchases; and
•identify and pursue accretive merger and acquisition (M&A) opportunities.
Corporate Responsibility at Baxter
Driven by our mission to save and sustain lives, Baxter's corporate responsibility strategy focuses on tackling the environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues that affect our patients, customers, employees, communities and other stakeholders. Our corporate responsibility approach supports our business priorities to achieve top quartile results relative to industry peers and other comparators across four dimensions: patient safety and quality, growth through innovation, best place to work, and industry-leading performance. Advancing our corporate responsibility goals contributes to business, social and economic value, including through employee attraction and retention, enhanced operational efficiency, and implementation of enterprise risk management strategies, among others.
In 2021, we launched our 2030 CR Commitment featuring ten goals for focused action, anchored by three pillars - Empower Our Patients, Protect Our Planet and Champion Our People and Communities - on the foundation of
principles of Ethics and Compliance, Human Rights, Inclusion and Diversity, and Privacy and Data Protection. The 2030 Commitment and Goals highlight Baxter's corporate responsibility focus and help to further advance our ESG performance. Our progress against these goals is published annually in our Corporate Responsibility Report which is available on our website under "Our Story-Corporate Responsibility". The Corporate Responsibility Report is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or any other document filed with the SEC.
Risks and Uncertainties Related to COVID-19
Our global operations expose us to risks associated with public health crises and epidemics/pandemics, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 has had, and we expect will continue to have, an adverse impact on our operations, supply chains and distribution systems and has increased and we expect will continue to increase our expenses, including as a result of impacts associated with preventive and precautionary measures that we, other businesses and governments have taken and continue to take. Initial measures taken in 2020 led to unprecedented restrictions on, disruptions in, and other related impacts on business and personal activities, including a shift in healthcare priorities, which resulted in a significant decline in medical procedures in 2020. Some of these disruptions and impacts (including the suspension or postponement of elective medical procedures) in certain of our principal markets have continued into 2021. The pandemic has created significant volatility in the demand for our products. For further discussion, refer to the Product Category Net Sales Reporting section below. Significant uncertainty remains regarding the duration and overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, concerns remain regarding the pace of economic recovery due to virus resurgence across the globe from the Delta and Omicron variants and other virus mutations as well as vaccine distribution and hesitancy. The U.S. and other governments may continue existing measures or implement new restrictions and other requirements in light of the continuing spread of the pandemic (including with respect to mandatory vaccinations for certain of our employees and moratoriums on elective procedures). Due to the uncertainty caused by the pandemic, our operating performance and financial results, particularly in the short term, may be subject to volatility. We have experienced significant challenges, including lengthy delays, shortages and interruptions, posed by the pandemic and other exogenous factors (including significant weather events and disruptions to certain ports of call around the world) to our global supply chain, including the cost and availability of raw materials and component parts (including resins and electromechanical devices) and higher transportation costs, and may experience these and other challenges in future periods. We expect that these challenges as well as evolving governmental restrictions and requirements, among other factors, may continue to have an adverse effect on our business. For further discussion, refer to Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Risk Factors
Our ability to sustain long-term growth and successfully execute the strategies discussed above depends in part on our ability to manage within an increasingly competitive and regulated environment and to address the other risk factors described in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Items
The following table provides a summary of our special items and the related impact by line item on our results for 2021 and 2020.
Intangible asset amortization expense is identified as a special item to facilitate an evaluation of current and past operating performance and is consistent with how management and our Board of Directors internally assess performance. Additional special items are identified above because they are highly variable, difficult to predict and of a size that may substantially impact our results of operations for a period. Management believes that providing the separate impact of the above items on our results in accordance with U.S. GAAP may provide a more complete understanding of our operations and can facilitate a fuller analysis of our results of operations, particularly in evaluating performance from one period to another.
1In 2020, our results included a charge of $17 million for an asset impairment related to a developed-technology intangible asset. Refer to Note 4 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding this asset impairment.
2In 2021 and 2020, our results were impacted by costs associated with our execution of programs to optimize our organization and cost structure. These actions included streamlining our international operations, rationalizing our manufacturing and distribution facilities, reducing our general and administrative infrastructure, re-aligning certain R&D activities and canceling certain R&D programs. Our results in 2021 and 2020 included business optimization charges of $114 million and $134 million, respectively. Additionally, we recognized a gain of $17 million in 2020 for property we sold in conjunction with our business optimization initiatives. Refer to Note 11 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding these charges and related liabilities.
3Our results in 2020 included a charge of $29 million related to Sigma Spectrum infusion pump inspection and remediation activities.
4Our results in 2021 included acquisition, integration and related financing expenses of $240 million. This included acquisition, integration and related financing expenses for our acquisition of Hillrom and the acquisition of the rights to Caelyx and Doxil for specified territories outside of the U.S. These expenses were partially offset by benefits from changes in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities. Our results in 2020 included $40 million of acquisition and integration expenses. This included acquisition and integration expenses related to our acquisitions of Cheetah Medical, Inc. (Cheetah), Seprafilm and in-process R&D assets, partially offset by a benefit related to the change in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities. Refer to Note 2 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding business development activities.
5Our results in 2021 and 2020 included costs of $42 million and $33 million, respectively, related to updating our quality systems and product labeling to comply with the new medical device reporting regulation and other requirements of the European Union’s regulations for medical devices that become effective in stages beginning in 2021.
6Our results in 2021 included charges of $31 million for investigation and related costs. Those costs related to matters associated with our previously announced investigation of foreign exchange gains and losses, including the settlement of shareholder litigation, a civil penalty from the SEC and related professional fees. Our results in 2020 included $23 million for investigation and related costs. Those costs primarily included professional fees for the investigation and related matters, as well as incremental stock compensation expense as we extended the terms of certain stock options that were scheduled to expire in the first quarter of 2020. Refer to Notes 7 and 8 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the investigation and stock compensation expense.
7Our results in 2021 included legal charges of approximately $13 million associated with claimants alleging injuries as a result of proximity to one of our plants.
8Our results in 2020 included a charge of $43 million related to lump-sum settlement distributions made to certain former U.S. employees with vested pension benefits. Refer to Note 12 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the lump-sum settlements.
9Our results in 2021 included a loss of $5 million on the early extinguishment of the $2.4 billion debt assumed as part of the Hillrom acquisition. Our results in 2020 included a loss of $110 million on the November 2020 early extinguishment of $750 million of 3.75% senior notes that were issued in March 2020. Refer to Note 5 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
10Our results in 2021 included a $58 million income tax benefit related to a tax-deductible foreign statutory loss on an investment in a foreign subsidiary and an $18 million income tax benefit related to a change in U.S. foreign tax credit regulations, partially offset by a $22 million income tax expense related to an unfavorable court ruling for an uncertain tax position.
11Reflected in this item is the income tax impact of the special items identified in this table. The tax effect of each special item is based on the jurisdiction in which the item was incurred and the tax laws in effect for each such jurisdiction.
Net Sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 10% at actual and 7% at constant currency rates.
Foreign currency favorably impacted net sales by 3 percentage points during 2021 compared to the prior-year period principally due to the weakening of the U.S. Dollar relative to the Euro, Australian Dollar, British Pound, Chinese Renminbi and Canadian Dollar.
The comparisons presented at constant currency rates reflect current year local currency sales at the prior year’s foreign exchange rates. This measure provides information on the change in net sales assuming that foreign currency exchange rates had not changed between the prior and the current period. We believe that the non-GAAP measure of change in net sales at constant currency rates, when used in conjunction with the U.S. GAAP measure of change in net sales at actual currency rates, may provide a more complete understanding and facilitate a fuller analysis of our results of operations, particularly in evaluating performance from one period to another.
In 2021, the acquisition of Hillrom and the rights to Caleyx and Doxil for specified territories outside of the U.S. contributed $212 million and $108 million, respectively, in net sales.
As a result of the increase in COVID-19 cases in late 2021 and early 2022, we have experienced higher levels of absenteeism at our manufacturing facilities. In addition, a number of our suppliers are experiencing similar staffing challenges, which, together with other supply chain constraints in the current environment, has limited the availability of certain raw materials and component parts used in our products. These conditions have decreased our current production levels, which we expect to adversely impact our sales growth during the first quarter of 2022. We currently expect these conditions to improve and our production levels to normalize over the course of 2022.
Product Category Net Sales Reporting
Beginning in the first quarter of 2021, our product category net sales disclosures (previously referred to as global business units (GBUs)) separately present net sales from our BioPharma Solutions business, which was previously included within Other. Concurrent with that disaggregation of net sales from our BioPharma Solutions business, we have also allocated certain previously unallocated sales deductions from Other to various categories, primarily based on their respective net sales. Net sales for 2020 have been recast to conform to the current period presentation. Additionally, with the acquisition of Hillrom in December 2021, we have added three new product categories: Patient Support Systems, Front Line Care and Surgical Solutions.
Our product categories include the following:
•Renal Care includes sales of our peritoneal dialysis (PD), hemodialysis (HD) and additional dialysis therapies and services.
•Medication Delivery includes sales of our intravenous (IV) therapies, infusion pumps, administration sets and drug reconstitution devices.
•Pharmaceuticals includes sales of our premixed and oncology drug platforms, inhaled anesthesia and critical care products and pharmacy compounding services.
•Clinical Nutrition includes sales of our parenteral nutrition (PN) therapies and related products.
•Advanced Surgery includes sales of our biological products and medical devices used in surgical procedures for hemostasis, tissue sealing and adhesion prevention.
•Acute Therapies includes sales of our continuous renal replacement therapies (CRRT) and other organ support therapies focused in the intensive care unit (ICU).
•BioPharma Solutions includes sales of contracted services we provide to various pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical companies.
•Patient Support Systems includes sales of our connected care solutions: devices, software, communications and integration technologies.
•Front Line Care includes sales of our integrated patient monitoring and diagnostic technologies to help diagnose, treat and manage a wide variety of illness and diseases, including respiratory therapy, cardiology, vision screening and physical assessment.
•Surgical Solutions includes sales of our surgical video technologies, tables, lights, pendants, precision positioning devices and other accessories.
•Other includes sales of other miscellaneous product and service offerings.
The following is a summary of net sales by product category.
Renal Care net sales increased 4% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in 2021 was driven by a 2% positive impact from foreign exchange rate changes, as compared to the prior-year period, and global patient growth in PD, partially offset by lower in-center HD sales.
Medication Delivery net sales increased 7% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in 2021 was due to a favorable comparison to the comparable period of 2020 which was more severely impacted from lower demand for our infusion systems and related IV administration sets and solutions due to lower hospital admission rates and a reduction in elective surgeries resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, foreign exchange rates had a favorable impact on Medication Delivery net sales of 1% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period.
Pharmaceuticals net sales increased 9% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in 2021 was driven by the acquisition of the rights to Caelyx and Doxil for specified territories outside of the U.S., which contributed $108 million of net sales in 2021. Additionally, foreign exchange rates had a favorable impact on Pharmaceuticals net sales of 4% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period. Partially offsetting this increase was a significant nonrecurring purchase from the U.S. government in the prior year.
Clinical Nutrition net sales increased 6% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in 2021 was driven by growth in the U.S. for our PN therapies and related products and a 2% positive impact from foreign exchange rate changes, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase was partially offset by lower international sales of vitamins resulting from supply constraints.
Advanced Surgery net sales increased 10% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in 2021 was driven by a recovery in elective surgeries, as many had been previously postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a 1% positive impact from foreign exchange rate changes, as compared to the prior-year period. Additionally, the acquisition of Seprafilm in February of 2020 contributed $8 million of incremental sales in the first quarter of 2021.
Acute Therapies net sales increased 6% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in 2021 was driven by increased global demand for our CRRT systems during the COVID-19 pandemic and a 3% positive impact from foreign exchange rate changes, as compared to the prior-year period.
BioPharma Solutions net sales increased 38% in 2021, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase was driven by manufacturing services and supply packaging related to the production of COVID-19 vaccines on behalf of multiple pharmaceutical companies and a 3% positive impact from foreign exchange rate changes, as compared to the prior-year period.
Patient Support Systems net sales were $115 million in 2021 and resulted from the acquisition of Hillrom in December 2021.
Front Line Care net sales were $70 million in 2021 and resulted from the acquisition of Hillrom in December 2021.
Surgical Solutions net sales were $27 million in 2021 and resulted from the acquisition of Hillrom in December 2021.
Gross Margin and Expense Ratios
Gross Margin
The gross margin ratio was 39.9% and 39.3% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The special items identified above had an unfavorable impact of 3.4 and 3.1 percentage points on the gross margin ratio in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Refer to the Special Items section above for additional detail.
Excluding the impact of the special items, the gross margin ratio increased 0.9 percentage points in 2021 compared to 2020 due to a favorable product mix that was partially offset by higher manufacturing and supply chain costs resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
SG&A
The SG&A expenses ratio was 22.4% and 21.2% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The special items identified above had an unfavorable impact of 2.0 and 1.0 percentage points on the SG&A expenses ratio in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Refer to the Special Items section above for additional detail.
Excluding the impact of the special items, the SG&A expenses ratio increased 0.2 percentage points in 2021 primarily due to higher bonus accruals under our annual employee incentive compensation plans.
R&D
The R&D expenses ratio was 4.2% and 4.5% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The special items identified above had an unfavorable impact of 0.1 and 0.3 percentage points on the R&D expenses ratio in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Refer to the Special Items section above for additional detail.
Excluding the impact of the special items, the R&D expenses ratio decreased 0.1 percentage points in 2021 as a result of decreased project-related expenditures that was partially offset by higher bonus accruals under our annual employee incentive compensation plans.
Business Optimization Items
In recent years, we have undertaken actions to transform our cost structure and enhance our operational efficiency. These efforts have included restructuring the organization, optimizing our manufacturing footprint, R&D operations and supply chain network, employing disciplined cost management, and centralizing and streamlining certain support functions. From the commencement of our business optimization actions in the second half of 2015 through December 31, 2021, we have incurred cumulative pre-tax costs of $1.2 billion related to these actions. The costs consisted primarily of employee termination costs, implementation costs, contract termination costs, asset impairments, and accelerated depreciation. We currently expect to incur additional pre-tax costs of approximately $30 million through the completion of the initiatives that are currently underway, primarily related to implementation costs. We continue to pursue cost savings initiatives and, to the extent further cost savings opportunities are identified, we may incur additional restructuring charges and costs to implement business optimization programs in future periods. The reductions in our cost base from these actions in the aggregate are expected to provide cumulative annual pretax savings of more than $1.2 billion once the remaining actions are complete. The savings from these actions have reduced cost of sales, SG&A expenses, and R&D expenses. Approximately 99 percent of the expected annual pre-tax savings has been realized through December 31, 2021, with the remainder expected to be realized by the end of 2022. Refer to Note 11 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our business optimization programs.
Other Operating Income, Net
Other operating income, net was $6 million and $19 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021 and 2020, we recognized benefits of $6 million and $2 million, respectively, related to the change in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities. Additionally, in 2020, we recognized a $17 million gain on the sale of property in conjunction with our business optimization initiatives.
In September 2013, we entered into an agreement with Celerity Pharmaceutical, LLC (Celerity) to develop certain acute care generic injectable premix and oncolytic products through regulatory approval. We transferred our rights in these products to Celerity and Celerity assumed ownership and responsibility for development of the products. We are obligated to purchase the individual product rights from Celerity if the products obtain regulatory approval. In December 2020, we entered into an agreement with a third party to divest one of the products that is currently being developed by Celerity if that product receives regulatory approval in the U.S. and/or European Union. If regulatory approval is obtained, we would incur a loss ranging from $30 million to $60 million for the difference between our purchase price and the divestiture proceeds in connection with that transaction. Refer to Note 2 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding this agreement.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $192 million and $134 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in 2021 was primarily driven by financing-related fees incurred in connection with the Hillrom acquisition, which totaled $59 million, and lower interest income due to lower interest rates. Refer to Note 5 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of the components of interest expense, net for 2021 and 2020.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $41 million and $190 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net expense in 2021 was primarily driven by foreign exchange net losses and pension and OPEB net expenses. The net expense in 2020 was primarily driven by a $110 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt related to our November 2020 redemption of $750 million of senior notes that were issued in March 2020, foreign exchange net losses of $49 million and $46 million of pension settlement charges, which included a $43 million charge related to lump-sum settlement distributions made to certain former U.S. employees with vested pension benefits. These expenses in 2020 were partially offset by net unrealized gains of $13 million related to marketable equity securities.
We expect expenses from pension and OPEB plans to decrease in 2022 primarily due to prior year actuarial gains that will reduce ongoing benefit costs. Refer to Note 12 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding pension and OPEB plan expenses.
In the first quarter of 2021, we began to wind down our operations in Argentina. Upon substantial liquidation of those operations in the future, we expect to reclassify currency translation adjustments (CTA) from accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income to other expense, net and recognize a non-cash charge. As of December 31, 2021, the CTA for our Argentina operations was in excess of $60 million.
Income Taxes
The effective income tax rate was 12.3% in 2021 and 14.1% in 2020. The special items identified above had a favorable impact of 4.5 and 2.6 percentage points on the effective income tax rate in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Refer to the Special Items section above for additional detail. Our effective income tax rate can differ from the 21% U.S. federal statutory rate due to a number of factors, including foreign rate differences, tax incentives, increases or decreases in valuation allowances and liabilities for uncertain tax positions and excess tax benefits on stock compensation awards.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the difference between our effective income tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory rate was primarily attributable to favorable geographic earnings mix, a $58 million tax benefit related to a tax-deductible foreign statutory loss on an investment in a foreign subsidiary, a tax benefit related to a change in U.S. foreign tax credit regulations and excess tax benefits on stock compensation awards, partially offset by an unfavorable court decision in a foreign jurisdiction related to an uncertain tax position.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the difference between our effective income tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory rate was primarily attributable to favorable geographic earnings mix and excess tax benefits on stock compensation awards.
Our tax provisions for 2021 and 2020 do not include any tax charges related to either the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (BEAT) or Global Intangible Low Taxed Income (GILTI) provisions, except for the inability to fully utilize foreign tax credits against such GILTI. Our accounting policy is to recognize any GILTI charge as a period cost.
We anticipate that our effective income tax rate, calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP, will be approximately 17% in 2022. This rate may be further impacted by a number of factors including discrete items, such as tax windfalls or deficiencies attributable to stock compensation awards, additional audit developments, or the tax effects of any future special items.
Net Income and Earnings per Diluted Share
Net income was $1.3 billion in 2021 and $1.1 billion in 2020. Diluted earnings per share was $2.53 in 2021 and $2.13 in 2020. The significant factors and events causing the net changes from 2020 to 2021 are discussed above. Additionally, earnings per share was positively impacted by the repurchase of 7.3 million shares in 2021 and 6.3 million shares in 2020 through Rule 10b5-1 purchase plans. Refer to Note 8 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding our stock repurchases.
Segment results
We manage our global operations based on four segments, consisting of the following geographic segments related to our legacy Baxter business: Americas, EMEA and APAC, and a new global segment for our recently acquired Hillrom business. We use net sales and operating income on a segment basis to make resource allocation decisions and assess the ongoing performance of our segments. In the first quarter of 2021, the information provided to our Chief Executive Officer for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance was updated to reallocate contracted services activities performed at a German manufacturing facility from our EMEA segment to our Americas segment. The contracted services performed at that facility are part of our BioPharma Solutions business, which is managed as part of the Americas segment. Accordingly, the reported financial results of the Americas segment now include the contracted services activities performed at that facility. Segment results for 2020 have been recast to conform to this presentation. Refer to Note 17 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details regarding our segments.
The following is a summary of financial information for our reportable segments.
Americas
Segment net sales and operating income in 2021 was $6.7 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively. Segment net sales and operating income in 2020 was $6.3 billion and $2.4 billion, respectively. The increase in operating profit in 2021 was primarily driven by favorable sales performance in our BioPharma Solutions, Medication Delivery and Advanced Surgery product categories, partially offset by unfavorable performance in Pharmaceuticals.
EMEA
Segment net sales and operating income in 2021 was $3.1 billion and $632 million, respectively. Segment net sales and operating income in 2020 was $2.9 billion and $523 million, respectively. The increase in operating profit in 2021 was due to the favorable impact of foreign exchange rates on results as compared to the prior-year period and the acquisition of the rights to Caelyx and Doxil for specified territories outside of the U.S., which contributed $93 million of net sales and operating profit to the region, respectively.
APAC
Segment net sales and operating income in 2021 was $2.8 billion and $623 million, respectively. Segment net sales and operating income in 2020 was $2.5 billion and $591 million, respectively. The increase in operating profit in 2021 was due to the favorable impact of foreign exchange rates on results as compared to the prior-year period and the acquisition of the rights to Caelyx and Doxil for specified territories outside of the U.S., which contributed $13 million of net sales and operating profit to the region, respectively.
Hillrom
Segment net sales and operating loss for 2021 was $212 million and $80 million, respectively. The increase in operating loss in 2021 was due to the acquisition of Hillrom in December 2021.
Corporate and other
Certain items are maintained at Corporate and are not allocated to a segment. They primarily include certain headquarter costs, certain R&D costs, certain product categories support costs, stock compensation expense, certain employee benefit plan costs, certain foreign currency hedging activities, and certain gains, losses, and other charges (such as business optimization, acquisition and integration costs, intangible asset amortization and asset impairments). The operating loss in 2021 was higher than 2020 primarily due to acquisition and integration expenses related to the Hillrom acquisition, higher intangible asset amortization expense and higher bonus accruals under our annual employee incentive compensation plans in the current year.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash Flows from Operations - Continuing Operations
In 2021 and 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $2.2 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively. Operating cash flows increased in 2021 primarily due to a lower increase in inventories in 2021 compared to 2020, an increase in our net income in 2021, payments of $173 million to settle interest rate derivative contracts in 2020 and lower
employee incentive compensation payments in 2021 compared to 2020, partially offset by cash outflows of approximately $47 million in 2021 related to Hillrom acquisition and integration costs.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
In 2021, cash used for investing activities included payments for acquisitions and investments of $10.5 billion, primarily related to Hillrom, Caleyx and Doxil, Transderm Scop and PerClot, and capital expenditures of $743 million. In 2020, cash used for investing activities included payments for acquisitions and investments of $494 million, primarily related to Seprafilm and multiple product acquisitions, and capital expenditures of $709 million.
We expect that our capital expenditures will increase in 2022 as we make investments in our manufacturing capacity in response to proposed regulatory changes of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in kidney health policy and reimbursement, which may substantially change the U.S. end stage renal disease market and demand for our peritoneal dialysis products.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In 2021, cash generated from financing activities included $11.8 billion to fund the consideration for the Hillrom acquisition, repay certain indebtedness of Hillrom, and to pay fees and expenses related to the foregoing. In September 2021, we entered into a term loan credit agreement (the Term Loan Credit Agreement), pursuant to which a syndicate of financial institutions has committed to provide us with a senior unsecured term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $4.0 billion (the Term Loan Facility), consisting of a $2.0 billion three-year term loan and a $2.0 billion five-year term loan. In December 2021, we issued $800 million senior notes due in 2023, $1.4 billion senior notes due in 2024, $1.45 billion senior notes due in 2027, $1.25 billion senior notes due in 2028, $1.55 billion senior notes due in 2032, $750 million senior notes due in 2051, $300 million floating rate senior notes due in 2023 and $300 million floating rate senior notes due in 2024. We also had net proceeds from commercial paper borrowings of $300 million and repaid debt obligations of $2.8 billion, including $2.4 billion of debt that was assumed in the Hillrom acquisition. Financing activities in 2021 also included payments for treasury stock repurchases of $600 million, dividend payments of $530 million and receipts from stock issued under employee benefit plans of $187 million.
In 2020, cash generated from financing activities included $1.2 billion of net proceeds from the March 2020 issuance of $750 million of senior notes due in 2025 and $500 million of senior notes due in 2030. In November 2020, we issued $650 million of senior notes due in 2031 and used the proceeds, along with cash on hand, to redeem the $750 million senior notes due in 2025 that were issued in March 2020 for $854 million, which included a $104 million make-whole premium. We have used the net proceeds from those senior notes issuances and redemptions for general corporate purposes, including to strengthen our balance sheet as a precautionary measure in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2020, we also repaid $322 million of variable rate notes that matured and the borrowings under our Euro-denominated credit facility of €200 million ($225 million). Financing activities in 2020 also included payments for stock repurchases of $500 million, dividend payments of $473 million and receipts from stock issued under employee benefit plans of $202 million.
As authorized by the Board of Directors, we repurchase our stock depending upon our cash flows, net debt levels and market conditions. In July 2012, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $2.0 billion of our common stock. The Board of Directors increased this authority by an additional $1.5 billion in each of November 2016 and February 2018, by an additional $2.0 billion in November 2018 and by an additional $1.5 billion in October 2020. We paid $600 million in cash to repurchase approximately 7.3 million shares under this authority pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 plans in 2021 and had $1.3 billion remaining available under this authorization as of December 31, 2021.
Credit Facilities and Access to Capital and Credit Ratings
Credit Facilities
On September 30, 2021, we entered into a new U.S. dollar-denominated revolving credit facility (the USD Revolver) and on October 1, 2021, we amended our existing Euro-denominated revolving credit facility (as amended, the Euro Revolver). As of December 31, 2021, our USD Revolver had capacity of $2.5 billion and our Euro Revolver had a capacity of approximately €200 million. Each of the facilities matures in 2026. The facilities enable us to borrow funds on an unsecured basis at variable interest rates, and contain various covenants, including a maximum net
leverage ratio. Fees under the credit facilities are 0.09% annually as of December 31, 2021 and are based on our credit ratings and the total capacity of the facility. Prior to entering into the USD Revolver and the Euro Revolver, our previous U.S. dollar-denominated revolving credit facility and Euro-denominated senior revolving credit facility had a maximum capacity of $2.0 billion and €200 million, respectively. Fees under these credit facilities were 0.09% annually as of December 31, 2020 and were based on our credit ratings and the total capacity of the facility. There were no borrowings under these credit facilities as of December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the financial covenants in these agreements. The non-performance of any financial institution supporting either of the credit facilities would reduce the maximum capacity of these facilities by the institution’s respective commitment.
We also maintain other credit arrangements, as described in Note 5 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Access to Capital and Credit Ratings
We intend to fund short-term and long-term obligations as they mature through cash on hand and future cash flows from operations or by issuing additional debt. We had $3.0 billion of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, with adequate cash available to meet operating requirements in each jurisdiction in which we operate. We invest our excess cash in money market and other funds and diversify the concentration of cash among different financial institutions. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $17.7 billion of long-term debt and finance lease obligations, including current maturities, and short-term debt. Subject to market conditions and our investment grade targets, we regularly evaluate opportunities with respect to our capital structure.
Our ability to generate cash flows from operations, issue debt, including commercial paper, or enter into other financing arrangements on acceptable terms could be adversely affected if there is a material decline in the demand for our products or in the solvency of our customers or suppliers, deterioration in our key financial ratios or credit ratings or other significantly unfavorable changes in conditions. However, we believe we have sufficient financial flexibility to issue debt, enter into other financing arrangements and attract long-term capital on acceptable terms to support our growth objectives and reduce our post-acquisition debt levels.
Our credit ratings at December 31, 2021 were as follows:
Our senior debt credit ratings were downgraded in 2021 as a result of the debt we issued to fund the Hillrom acquisition.
LIBOR Reform
In 2017, the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority announced that after 2021 it would no longer compel banks to submit the rates required to calculate the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) and other interbank offered rates, which have been widely used as reference rates for various securities and financial contracts, including loans, debt and derivatives. This announcement indicated that the continuation of LIBOR on the current basis was not guaranteed after 2021. Regulators in the U.S. and other jurisdictions have been working to replace these rates with alternative reference interest rates that are supported by transactions in liquid and observable markets, such as the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR). In 2020, it was announced that certain U.S. dollar LIBOR tenors would not cease until 2023. Currently, our $2.5 billion U.S. dollar-denominated revolving credit facility, our €200 million Euro-denominated revolving credit facility and our $4.0 billion Term Loan Credit Agreement reference LIBOR-based rates. The discontinuation of LIBOR will require these arrangements to be modified in order to replace LIBOR with an alternative reference interest rate, which could impact our cost of funds. Our credit facilities and term loan credit agreement include provisions related to the determination of a successor LIBOR rate.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we had contractual obligations, excluding accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, payable or maturing in the following periods.
1.Interest payments on debt and finance lease obligations are calculated for future periods using interest rates in effect at the end of 2021. Certain of these projected interest payments may differ in the future based on foreign currency fluctuations or other factors or events. The projected interest payments only pertain to obligations and agreements outstanding at December 31, 2021. Refer to Note 5 and Note 6, respectively, in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our debt instruments outstanding and finance lease obligations at December 31, 2021.
2.The primary components of other non-current liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021 are pension and other postretirement benefits, deferred tax liabilities, long-term tax liabilities, and litigation and environmental reserves. We projected the timing of the related future cash payments based on contractual maturity dates (where applicable) and estimates of the timing of payments (for liabilities with no contractual maturity dates). The actual timing of payments could differ from our estimates.
We contributed $73 million and $74 million to our defined benefit pension plans in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The timing of funding in future periods is uncertain and is dependent on future movements in interest rates, investment returns, changes in laws and regulations, and other variables. Therefore, the table above excludes cash outflows related to our pension plans. The amount included within other non-current liabilities (and excluded from the table above) related to our pension plan liabilities was $858 million as of December 31, 2021. In 2022, we have no obligation to fund our principal plans in the United States and we expect to make contributions of at least $41 million to our foreign pension plans. Additionally, we have excluded long-term tax liabilities, which include liabilities for unrecognized tax positions, and deferred tax liabilities from the table above because we are unable to estimate the timing of the related cash outflows. The amounts of long-term tax liabilities and deferred tax liabilities included within other non-current liabilities (and excluded from the table above) were $80 million and $962 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2021.
3.Includes our significant contractual unconditional purchase obligations. For cancellable agreements, any penalty due upon cancellation is included. These commitments do not exceed our projected requirements and are in the normal course of business. Examples include firm commitments for raw material and component part purchases, utility agreements and service contracts.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We periodically enter into off-balance sheet arrangements. Certain contingencies arise in the normal course of business and are not recorded in the consolidated balance sheets in accordance with U.S. GAAP (such as contingent joint development and commercialization arrangement payments). Also, upon resolution of uncertainties, we may incur charges in excess of presently established liabilities for certain matters (such as contractual indemnifications). For a discussion of our significant off-balance sheet arrangements, refer to Note 15 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding receivable transactions, and Note 2 and Note 7 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding joint development and commercialization arrangements, indemnifications and legal contingencies.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENT MARKET RISK
We operate on a global basis and are exposed to the risk that our earnings, cash flows and equity could be adversely impacted by fluctuations in foreign exchange and interest rates. Our hedging policy attempts to manage these risks to an acceptable level based on our judgment of the appropriate trade-off between risk, opportunity and costs. Refer to Note 15 and Note 16 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding our financial instruments and hedging strategies.
Currency Risk
We are primarily exposed to foreign exchange risk with respect to revenues generated outside of the United States denominated in the Euro, British Pound, Chinese Renminbi, Korean Won, Australian Dollar, Canadian Dollar, Japanese Yen, Colombian Peso, Brazilian Real, Mexican Peso, Turkish Lira, Indian Rupee and Swedish Krona. We manage our foreign currency exposures on a consolidated basis, which allows us to net exposures and take advantage of any natural offsets. In addition, we use derivative and nonderivative financial instruments to further reduce the net exposure to foreign exchange, however these instruments may be unavailable or inefficient in emerging or volatile markets. Gains and losses on the hedging instruments offset losses and gains on the hedged transactions and reduce the earnings and stockholders’ equity volatility relating to foreign exchange. However, we don't hedge our entire foreign exchange exposure and are still subject to earnings and stockholders' equity volatility relating to foreign exchange risk. Financial market and currency volatility may limit our ability to cost-effectively hedge these exposures.
We use options and forwards to hedge the foreign exchange risk to earnings relating to forecasted transactions and recognized assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. The maximum term over which we have cash flow hedge contracts in place related to foreign exchange risk on forecasted transactions as of December 31, 2021 is 12 months. We also enter into derivative instruments to hedge foreign exchange risk on certain intra-company and third-party receivables and payables and debt denominated in foreign currencies.
As part of our risk-management program, we perform sensitivity analyses to assess potential changes in the fair value of our foreign exchange instruments relating to hypothetical and reasonably possible near-term movements in foreign exchange rates.
A sensitivity analysis of changes in the fair value of foreign exchange contracts outstanding as of December 31, 2021, while not predictive in nature, indicated that if the U.S. Dollar uniformly weakened by 10% against all currencies, the net pre-tax asset balance of $3 million with respect to those contracts would change by $34 million. A similar analysis performed with respect to contracts outstanding as of December 31, 2020 indicated that, on a pre-tax basis, the net liability balance of $8 million would change by $32 million.
The sensitivity analysis model recalculates the fair value of the foreign exchange contracts outstanding as of December 31, 2021 by replacing the actual exchange rates as of December 31, 2021 with exchange rates that are 10% weaker compared to the actual exchange rates for each applicable currency. All other factors are held constant. These sensitivity analyses disregard the possibility that currency exchange rates can move in opposite directions and that gains from one currency may or may not be offset by losses from another currency. The analyses also disregard the offsetting change in value of the underlying hedged transactions and balances.
Our subsidiary in Argentina is reported using highly inflationary accounting effective July 1, 2018. Changes in the value of the Argentine peso applied to our peso-denominated net monetary asset positions are recorded in income at the time of the change. As of December 31, 2021, our net monetary assets denominated in Argentine pesos are not significant.
Interest Rate Risk
We are also exposed to the risk that our earnings and cash flows could be adversely impacted by fluctuations in interest rates. Our policy is to manage interest costs using the mix of fixed- and floating-rate debt that we believe is appropriate at that time. To manage this mix in a cost-efficient manner, we periodically enter into interest rate swaps in which we agree to exchange, at specified intervals, the difference between fixed and floating interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreed-upon notional amount. We also periodically use forward-starting interest rate swaps and treasury rate locks to hedge the risk to earnings associated with fluctuations in interest rates relating to anticipated issuances of term debt. As of December 31, 2021, there were no interest rate derivative contracts outstanding and we had approximately $4.9 billion of outstanding floating rate debt. A 100 basis point change in
interest rates would impact out pre-tax earnings and cash flows by approximately $49 million over a one-year period.
CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Refer to Note 1 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on changes in accounting standards.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In July 2021, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2021-05, Leases (Topic 842), which requires a lessor to classify a lease with variable lease payments (that do not depend on an index or rate) as an operating lease if (1) the lease would have been classified as a sales-type or direct financing lease, and (2) the lessor would have recognized a selling loss at lease commencement. These changes are intended to avoid recognizing a day-one loss for a lease with variable payments even though the lessor expects the arrangement will be profitable overall. The standard is effective for our financial statements beginning in 2022. The impact of the adoption of this ASU is not expected to have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. A summary of our significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain of our accounting policies are considered critical, as these policies are the most important to the depiction of our financial statements and require significant, difficult or complex judgments by us, often employing the use of estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results that differ from our estimates could have an unfavorable effect on our results of operations and financial position. The following is a summary of accounting policies that we consider critical to the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition and Related Provisions and Allowances
Revenues from product sales are recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration primarily related to rebates and wholesaler chargebacks. These reserves are based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales. Our estimates take into consideration historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of variable consideration included in the net sales price is limited to the amount that is probable not to result in a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized in a future period. Additionally, our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately and determining the allocation of the transaction price may require significant judgment.
Pension and OPEB Plans
We provide pension and other postretirement benefits to certain of our employees. The service component of employee benefit expenses is reported in the same line items in the consolidated income statements as the applicable employee’s compensation expense. All other components of these employee benefit expenses are reported in other expense, net in our consolidated statements of income. The valuation of the funded status and net periodic benefit cost for the plans is calculated using actuarial assumptions. These assumptions are reviewed annually and revised if appropriate. The significant assumptions include the following:
•interest rates used to discount pension and OPEB plan liabilities;
•the long-term rate of return on pension plan assets;
•rates of increases in employee compensation (used in estimating liabilities);
•anticipated future healthcare trend rates (used in estimating the OPEB plan liability); and
•other assumptions involving demographic factors such as retirement, mortality and turnover (used in estimating liabilities).
Selecting assumptions involves an analysis of both short-term and long-term historical trends and known economic and market conditions at the time of the valuation (also called the measurement date). The use of different assumptions would result in different measures of the funded status and net cost. Actual results in the future could differ from expected results.
Our key assumptions are listed in Note 12 in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The most critical assumptions relate to the plans covering U.S. and Puerto Rico employees, because these plans are the most significant to our consolidated financial statements.
Discount Rate Assumption
Effective for the December 31, 2021 measurement date, we utilized discount rates of 3.01% and 2.76% to measure our benefit obligations for our most significant U.S. and Puerto Rico pension plans and OPEB plan, respectively. We used a broad population of approximately 200 Aa-rated corporate bonds as of December 31, 2021 to determine the discount rate assumption. All bonds were denominated in U.S. dollars, with a minimum amount outstanding of $50 million. This population of bonds was narrowed from a broader universe of approximately 700 Moody’s Aa rated, non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds by eliminating the top 10th percentile and bottom 40th percentile to adjust for any pricing anomalies and to represent the bonds we would most likely select if we were to actually annuitize our pension and OPEB plan liabilities. This portfolio of bonds was used to generate a yield curve and associated spot rate curve to discount the projected benefit payments for the U.S. and Puerto Rico plans. The discount rate is the single level rate that produces the same result as the spot rate curve.
For plans in Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom and other European countries, we use a method essentially the same as that described for the U.S. and Puerto Rico plans. For our other international plans, the discount rate is generally determined by reviewing country- and region-specific government and corporate bond interest rates.
To understand the impact of changes in discount rates on pension and OPEB plan cost, we perform a sensitivity analysis. Holding all other assumptions constant, for each 50 basis point (i.e., one-half of one percent) increase in the discount rate, global pre-tax pension and OPEB plan cost would decrease by approximately $30 million, and for each 50 basis point decrease in the discount rate, global pre-tax pension and OPEB plan cost would increase by approximately $35 million.
Return on Plan Assets Assumption
In measuring the net periodic cost for 2021, we used a long-term expected rate of return of 5.5% for our most significant pension plans covering U.S. and Puerto Rico employees. This assumption will decrease to 5% in 2022. This assumption is not applicable to our OPEB plan because it is not funded.
We establish the long-term asset return assumption based on a review of historical compound average asset returns, both company-specific and relating to the broad market (based on our asset allocation), as well as an analysis of current market and economic information and future expectations. The current asset return assumption is supported by historical market experience for both our actual and targeted asset allocation. In calculating net pension cost, the expected return on assets is applied to a calculated value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets in a systematic manner over five years. The difference between this expected return and the actual return on plan assets is a component of the total net unrecognized gain or loss and is subject to amortization in the future.
To understand the impact of changes in the expected asset return assumption on net cost, we perform a sensitivity analysis. Holding all other assumptions constant, for each 50 basis point increase (decrease) in the asset return assumption, global pre-tax pension plan cost would decrease (increase) by approximately $15 million.
Other Assumptions
For the U.S. and Puerto Rico plans, we used the Pri-2012 combined mortality table with improvements projected using the MP-2019 projection scale adjusted to a long-term improvement of 0.8% as of December 31, 2021. For all other pension plans, we utilized country- and region-specific mortality tables to calculate the plans’ benefit obligations. We periodically analyze and update our assumptions concerning demographic factors such as retirement, mortality and turnover, considering historical experience as well as anticipated future trends.
The assumptions relating to employee compensation increases and future healthcare costs are based on historical experience, market trends, and anticipated future company actions.
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowances and Reserves for Uncertain Tax Positions
We maintain valuation allowances unless it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax asset will be realized. Changes in valuation allowances are included in our tax provision in the period of change. In determining whether a valuation allowance is warranted, we evaluate factors such as prior earnings history, expected future earnings, carryback and carryforward periods, and tax strategies that could potentially enhance the likelihood of realization of a deferred tax asset. The realizability assessments made at a given balance sheet date are subject to change in the future, particularly if earnings of a subsidiary are significantly higher or lower than expected, or if we take operational or tax planning actions that could impact the future taxable earnings of a subsidiary.
In the normal course of business, we are audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, and are periodically challenged regarding the amount of taxes due. These challenges relate to the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. We believe our tax positions comply with applicable tax law and we intend to defend our positions. In evaluating the exposure associated with various tax filing positions, we record reserves for uncertain tax positions in accordance with U.S. GAAP based on the technical support for the positions, our past audit experience with similar situations, and potential interest and penalties related to the matters. Our results of operations and effective tax rate in a given period could be impacted if, upon final resolution with taxing authorities, we prevail in positions for which reserves have been established, or we are required to pay amounts in excess of established reserves.
Realization of the U.S. and foreign operating loss and tax credit carryforwards depends on generating sufficient future earnings. A valuation allowance of $401 million and $454 million was recognized as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, to reduce the deferred tax assets associated with net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards because we do not believe it is more likely than not that these assets will be fully realized prior to expiration. After evaluating relevant U.S. tax laws, any elections or other opportunities that may be available, and the future expiration of certain U.S. tax provisions that will impact the utilization of our U.S. foreign tax credit carryforwards, management expects to be able to realize some, but not all, of the U.S. foreign tax credit deferred tax assets up to its overall domestic loss (ODL) balance plus other recurring and non-recurring foreign inclusions. Therefore, a valuation allowance of $98 million and $157 million was recognized with respect to the foreign tax credit carryforwards as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We will continue to evaluate the need for additional valuation allowances and, as circumstances change, the valuation allowance may change.
Valuation of Intangible Assets, Including IPR&D
As a result of our acquisition of Hillrom in December 2021, our intangible asset balance increased to $7.8 billion as of December 31, 2021 compared to $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2020. We record acquired intangible assets at fair value in business combinations and at cost in asset acquisitions. Valuations are generally completed for intangible assets acquired in business acquisitions using a discounted cash flow analysis (an income approach), incorporating the stage of completion and consideration of market participant assumptions. The most significant estimates and assumptions inherent in a discounted cash flow analysis (an income approach) include the amount and timing of projected future cash flows, the discount rate used to measure the risks inherent in the future cash flows, the assessment of the asset’s life cycle, royalty rates, terminal growth rate, contributory asset charges, and customer attrition rate. Each of these factors and assumptions can significantly affect the value of the intangible asset.
Acquired in-process R&D (IPR&D) is the value assigned to acquired technology or products under development which have not received regulatory approval and have no alternative future use. IPR&D acquired in a business combination is capitalized as an indefinite-lived intangible asset. Development costs incurred after the acquisition are expensed as incurred. Upon receipt of regulatory approval of the related technology or product, the indefinite-lived intangible asset is then accounted for as a finite-lived intangible asset and amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated useful life. If the R&D project is abandoned, the indefinite-lived intangible asset is charged to expense.
IPR&D acquired in transactions that are not business combinations is expensed immediately. For such transactions, payments made to third parties on or after regulatory approval are capitalized as intangible assets and amortized over the remaining useful life of the related asset.
Due to the inherent uncertainty associated with R&D projects, there is no assurance that actual results will not differ materially from the underlying assumptions used to prepare discounted cash flow analyses, nor that the R&D project will result in a successful commercial product.
Due to a change in the timing and amount of projected cash flows associated with $140 million of acquired in-process R&D intangible assets from a historical acquisition, we updated the estimated fair values of these assets in 2021. While no impairment has been recorded because the estimated fair values of those assets exceeded their carrying values, the estimated excess of fair value over carrying value of these assets further declined in 2021 and are at risk of future impairment should the estimated timing or amount of projected cash flows further deteriorate.
In 2021, we changed the measurement date of our annual indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment tests from December 31st to November 1st. This change better aligns the timing of the impairment tests with our long-term business planning process. The change was not material to our consolidated financial statements as it did not result in the delay, acceleration or avoidance of an impairment charge.
CERTAIN REGULATORY MATTERS
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) commenced an inspection of Claris’ facilities in Ahmedabad, India in July 2017, immediately prior to the closing of the Claris acquisition. FDA completed the inspection and subsequently issued a Warning Letter based on observations identified in the 2017 inspection (Claris Warning Letter).¹ Due to challenges with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, FDA has not yet re-inspected the facilities and management cannot speculate on when the Claris Warning Letter will be lifted. However, we are continuing to implement corrective and preventive actions to address FDA’s prior observations and other items we identified and management continues to pursue and implement other manufacturing locations, including contract manufacturing organizations, to support the production of new products for distribution in the U.S. As previously disclosed, we have secured alternative locations to produce a majority of the planned new products to be manufactured in Ahmedabad for distribution into the U.S. and are producing new products from those locations.
Refer to Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of regulatory matters and how they may impact us.
1 Available online at https://www.fda.gov/ICECI/EnforcementActions/WarningLetters/ucm613538.htm
FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This annual report includes forward-looking statements. Use of the words “may,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “should,” “believes,” “estimates,” “projects,” “potential,” “expects,” “plans,” “seeks,” “intends,” “evaluates,” “pursues,” “anticipates,” “continues,” “designs,” “impacts,” “affects,” “forecasts,” “target,” “outlook,” “initiative,” “objective,” “designed,” “priorities,” “goal,” or the negative of those words or other similar expressions is intended to identify forward-looking statements that represent our current judgment about possible future events. These forward-looking statements may include statements with respect to accounting estimates and assumptions, impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, litigation-related matters including outcomes, impacts of the internal investigation related to foreign exchange gains and losses, future regulatory filings and our R&D pipeline, strategic objectives, sales from new product offerings, credit exposure to foreign governments, potential developments with respect to credit ratings, investment of foreign earnings, estimates of liabilities including those related to uncertain tax positions, contingent payments, future pension plan contributions, costs, discount rates and rates of return, our exposure to financial market volatility and foreign currency and interest rate risks, the impact of competition, future sales growth, business development activities (including the acquisitions of Cheetah, Seprafilm, certain outside of the U.S. (OUS) rights to Caelyx and Doxil, full U.S. and specific OUS rights to Transderm Scop, PerClot and Hillrom), business optimization initiatives, cost saving initiatives, future capital and R&D expenditures, future debt issuances, manufacturing expansion, the adequacy of credit facilities, tax provisions and reserves, the effective tax rate and all other statements that do not relate to historical facts.
These forward-looking statements are based on certain assumptions and analyses made in light of our experience and perception of historical trends, current conditions, and expected future developments as well as other factors that we believe are appropriate in the circumstances. While these statements represent our judgment on what the future may hold, and we believe these judgments are reasonable, these statements are not guarantees of any events or financial results. Whether actual future results and developments will conform to expectations and predictions is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including the following factors, many of which are beyond our control:
•
demand for and market acceptance risks for and competitive pressures related to new and existing products (including challenges with our ability to accurately predict changing consumer preferences and needs and advances in technology and the resulting impact on customer inventory levels and the impact of reduced hospital admission rates and elective surgery volumes), and the impact of those products on quality and patient safety concerns;
•
product development risks, including satisfactory clinical performance, the ability to manufacture at appropriate scale, and the general unpredictability associated with the product development cycle;
•
our ability to finance and develop new products or enhancements on commercially acceptable terms or at all;
•
the impact of global economic conditions (including potential trade wars) and public health crises and epidemics, such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, on us and our employees, customers and suppliers, including foreign governments in countries in which we operate;
•
the continuity, availability and pricing of acceptable raw materials and component parts, and the related continuity of our manufacturing and distribution (including impacts from COVID-19) and those of our suppliers;
•
inability to create additional production capacity in a timely manner or the occurrence of other manufacturing, sterilization or supply difficulties (including as a result of natural disaster, public health crises and epidemics/pandemics, regulatory actions or otherwise);
•
our ability to identify business development and growth opportunities and to successfully execute on business development strategies (including the Hillrom acquisition and related restructuring activities);
•
product quality or patient safety issues, leading to product recalls, withdrawals, launch delays, warning letters, import bans, sanctions, seizures, litigation, or declining sales;
•
breaches or failures of our information technology systems or products, including by cyber-attack, data leakage, unauthorized access or theft (as a result of increased remote working arrangements or otherwise);
•
future actions of (or failures to act or delays in acting by) FDA, the European Medicines Agency or any other regulatory body or government authority (including the SEC, DOJ or the Attorney General of any State) that could delay, limit or suspend product development, manufacturing or sale or result in seizures, recalls, injunctions, monetary sanctions or criminal or civil liabilities, including the continued delay in lifting the warning letter at our Ahmedabad facility;
•
failures with respect to our quality, compliance or ethics programs;
•
future actions of third parties, including third-party payers and our customers and distributors (including GPOs and IDNs), the impact of healthcare reform and its implementation, suspension, repeal, replacement, amendment, modification and other similar actions undertaken by the United States or foreign governments, including with respect to pricing, reimbursement, taxation and rebate policies; legislation, regulation and other governmental pressures in the United States or globally, including the cost of compliance and potential penalties for purported noncompliance thereof, all of which may affect pricing, reimbursement, taxation and rebate policies of government agencies and private payers or other elements of our business, including new or amended laws, rules and regulations (such as the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018, the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation and proposed regulatory changes of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in kidney health policy and reimbursement, which may substantially change the U.S. end stage renal disease market and demand for our peritoneal dialysis products, necessitating significant multi-year capital expenditures, which are difficult to estimate in advance);
•
the outcome of pending or future litigation, including the opioid litigation and current or future ethylene oxide litigation or other claims;
•
failure to achieve our short- and long-term financial improvement goals;
•
the impact of competitive products and pricing, including generic competition, drug reimportation and disruptive technologies;
•
global regulatory, trade and tax policies (including with respect to climate change and other sustainability matters);
•
the ability to protect or enforce our owned or in-licensed patent or other proprietary rights (including trademarks, copyrights, trade secrets and know-how) or patents of third parties preventing or restricting our manufacture, sale or use of affected products or technology;
•
the impact of any goodwill or other intangible asset impairments on our operating results;
•
fluctuations in foreign exchange and interest rates;
•
any changes in law concerning the taxation of income (whether with respect to current or future tax reform), including income earned outside the United States and potential taxes associated with the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax or the Build Back Better framework;
•
actions by tax authorities in connection with ongoing tax audits;
•
loss of key employees, the occurrence of labor disruptions or the inability to identify and recruit new employees;
•
other factors identified elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including those factors described in Item 1A and other filings with the SEC, all of which are available on our website.
Actual results may differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. We do not undertake to update our forward-looking statements.