ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
Bed Bath & Beyond Inc. and subsidiaries (the "Company", "we", "our", "us", or "ourselves") is an omni-channel retailer that makes it easy for our customers to feel at home. We sell a wide assortment of merchandise in the Home, Baby, Beauty & Wellness markets and operate under the names Bed Bath & Beyond, buybuy BABY ("BABY"), and Harmon, Harmon Face Values, or Face Values (collectively, "Harmon"). We also operate Decorist, an online interior design platform that provides personalized home design services. In addition, we are a partner in a joint venture, which operates retail stores in Mexico under the name Bed Bath & Beyond.
We account for our operations as one North American Retail reporting segment. For Fiscal 2020 and 2019, we accounted for our operations as two operating segments: North American Retail and Institutional Sales, the latter of which did not meet the quantitative thresholds under GAAP and, therefore, was not a reportable segment, and which was divested in October 2020.
We are driving a digital-first, omni-always growth strategy and optimizing our digital and physical store channels to provide our customers with a seamless omni-channel shopping experience. Digital purchases, including web and mobile, can be shipped to a customer from our distribution facilities, directly from vendors, or from a store. Store purchases are primarily fulfilled from that store's inventory or may also be shipped to a customer from one of our distribution facilities, from a vendor, or from another store. Customers can also choose to pick up orders using our BOPIS and contactless Curbside Pickup services, as well as return online purchases to a store. Customers can also make purchases through one of our customer contact centers and in-store through The Beyond Store, our proprietary web-based platform. These capabilities allow us to better serve our customers across various channels.
Across our banners, we carry a wide variety of domestics and home furnishings merchandise. Domestics merchandise includes categories such as bed linens and related items, bath items and kitchen textiles. Home furnishings include categories such as kitchen and tabletop items, fine tabletop, basic housewares, general home furnishings (including furniture and wall décor), consumables and certain juvenile products.
Business Transformation and Restructuring
Since 2019, we have undertaken significant changes to transform our business and adapt to the dynamic retail environment and the evolving needs of our customers in order to position ourselves for long-term success. As part of these changes, our management team, led by President and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Mark Tritton, has been focused on driving an omni-always, customer-inspired strategy to re-establish our authority in the Home, Baby, Beauty & Wellness markets. We have created a more focused portfolio through the divestiture of non-core assets and further strengthened our financial flexibility through key actions such as corporate restructurings and operating expense control to re-set our cost structure and support our ongoing business transformation.
We are implementing a growth strategy that will harness the power of data and insights to engage customers across our four core banners (Bed Bath & Beyond, buybuy BABY, Harmon and Decorist) in an enterprise-wide plan to accelerate our omni-channel transformation. Our strategy is underpinned by five key pillars of strategic focus and investment: product, price, promise, place and people. Through this approach, we are becoming a digital-first, customer-focused omni-channel retailer with a more curated, inspirational and differentiated product collection across categories, and creating a more convenient and inspirational shopping experience.
In March 2021, we announced our plan to introduce at least eight new Owned Brands during Fiscal 2021. During Fiscal 2021 the following Owned Brands were launched:
The assortment for these Owned Brands includes thousands of new products across our key destination categories of Bed, Bath, Kitchen Food Prep, Home Organization and Indoor Decor. We also continue to redefine certain of our existing Owned Brands, such as Bee & Willow™ and Marmalade™, including new brand imagery and packaging as well as refined product assortment and presentation.
We will continue to build on this strong foundation as we execute our three-year growth strategy to further elevate the shopping experience, modernize our operations and unlock strong and sustainable shareholder value.
As part of our business transformation plan, we are also pursuing a comprehensive cost restructuring program, to drive improved financial performance. We expect to reinvest a portion of the expected cost savings into future growth initiatives. Key components of the expected financial improvement include:
•Approximately $100 million in annual savings from our previously disclosed store fleet optimization program which included the planned closure of approximately 200 mostly Bed Bath & Beyond stores. This program was largely completed by February 26, 2022. During Fiscal 2021, we closed 63 stores (bringing the total store closures to 207 since the program's inception). We continue to believe that our physical store channel is an asset for our transformation into a digital-first company, especially with new omni-fulfillment capabilities in BOPIS, Curbside Pickup, Same Day Delivery and fulfill-from-store.
•Approximately $200 million in annual savings from product sourcing, through renegotiations with existing vendors.
•Approximately $100 to $150 million in annual selling, general and administrative expense savings from continued optimization of our corporate overhead cost structure and reductions in other discretionary expense. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2020, we implemented a workforce reduction of approximately 2,800 roles from across our corporate headquarters and retail stores, designed to further reduce layers at the corporate level, significantly reposition field operations to better serve customers in a digital-first environment and realign our technology, supply chain and merchandising teams to support our strategic growth initiatives.
•In the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, we announced that we are pursuing additional expense optimization measures of approximately $100 million annualized that will explore areas such as additional store fleet optimization, fixed costs and discretionary savings opportunities.
In connection with the above restructuring and transformation initiatives, during Fiscal 2021, we recorded total expense of $281.2 million including $137.2 million in cost of sales, primarily associated with the transition of our product assortment to Owned Brands and, to a lesser extent, to redefine certain existing Owned Brands, as well as $144.0 million in restructuring and transformation initiative expenses for costs associated with our planned store closures as part of the store fleet optimization program and other transformation initiatives. We also recorded impairment charges of approximately $36.5 million, primarily related to store assets. At this point, we are unable to estimate the amount or range of amounts expected to be incurred in connection with future restructuring and transformation initiatives, including additional Owned Brand introductions and further store closures, and will provide such estimates as they become available.
Additionally, as part of these efforts, we completed the divestitures of the following banners:
•In December 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell Cost Plus World Market to Kingswood Capital Management.
•In October 2020, we entered into definitive agreements to sell Christmas Tree Shops ("CTS") to Handil Holdings LLC.
•In October 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell Linen Holdings to The Linen Group, LLC, an affiliate of Lion Equity Partners.
•In February 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell PersonalizationMall.com ("PMall") to 1-800-FLOWERS.COM.
•During the first quarter of Fiscal 2020, we also sold One Kings Lane to a third party.
The net proceeds from these transactions have been reinvested in our core business operations to drive growth, fund share repurchases and reduce our outstanding debt.
During Fiscal 2021, we recognized a charge of approximately $18.2 million in loss on sale of businesses in the consolidated statement of operations, primarily associated with the Fiscal 2021 settlement of the CTS pension plan (see "Employee Benefit Plans," Note 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements) and certain working capital and other adjustments related to the above divestitures. During Fiscal 2020, we recognized a loss of approximately $1.1 million on the sale of businesses related to certain of the above divestitures.
Executive Summary
The following represents a summary of key financial results and related business developments for the periods indicated:
•Net sales for Fiscal 2021 were $7.868 billion, a decrease of approximately 14.8% as compared with Fiscal 2020.
•Excluding the impact of the business divestitures described above, which represented net sales of $1.290 billion for Fiscal 2020, net sales for our four core banners for Fiscal 2021 decreased by approximately 1% compared with Fiscal 2020.
•During Fiscal 2021, we continued to execute against key initiatives under our transformation program, including:
•Owned Brands. We launched eight new Owned Brands, under which there are thousands of new products across our key Destination Categories of Bed, Bath, Kitchen Food Prep, Home Organization and Indoor Decor.
•New York City Flagship Renovation. We completed the renovation of our Bed Bath & Beyond flagship store in New York City, which reopened in July 2021 after undergoing a complete transformation since closing in December 2020. The renovated flagship store is an expression of the new Bed Bath & Beyond, with a significant focus on our five core destination categories of bed, bath, kitchen & dining, indoor décor and organization.
◦Omni-Channel Capabilities. We continued our focus on being a digital-first, omni-always retailer:
▪We announced separate partnerships with DoorDash and Uber to provide on-demand delivery of essential homeware products and items from more than 700 Bed Bath & Beyond locations and nearly 120 BABY locations nationwide.
▪In November 2021, we launched our new digital marketplace to build on our existing authority in key Home & Baby categories, with an assortment of products from a highly curated selection of third-party brand partners that will be integrated into our digital platform.
▪In November 2021, we announced a strategic collaboration to directly offer Kroger customers an extensive selection of the most sought-after goods for the Home & Baby products carried by the Bed Bath & Beyond and buybuy BABY banners through Kroger.com as well as a small-scale physical store pilot at select Kroger Family of Companies stores beginning in Fiscal 2022.
•Additional Product Initiatives. Our Bed Bath & Beyond banner launched the Home, Happier Team, the brand's first-ever curated advisory panel of industry experts who will serve as "host and hostesses of the home," providing ideas, innovative solutions and compelling content to help customers personalize their living spaces and make it easy to feel at home. Our buybuy BABY banner introduced its "welcome to parenthood" program in-store and online through educational resources, reimagined shopping experiences, a revised registry, new digital offerings and a new marketing campaign to inspire customers to embrace every aspect of parenthood. Additionally, we announced key partnerships with Casper Sleep Inc. (including a first branded shop-in shop in our New York City flagship store), and with Safely™, an eco-friendly line of home care and cleaning products which made its retail debut exclusively in Bed Bath & Beyond, buybuy BABY and Harmon stores nationwide.
•Supply Chain Transformation. In the second half of Fiscal 2021, we started operations at our first regional distribution center, an approximately one million square foot facility in Frackville, Pennsylvania, and executed a lease for our second regional distribution center in Jurupa Valley, California, which is expected to be operational by late 2022. Ryder
Systems, Inc. will operate these two regional distribution centers under a strategic partnership, with the objective of reducing product replenishment times and improving the customer experience.
•Store Fleet Optimization. We continue to believe that our physical store channel is an asset for our transformation into a digital-first company, especially with omni-fulfillment capabilities in BOPIS, Curbside Pickup, Same Day Delivery and fulfill-from-store. During Fiscal 2021:
◦We commenced renovations on approximately 130 stores, of which approximately 80 were completed, to bring the expression of the new Bed Bath & Beyond to our customers in many of our markets.
◦We largely completed the planned optimization of our store fleet through the closure of 63 mostly Bed Bath & Beyond stores during Fiscal 2021, bringing total store closures for the overall program to 207 as of February 26, 2022.
We plan to continue to actively manage our real estate portfolio to permit store sizes, layouts, locations and offerings to evolve over time to optimize market profitability and to renovate, remodel or reposition stores within markets as appropriate.
•In connection with these restructuring and transformation initiatives, during Fiscal 2021, we recorded total expense of $281.2 million including $137.2 million in cost of sales and $144.0 million in restructuring and transformation initiative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations, as well as $36.5 million of impairments and $18.2 million of losses on sales of businesses.
•During Fiscal 2021, we announced plans to complete our $1 billion three-year repurchase plan by the end of Fiscal 2021, which was two years ahead of schedule. During Fiscal 2021, we repurchased approximately 27.7 million shares of our common stock under the share repurchase plan approved by our Board of Directors, at a total cost of approximately $574.9 million, which combined with the accelerated share repurchase programs entered into in Fiscal 2020 totaling $375.0 million, resulted in the repurchase of $950.0 million shares under this plan as of February 26, 2022. An additional approximately $40.0 million was repurchased in March of 2022.
•Net loss for Fiscal 2021 was $559.6 million, or $5.64 per diluted share, compared with net loss of $150.8 million, or $1.24 per diluted share, for Fiscal 2020. Net loss for Fiscal 2021 included a net unfavorable impact of $4.66 per diluted share associated with restructuring and other transformation initiatives, non-cash impairments, loss on sale of business and loss on debt extinguishment, as well as the impact of recording a valuation allowance against the Company’s U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets (see "Provision for Income Taxes," Note 8 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements). Net loss for Fiscal 2020 included a net unfavorable impact of $0.23 per diluted share associated with the loss on sale of business, non-cash impairments and charges recorded in connection with the restructuring program and transformation initiatives offset by a gain on extinguishment of debt and decrease in the incremental inventory reserve for future markdowns recorded in Fiscal 2019, as well as the associated tax effects.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global pandemic. That same month, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we began to temporarily close certain store locations that did not have a health and personal care department, and as of March 23, 2020, all of our retail stores across the U.S. and Canada were temporarily closed except for most stand-alone buybuy BABY and Harmon stores, subject to state and local regulations. In May 2020, we announced a phased approach to re-open our stores in compliance with relevant government directives, and as of the end of July 2020, nearly all of our stores re-opened. During portions of Fiscal 2021, a limited number of stores in Canada either closed temporarily or continued to operate under restrictions in compliance with local governmental orders. As of February 26, 2022, all of our stores were operating without restriction subject to compliance with applicable mask and vaccine requirements.
The COVID-19 pandemic materially adversely impacted our results of operations and cash flows for Fiscal 2021. We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, and financial results, as numerous significant uncertainties continue to surround the pandemic and its ultimate impact on us, including but not limited to:
•the timing and extent of recovery in consumer traffic and spending;
•potential delays, interruptions and disruptions in our supply chain, including higher freight charges;
•labor shortages, wage pressures and competition for talent;
•the extent of dissemination and public acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines and their effectiveness against COVID-19 and its evolving strains, some of which may be more transmissible or virulent than the initial strain;
•additional widespread resurgences in COVID-19 infections; and
•evolving safety protocols such as requirements for proof of vaccination or regular testing in certain of our markets.
Further discussion of the risks and uncertainties posed by the COVID-19 pandemic is included in "Risk Factors" under "Part I, Item 1A" of this Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The fiscal years discussed below were each comprised of 52 weeks.
Net Sales
Excluding the impact of the divestitures described above, which represented net sales of $1.290 billion for Fiscal 2020, net sales for our four core banners for Fiscal 2021 decreased by approximately 1% compared with Fiscal 2020, as net sales improvements in the first half of Fiscal 2021, including due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the first quarter of 2020, were offset by the impact of traffic declines and the supply chain disruptions in the second half of the year. Store closures as part of our store fleet optimization program also contributed to the decline in sales from Fiscal 2020 to Fiscal 2021.
The decrease in net sales for Fiscal 2020 was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of Fiscal 2020, as well as the impact of our transformation initiatives, primarily our store fleet optimization program and the business divestitures described above (see Business Transformation and Restructuring).
During Fiscal 2021, Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, net sales consummated through digital channels represented approximately 37%, 38% and 17%, respectively, of our sales. Sales consummated on a mobile device while physically in a store location and BOPIS orders are recorded as customer facing digital channel sales. Customer orders taken in-store by an associate through The Beyond Store, our proprietary, web-based platform, are recorded as in-store sales. Prior to implementation of BOPIS and contactless Curbside Pickup services, customer orders reserved online and picked up in a store were recorded as in-store sales. Sales originally consummated from customer facing digital channels and subsequently returned in-store are recorded as a reduction of in-store sales.
As a result of the extended closure of the majority of our stores in the first quarter and in June of Fiscal 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and our policy of excluding extended store closures from our comparable sales calculation, we believe that comparable sales* was not a meaningful metric for the first quarter of Fiscal 2020 as well as for the month of June in Fiscal 2020 and, therefore, are not a meaningful metric for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020.
* Comparable sales normally include sales consummated through all retail channels that have been operating for twelve full months following the opening period (typically six to eight weeks), excluding the impact of store fleet optimization program. We are an omni-channel retailer with capabilities that allow a customer to use more than one channel when making a purchase, including in-store, online, with a mobile device or through a customer contact center, and have it fulfilled, in most cases, either through in-store customer pickup or by direct shipment to the customer from one of our distribution facilities, stores or vendors.
Our comparable sales metric considers sales consummated through all retail channels - in-store, online, with a mobile device or through a customer contact center. Our omni-channel environment allows our customers to use more than one channel when making a purchase. We believe in an integrated and seamless customer experience. A few examples are: a customer may be assisted by an in-store associate to create a wedding or baby registry, while the guests may ultimately purchase a gift from our websites; or a customer may research a particular item, and read other customer reviews on our websites before visiting a store to consummate the actual purchase; or a customer may buy an item online for in-store or curbside pickup; or while in a store, a
customer may make the purchase on a mobile device for in home delivery from either a distribution facility, a store or directly from a vendor. In addition, we accept returns in-store without regard to the channel in which the purchase was consummated, therefore resulting in reducing store sales by sales originally consummated through customer facing digital channels. As our retail operations are integrated and we cannot reasonably track the channel in which the ultimate sale is initiated, we can however, provide directional information on where the sale was consummated.
Sales of domestics merchandise accounted for approximately 37.4%, 34.7%, and 35.2%, of net sales in Fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Sales of home furnishings accounted for approximately 62.6%, 65.3% and 64.8% of net sales, respectively, for Fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Gross Profit
Gross profit in Fiscal 2021 was negatively impacted by markdown activity associated with inventory being removed from our assortment in connection with the launches of new Owned Brands and, to a lesser extent, the redefinition of certain existing Owned Brands, as well as markdown activity associated with store closures as part of our store fleet optimization program. Gross profit for Fiscal 2021 included the impact of charges of $137.2 million for these higher markdowns on inventory sold, as well as an adjustment to reduce the cost of inventory on hand to be removed from the product assortment as part of these initiatives to its estimated realizable value. In addition, higher freight expenses, both for inbound product shipments and direct-to-customer fulfillment and in part due to industry wide, global supply chain challenges, negatively impacted gross margin in Fiscal 2021 compared with Fiscal 2020, which offset the favorable impact of a shift in product assortment toward new Owned Brands and a more normalized mix of digital sales.
The increase in the gross margin between Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019 was primarily attributable to a shift in product mix and the leverage of distribution and fulfillment costs, partially offset by the impact of channel mix, including higher net-direct-to-customer shipping expense. In addition, our gross margin for Fiscal 2020 included the impact of a net benefit of $20.2 million from the reduction of incremental markdown reserves taken in Fiscal 2019, partially offset by restructuring and transformation initiatives.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The decrease in SG&A expenses for Fiscal 2021 was primarily attributable to cost reductions resulting from our transformation initiatives, including reductions in corporate overhead, divestitures of non-core assets and lower rent and occupancy expenses as a result of our store fleet optimization program. The decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales for Fiscal 2021 was also largely due to the factors above, as well as the de-leveraging effect caused by sales declines in Fiscal 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
For Fiscal 2020, the increase was primarily attributable to increases in fixed costs such as rent and occupancy and depreciation, and consulting costs related to our strategic initiatives, partially offset by decreases in payroll and payroll-related expenses and advertising.
In addition, during Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, we recorded credits of approximately $7.8 million and $33.3 million, respectively, as an offset to SG&A expenses as a result of the employee retention credits made available under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") for U.S. employees and under the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy for Canadian employees.
Goodwill and Other Impairments
Goodwill and other impairments were $36.5 million for Fiscal 2021, $127.3 million in Fiscal 2020 and $509.2 million in Fiscal 2019. For Fiscal 2021, impairment charges included $30.8 million related to certain store-level assets (including leasehold improvements and operating lease assets) and tradename impairments of $5.7 million. For Fiscal 2020, impairment charges included $92.9 million related to certain store-level assets (including leasehold improvements and operating lease assets) and tradename impairments of $35.1 million. For Fiscal 2019, impairment charges included goodwill impairments of $391.1 million (primarily as the result of a sustained decline in our market capitalization), tradename impairments of $41.8 million, long-lived assets impairments of $75.1 million and other impairments of $1.2 million.
Restructuring and Transformation Initiative Expenses
During Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, we recorded charges of $144.0 million and $102.2 million, respectively, in connection with our restructuring and transformation initiatives. In Fiscal 2021, these charges were primarily for costs associated with the store fleet optimization program described above, including for the termination of facility leases, as well as technology transformation and business strategy and operating model transformation programs across core functions, including merchandising, supply chain and finance. In Fiscal 2020, these costs primarily related to severance costs recorded in connection with our workforce reduction and store fleet optimization programs as well as other restructuring activities (see "Restructuring and Transformation Activities," Note 3 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Loss on Sale of Businesses
During Fiscal 2021, we recognized approximately $18.2 million in loss on sale of businesses in the consolidated statement of operations, primarily related to a $13.5 million charge associated with the Fiscal 2021 settlement of the CTS pension plan (see "Assets Held for Sale and Divestitures," Note 16 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements), as well as certain working capital and other adjustments related to the Fiscal 2020 divestitures. During Fiscal 2020, we recognized a loss of approximately $1.1 million on the sale of businesses related to these divestitures discussed above (see Business Transformation and Restructuring).
Operating Loss
Operating loss for Fiscal 2021 included the impact of pre-tax charges of $137.2 million included in gross profit primarily associated with the transition of our product assortment to Owned Brands and, to a lesser extent, our store fleet optimization program, as well as $144.0 million associated with restructuring and other transformation initiatives, $36.5 million for non-cash impairments and $18.2 million for loss on sale of business (each as described above). The change in operating loss as a percentage of net sales between Fiscal 2021 and 2020 was primarily due to the decline in gross margin, as discussed above, as well as higher restructuring and transformation expenses in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020.
The favorable change in operating loss as a percentage of net sales between Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019 was primarily due to an increase in the gross margin, lower goodwill and other impairments compared to the prior year period, partially offset by increased SG&A expenses and restructuring and transformation initiative expenses as well as the impact of reductions of net sales, which reflected the impact of the temporary nationwide closure of the majority of our stores due to COVID-19, nearly all of which reopened as of July 2020, and of the divestitures discussed above (see Business Transformation and Restructuring).
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net was $64.7 million, $76.9 million, and $64.8 million in Fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The decrease in Fiscal 2021 interest expense, net was primarily driven by decreased interest costs attributable to our revolving credit facilities and the impact of the repurchase of a portion of our senior unsecured notes in Fiscal 2020. For Fiscal 2020, the increase in interest expense, net was primarily driven by lower interest income on investments and increased interest costs attributable to our revolving credit facilities, primarily relating to the ABL Facility entered into in Fiscal 2020, partially offset by lower interest costs for our senior unsecured notes, primarily related to the repurchase of a portion of the senior unsecured notes in August 2020. For Fiscal 2019, interest expense, net primarily related to interest on the senior unsecured notes issued in July 2014.
(Loss) Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
During Fiscal 2021, we recorded a $0.4 million loss on the partial repayment of senior unsecured notes. During Fiscal 2020, we recorded a $77 million gain on the repurchase of $75 million principal amount of 4.915% senior unsecured notes due August 1, 2034 and $225 million principal of 5.165% senior unsecured notes due August 1, 2044 (see "Long Term Debt," Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate was (18.4)% for Fiscal 2021, 55.2% for Fiscal 2020, and 19.7% for Fiscal 2019.
For Fiscal 2021, the effective tax rate reflects the recording of a valuation allowance against our U.S federal and state deferred tax assets (discussed below), as well as a benefit resulting from an adjustment to the estimated net operating loss incurred in Fiscal 2020 which was carried back, under the provisions of the CARES Act, to a year in which the tax rate was 35%.
For Fiscal 2020, the effective tax rate reflected the carry back of the net operating loss to a year in which the tax rate was 35% under the CARES Act, and included the impact of the benefit of certain tax planning strategies the Company deployed, in addition to the losses from the divestitures of CTS, Linen Holdings and Cost Plus, partially offset by the impact of impairment charges for tradename and certain store-level assets, the gain on the divestiture of PMall, a benefit related to the carry back of the Fiscal 2019 net operating loss under the CARES Act, and other discrete tax items resulting in net after tax benefits.
For Fiscal 2019, the effective tax rate reflected the impact of charges, portions of which are non-deductible for tax purposes, for goodwill and other impairments, an incremental charge for markdowns, severance costs, shareholder activity costs and a loss from a sale-leaseback transaction, including transaction costs.
In assessing the recoverability of our deferred tax assets, we evaluated the available objective positive and negative evidence to estimate whether it is more likely than not that sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit use of existing deferred tax assets in each taxpaying jurisdiction. A valuation allowance is a non-cash charge, and does not limit our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets, including our ability to utilize tax loss and credit carryforward amounts, against future taxable income.
During Fiscal 2021, we concluded that, based on our evaluation of available objective positive and negative evidence, it is no longer more likely than not that our net U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets are recoverable. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, the key assumptions used to determine positive and negative evidence included our cumulative taxable loss for the past three years, current trends related to actual taxable earnings or losses, and expected future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, as well as timing and cost of our transformation initiatives and their expected associated benefits. Accordingly, we recorded a charge of $181.5 million in the third quarter of Fiscal 2021 as a reserve against our net U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets. As of February 26, 2022, the total valuation allowance relative to U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets was $224.3 million.
The amount of the deferred tax assets considered realizable, and the associated valuation allowance, could be adjusted in a future period if estimates of future taxable income change or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as projections for future growth.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted in the United States, which provided for certain changes to tax laws which impacted our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. We implemented certain provisions of the CARES Act, such as deferring employer payroll taxes and utilizing the ability to carry back and deduct losses to offset prior income in previously filed tax returns. As of February 27, 2021, the Company had deferred $3.1 million of employer payroll taxes, which were deposited by December 2021. As of February 26, 2022 and February 27, 2021, under the CARES Act, we recorded income tax benefits of $18.7 million and $152.0 million, respectively, as a result of the Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019 net operating losses were carried back to prior years during which the federal tax rate was 35%.
For Fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, the effective tax rate included net benefit of approximately $6.0 million, net benefit of approximately $2.1 million, and net expense of approximately $4.3 million, respectively, due to the recognition of discrete federal and state tax items.
Potential volatility in the effective tax rate from year to year may occur as we are required each year to determine whether new information changes our assessment of both the probability that a tax position will effectively be sustained and the appropriateness of the amount of recognized benefit.
Net Loss
As a result of the factors described above, the net loss for Fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, was $559.6 million, $150.8 million, and $613.8 million, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We ended Fiscal 2021 in a solid cash and liquidity position, which we anticipate maintaining, to provide us the flexibility to fund our ongoing initiatives and act upon other opportunities that may arise. As of February 26, 2022, we had approximately $439.5 million in cash and cash equivalents, a decrease of approximately $913.5 million as compared with February 27, 2021, which included $589.4 million for share repurchases. We believe that existing and internally generated funds, as well as availability under our existing credit facilities, will be sufficient to continue to finance our operations for the next twelve months. If necessary, we have the ability to borrow under our ABL Facility, which matures on August 9, 2026. Our ability to borrow under the ABL Facility is subject to customary conditions, including no default, the accuracy of representations and warranties and borrowing
base availability. Borrowing base availability under the ABL Facility is based upon a specified borrowing base consisting of a percentage of our eligible inventory and credit card receivables as defined in the ABL Facility, net of applicable reserves (see "Long Term Debt," Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements). As of February 26, 2022, the Company had no loans outstanding and had outstanding letters of credit of $96.4 million under the ABL Facility.
In Fiscal 2020, similar to other retailers, we withheld portions of and/or delayed payments to certain of our business partners as we sought to renegotiate payment terms, in order to further maintain liquidity during the period of temporary store closures. In some instances, the renegotiations of lease terms have led to agreements with landlords for rent abatements or rental deferrals. Total payments withheld and/or delayed or deferred as of February 26, 2022 were approximately $1.9 million and are included in current liabilities. During Fiscal 2021, we recognized reduced rent expense of $2.7 million related to rent abatement concessions. Additional negotiations of payment terms are still in process, and there can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully renegotiate payment terms with all such business partners, and the ultimate outcome of these activities including the responses of certain business partners are not yet known. We are also executing on our business transformation program, which includes the closure, as of February 26, 2022, of 207 mostly Bed Bath & Beyond stores under our store fleet optimization program and the introduction of new Owned Brand products in a number of categories.
Our liquidity may continue to be negatively impacted by the uncertainty regarding the spread of COVID-19 and the timing of economic recovery (see "Item 1A - Disruptions in the financial markets could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s ability to access our cash and cash equivalents").
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures for Fiscal 2021 were $354.2 million, and for Fiscal 2022 are projected to be approximately $390.0 million to $410.0 million. Our capital expenditures in Fiscal 2021 were related to digital and omni-channel capabilities, store remodels and investments in technology across a number of areas including supply chain, merchandising and finance.
We continue to review and prioritize our capital needs and remain committed to making the required investments in our infrastructure to help position us for continued growth and success. Key areas of investment include: continuing to improve the presentation and content as well as the functionality, general search and navigation across our customer facing digital channels; improving customer data integration and customer relations management capabilities; continuing to enhance service offerings to our customers; continuing to strengthen and deepen our information technology, analytics, marketing, e-commerce, merchandising and finance capabilities; and creating more flexible fulfillment options designed to improve our delivery capabilities and lower our shipping costs. These and other investments are expected to, among other things, provide a seamless and compelling customer experience across our omni-channel retail platform.
Stock Repurchases
During Fiscal 2021, we repurchased approximately 28.3 million shares of our common stock, at a total cost of approximately $589.4 million, which included approximately 27.7 million shares at a total cost of approximately $574.9 million repurchased under our share repurchase programs as authorized by our Board of Directors, as well as approximately 0.6 million shares, at a total cost of approximately $14.5 million to cover employee related taxes withheld on vested restricted stock, restricted stock unit awards and performance stock unit awards.
During Fiscal 2021, we announced that we intended to complete our $1 billion three-year share repurchase plan two years ahead of schedule. The repurchases made during Fiscal 2021 of $574.9 million, combined with the accelerated share repurchase programs entered into in Fiscal 2020 totaling $375.0 million (discussed below), resulted in the repurchase of $950.0 million under this plan as of February 26, 2022. An additional approximately $40.0 million was repurchased in March of 2022.
In the first quarter of Fiscal 2020, the Company had postponed share repurchases, but lifted this postponement in October 2020. In October 2020, the Company entered into an accelerated share repurchase agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association to repurchase $225.0 million of its common stock, subject to market conditions, which settled in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, resulting in the repurchase of a total of 10.8 million shares. In January 2021, the Company entered into a second accelerated share repurchase agreement to repurchase an aggregate $150.0 million of its common stock, subject to market conditions. This resulted in the repurchase of 5.0 million shares in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, and an additional 0.2 million shares received upon final settlement in the first quarter of Fiscal 2021. During Fiscal 2020, the Company also repurchased approximately 0.6 million shares of its common stock, at a total cost of approximately $5.1 million, to cover employee related taxes withheld on vested restricted stock, restricted stock unit awards and performance stock unit awards.
Between December 2004 and April 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized, through several share repurchase programs, the repurchase of $12.950 billion of its shares of common stock. Since 2004 through the end of Fiscal 2021, the Company has repurchased approximately $11.685 billion of its common stock through share repurchase programs. The Company also acquires shares of its common stock to cover employee related taxes withheld on vested restricted stock, restricted stock units and performance stock unit awards. Since the initial authorization in December 2004, the aggregate total of common stock repurchased is approximately 262.2 million shares for a total cost of approximately $11.685 billion. The Company had approximately $1.267 billion remaining of authorized share repurchases as of February 26, 2022.
Decisions regarding share repurchases are within the discretion of the Board of Directors, and are influenced by a number of factors, including the price of our common stock, general business and economic conditions, our financial condition and operating results, the emergence of alternative investment or acquisition opportunities, changes in business strategy and other factors. Our share repurchase program could change, and could be influenced by several factors, including business and market conditions, such as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations or stock price. We review our alternatives with respect to our capital structure on an ongoing basis. Any future share repurchases will be subject to the determination of the Board of Directors, based on an evaluation of our earnings, financial condition and requirements, business conditions and other factors, including the restrictions on share repurchases under the ABL Facility (see "Long Term Debt," Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Debt Repurchases
During Fiscal 2021 we purchased approximately $11.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 3.749% senior unsecured notes due August 1, 2024. During Fiscal 2020, we purchased approximately $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 4.915% Senior Notes due 2034 and 5.165% Senior Notes due 2044.
Cash flow from operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for Fiscal 2021 was $17.9 million, compared with net cash provided by operating activities of $268.1 million in Fiscal 2020. The year-over-year change in operating cash flow was primarily due to higher net loss, adjusted for non-cash expenses, which included the impact of higher restructuring and transformation expenses in Fiscal 2021, as well as investments in inventory, including as a result of changing the timing of purchasing in response to the potential impact of global supply chain disruptions on timing of inventory receipts and availability of product in our stores and on our websites, and lower accounts payable, due primarily to timing of payments for merchandise, and accrued liabilities, including lower incentive compensation accruals. There were partially offset by a decrease in other current assets primarily due to the receipt of income tax refunds in Fiscal 2021. For Fiscal 2020, the decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the net decrease in cash provided by components of working capital (primarily merchandise inventories and other current assets, partially offset by accounts payable). This decrease was partially offset by a decrease in net loss, adjusted for non-cash expenses.
Retail inventory, which includes inventory in our distribution facilities for direct to customer shipments, was approximately $1.725 billion at February 26, 2022, an increase of 3.2% compared with retail inventory at February 27, 2021. We continue to focus on our inventory optimization strategies while also responding to the potential impact of global supply chain disruptions on product availability. Retail inventory at February 27, 2021 decreased approximately 18.0% compared to retail inventory at February 29, 2020, which was primarily related to the Fiscal 2020 divestitures.
Cash flow from investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for Fiscal 2021 was $349.2 million, compared with net cash provided by investing activities of $737.9 million in Fiscal 2020. For Fiscal 2021, net cash used in investing activities included $354.2 million of capital expenditures. For Fiscal 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was comprised of $386.5 million of redemptions of investment securities and $534.5 million in proceeds from the sale of PMall, CTS and Linen Holdings businesses, partially offset by $183.1 million of capital expenditures.
Cash flow from financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities for Fiscal 2021 was $606.0 million, compared with net cash used in financing activities of $632.3 million in Fiscal 2020. Net cash used in financing activities in Fiscal 2021 was primarily comprised of repurchases of common stock of $589.4 million, of which $574.9 million was related to our share repurchase program, repayments of long-term debt of $11.4 million and payments of deferred financing costs of $3.4 million. Net cash used in financing activities in Fiscal 2020 was comprised of net repayments of long-term debt of $221.4 million, a $47.6 million prepayment under an accelerated
share repurchase agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association entered into in October 2020, repurchases of our common stock of $332.5 million, payments of deferred financing costs of $7.7 million and dividend payments of $23.1 million.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of February 26, 2022 consist mainly of (i) principal and interest related to our senior unsecured notes (see "Long Term Debt," Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements), (ii) leases for stores, offices, distribution facilities and equipment (see "Leases," Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements) and (iii) purchase obligations, primarily under purchase orders issued for merchandise and for certain capital expenditures. Total capital expenditures for Fiscal 2021 were $354.2 million, and for Fiscal 2022 are projected to be approximately $390.0 million to $410.0 million.
Approximately $284.4 million in principal amount of our senior unsecured notes are due August 1, 2024, with the remaining principal balances due August 1, 2034 and August 1, 2044. Our lease obligations include both operating and finance leases, and have various terms extending through 2041, with approximately $451.9 million in minimum lease payments due in Fiscal 2022, and declining amounts due each year thereafter.
These obligations are considered as part of our overall capital allocation and liquidity management processes referred to above.
SEASONALITY
Our business is subject to seasonal influences. Generally, our sales volumes are higher in the calendar months of August, November, and December, and lower in February.
INFLATION
In Fiscal 2021, we experienced inflationary pressures in various parts of our business, including, but not limited to, product cost pressure as well as increased freight and shipping costs across our supply chain. We continue to monitor the impact of inflation on the costs of materials, labor, and other costs required to manage our business in order to minimize its effects through pricing strategies, productivity improvements and cost reductions. There can be no assurance, however, that our operating results will not be affected by inflation in the future. See also Risk Factor "Rising inflation may adversely affect us by increasing costs of materials, labor and other costs beyond what we can recover through price increases".
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to establish accounting policies and to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be relevant under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. In particular, judgment is used in areas such as inventory valuation, impairment of long-lived assets, goodwill and other indefinite lived intangible assets, accruals for self-insurance and income and certain other taxes. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Inventory Valuation: Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Inventory costs are primarily calculated using the weighted average retail inventory method.
Under the retail inventory method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the resulting gross margins are calculated by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the retail values of inventories. The inputs associated with determining the cost-to-retail ratio include: merchandise purchases, net of returns to vendors, discounts and volume and incentive rebates; inbound freight expenses; import charges, including duties, insurance and commissions.
The retail inventory method contains certain management judgments that may affect inventory valuation. At any one time, inventories include items that have been written down to our best estimate of their realizable value. Judgment is required in estimating realizable value and factors considered are the age of merchandise, anticipated demand based on factors such as customer preferences and fashion trends and anticipated changes in product assortment (including related to the launch of our Owned Brands), as well as anticipated markdowns to reduce the price of merchandise from its recorded retail price to a retail price at which it is expected to be sold in the future. These estimates are based on historical experience and current information about future events which are inherently uncertain. Actual realizable value could differ materially from this estimate based upon future customer demand or economic conditions, including the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We estimate our reserve for shrinkage throughout the year based on historical shrinkage and any current trends, if applicable. Actual shrinkage is recorded at year end based upon the results of our physical inventory counts for locations at which counts were conducted. For locations where physical inventory counts were not conducted in the fiscal year, an estimated shrink reserve is recorded based on historical shrinkage and any current trends, if applicable. Historically, our shrinkage has not been volatile.
We accrue for merchandise in transit once we take legal ownership and title to the merchandise; as such, an estimate for merchandise in transit is included in our merchandise inventories.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets: We review long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of these assets may exceed their current fair values. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the assets. Judgment is required in estimating the fair value of the assets including assumptions related to sales growth rates and market rental rates. These estimates are based on historical experience and current information about future events which are inherently uncertain.
In Fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, we recorded $30.8 million, $92.9 million, and $75.1 million, respectively, of non-cash pre-tax impairment charges within goodwill and other impairments in the consolidated statement of operations for certain store-level assets, including leasehold improvements and operating lease assets. Of the stores impaired during Fiscal 2021, partial impairments were recorded at 50 stores resulting in a remaining net book value of long-lived assets at risk of $46.4 million as of February 26, 2022, inclusive of leasehold improvements and right-of-use assets. We will continue to monitor these stores closely. If actual results differ from the estimated undiscounted future cash flows or the estimated price market participants would be willing to pay to sublease store operating leases and acquire remaining store assets, which among other factors, may be impacted by the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may be exposed to additional impairment losses that may be material. If events or market conditions affect the estimated fair value to the extent that a long-lived asset is impaired, we will adjust the carrying value of these long-lived assets in the period in which the impairment occurs.
Other Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets: We review other intangibles that have indefinite lives for impairment annually as of the end of the fiscal year or when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of these assets might exceed their current fair values. Impairment testing is based upon the best information available, including estimates of fair value which incorporate assumptions marketplace participants would use in making their estimates of fair value. Significant assumptions and estimates are required, including, but not limited to, projecting future cash flows, determining appropriate discount rates, margins, growth rates, and other assumptions, to estimate the fair value of indefinite lived intangible assets. Although we believe that the assumptions and estimates made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact our reported financial results.
Other indefinite lived intangible assets were recorded as a result of acquisitions and primarily consist of tradenames. We value our tradenames using a relief-from-royalty approach, which assumes the value of the tradename is the discounted cash flows of the amount that would be paid by a hypothetical market participant had they not owned the tradename and instead licensed the tradename from another company. For Fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, for certain tradenames within other indefinite lived intangible assets, we completed a quantitative impairment analysis by comparing the fair value of the tradenames to their carrying value and recognized non-cash pre-tax tradename impairment charges of $5.7 million, $35.1 million, and $41.8 million, respectively, within goodwill and other impairments in the consolidated statement of operations. For the remaining other indefinite lived intangible assets, we assessed qualitative factors as of February 26, 2022 in order to determine whether any events and circumstances existed which indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair value of these other indefinite lived assets did not exceed their carrying values and concluded no such events or circumstances existed which would require an impairment test be performed. As of February 26, 2022, we have $16.3 million of remaining other indefinite lived intangible assets. If actual results differ from the estimated future cash flows, which, among other factors, may be impacted by the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may be exposed to additional impairment losses that may be material. In the future, if events or market conditions affect the estimated fair value to the extent that an asset is impaired, we will adjust the carrying value of these assets in the period in which the impairment occurs.
Self-Insurance: We utilize a combination of third-party insurance and self-insurance for a number of risks including workers’ compensation, general liability, cyber liability, property liability, automobile liability and employee related health care benefits (a portion of which is paid by our employees). Liabilities associated with the risks that we retain are not discounted and are estimated by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial assumptions. Although our claims experience has not displayed substantial volatility in the past, actual experience could materially vary from our historical experience in the future. Factors that affect these estimates include but are not limited to: inflation, the number and severity of claims and regulatory changes. In the future, if we conclude an adjustment to self-insurance accruals is required, the liability will be adjusted accordingly.
Beginning in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, we began insuring portions of our workers' compensation and medical insurance through a wholly owned captive insurance subsidiary (the "Captive") to enhance our risk financing strategies. The Captive is subject to regulations in Vermont, including those relating to its levels of liquidity. The Captive was in compliance with all regulations as of February 26, 2022.
Taxes: The Company accounts for its income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in earnings in the period that includes the enactment date.
In assessing the recoverability of our deferred tax assets, we evaluate the available objective positive and negative evidence to estimate whether it is more likely than not that sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit use of existing deferred tax assets in each taxpaying jurisdiction. For any deferred tax asset in excess of the amount for which it is more likely than not that we will realize a benefit, we establish a valuation allowance. A valuation allowance is a non-cash charge, and does not limit our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets, including our ability to utilize tax loss and credit carryforward amounts, against future taxable income.
During Fiscal 2021, we concluded that, based on our evaluation of available objective positive and negative evidence, it is no longer more likely than not that our net U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets are recoverable. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, the key assumptions used to determine positive and negative evidence included our cumulative book loss for the past three years, current trends related to actual taxable earnings or losses, and expected future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, as well as timing and cost of our transformation initiatives and their expected associated benefits. Accordingly, we recorded a charge of $181.5 million in the third quarter of Fiscal 2021 as a reserve against our net U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets. As of February 26, 2022, the total valuation allowance relative to U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets was $224.3 million.
The amount of the deferred tax assets considered realizable, and the associated valuation allowance, could be adjusted in a future period if estimates of future taxable income change or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as projections for future growth.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. government enacted comprehensive tax legislation commonly referred to as the Tax Act. The Tax Act included a mandatory one-time tax on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries, and as a result, all previously unremitted earnings for which no U.S. deferred tax liability had been previously accrued has now been subject to U.S. tax. Notwithstanding the U.S. taxation of these amounts, the Company intends to continue to reinvest the unremitted earnings of its Canadian subsidiary. Accordingly, no additional provision has been made for U.S. or additional non-U.S. taxes with respect to these earnings, except for the transition tax resulting from the Tax Act. In the event of repatriation to the U.S., it is expected that such earnings would be subject to non-U.S. withholding taxes offset, in whole or in part, by U.S. foreign tax credits.
The Company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is at least more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon settlement with the taxing authorities.
Potential volatility in the effective tax rate from year to year may occur as the Company is required each year to determine whether new information changes the assessment of both the probability that a tax position will effectively be sustained and the appropriateness of the amount of recognized benefit.
The Company also accrues for certain other taxes as required by its operations.
Judgment is required in determining the provision for income and other taxes and related accruals, and deferred tax assets and liabilities. In the ordinary course of business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Additionally, the Company's various tax returns are subject to audit by various tax authorities. Although the Company believes that its estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Form 10-K and Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21 E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 including, but not limited to, our progress and anticipated progress towards our long-term objectives, as well as more generally the status of our future liquidity and financial condition and our outlook for our 2022 Fiscal year. Many of these forward-looking statements can be identified by use of words such as may, will, expect, anticipate, approximate, estimate, assume, continue, model, project, plan, goal, preliminary, and similar words and phrases, although the absence of those words does not necessarily mean that statements are not forward-looking. Our actual results and future financial condition may differ materially from those expressed in any such forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. Such factors include, without limitation: general economic conditions including the recent supply chain disruptions, labor shortages, wage pressures, rising inflation and the ongoing military conflict between Russia and Ukraine; a challenging overall macroeconomic environment and a highly competitive retailing environment; risks associated with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the governmental responses to it, including its impacts across our businesses on demand and operations, as well as on the operations of our suppliers and other business partners, and the effectiveness of our and governmental actions taken in response to these risks; changing consumer preferences, spending habits and demographics; demographics and other macroeconomic factors that may impact the level of spending for the types of merchandise sold by us; challenges in executing our omni-channel and transformation strategy, including our ability to establish and profitably maintain the appropriate mix of digital and physical presence in the markets we serve; our ability to successfully execute our store fleet optimization strategies, including our ability to achieve anticipated cost savings and to not exceed anticipated costs; our ability to execute on any additional strategic transactions and realize the benefits of any acquisitions, partnerships, investments or divestitures; disruptions to our information technology systems, including but not limited to security breaches of systems protecting consumer and employee information or other types of cybercrimes or cybersecurity attacks; damage to our reputation in any aspect of our operations; the cost of labor, merchandise, logistical costs and other costs and expenses; potential supply chain disruption due to trade restrictions or otherwise, and other factors such as natural disasters, pandemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic, political instability, labor disturbances, product recalls, financial or operational instability of suppliers or carriers, and other items; inflation and the related increases in costs of materials, labor and other costs; inefficient management of relationships and dependencies on third-party service providers; our ability to attract and retain qualified employees in all areas of the organization; unusual weather patterns and natural disasters, including the impact of climate change; uncertainty and disruptions in financial markets; volatility in the price of our common stock and its effect, and the effect of other factors, including the COVID-19 pandemic, on our capital allocation strategy; changes to statutory, regulatory and other legal requirements or deemed noncompliance with such requirements; changes to accounting rules, regulations and tax laws, or new interpretations of existing accounting standards or tax laws; new, or developments in existing, litigation, claims or assessments; and a failure of our business partners to adhere to appropriate laws, regulations or standards. Except as required by law, we do not undertake any obligation to update our forward-looking statements.