ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements that are based upon current expectations and involve risks, assumptions and uncertainties.
Overview
Vinco Ventures, formerly known as Edison Nation, Inc., Xspand Products Lab, Inc. and Idea Lab Products, Inc., is a Nevada corporation incorporated on July 18, 2017. In connection with the acquisition of an 80% equity interest in Lomotif by ZVV, our joint venture with ZASH in 2021, and our recent acquisition of AdRizer, we are transitioning from focusing on innovation, development and commercialization of end-to-end consumer products to innovation, development and commercialization of digital media and content technologies. For a discussion of the platforms and businesses operated through our significant subsidiaries and consolidated variable interest entities, please see “Vinco Ventures: Focused on Digital Media and Content Technologies” under Item 1 Business of this Annual Report.
Significant Developments
For a discussion of completed and pending strategic transactions since the beginning of 2021, please see “Recent and Ongoing Strategic Transactions” under Item 1 Business of this Annual Report.
Covid-19 Pandemic
COVID-19 has caused and continues to cause significant loss of life and disruption to the global economy, including the curtailment of activities by businesses and consumers in much of the world as governments and others seek to limit the spread of the disease, and through business and transportation shutdowns and restrictions on people’s movement and congregation.
As a result of the pandemic, we have experienced, and continue to experience, weakened demand for our historical products. Many of our customers have been unable to sell our products in their stores due to government-mandated closures and have deferred or significantly reduced orders for our products. We expect these trends to continue until such closures are significantly curtailed or lifted. In addition, the pandemic has reduced foot traffic in the stores where our products are sold that remain open, and the global economic impact of the pandemic has temporarily reduced consumer demand for our products as they focus on purchasing essential goods.
In the United States and Asia, many of our key accounts remain closed or are operating at significantly reduced volumes. As a result, we have made the strategic decision to expand our operations through our Edison Nation Medical (“Ed Med”) division. Through Ed Med, the Company wholesales Personal Protective Equipment (“PPE”) products through an online portal for hospitals, government agencies and distributors.
Given these factors, the Company anticipates that the greatest impact from the COVID-19 pandemic was in 2020 and occurred in the first quarter of 2020 resulting in a significant net sales decline as compared to the first quarter of 2019.
In addition, certain of our suppliers and the manufacturers of certain of our products were adversely impacted by COVID-19. As a result, we faced delays or difficulty sourcing products, which negatively affected our business and financial results. Even if we are able to find alternate sources for such products, they may cost more and cause delays in our supply chain, which could adversely impact our profitability and financial condition.
We have taken actions to protect our employees in response to the pandemic, including closing our corporate offices and requiring our office employees to work from home. At our distribution centers, certain practices are in effect to safeguard workers, including a staggered work schedule, and we are continuing to monitor direction from local and national governments carefully. Additionally, our two retail locations have been closed until further notice.
As a result of the impact of COVID-19, and the unknown future impact of the pandemic, we implemented cost control measures and cash management actions during 2020, including:
● Furloughed a significant portion of our employees in the first quarter of 2020;
● Implemented a 20% salary reductions across our executive team and other members of upper-level management in the first and second quarter of 2020;
● Executed reductions in operating expenses, planned inventory levels and non-product development capital expenditures throughout 2020; and
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. The accounting estimates that require our most significant, difficult and subjective judgments have an impact on revenue recognition, the determination of share-based compensation and financial instruments. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Principles of Consolidation
 
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Vinco Ventures, Inc. and its wholly-owned, majority owned subsidiaries and consolidated variable interest entities. In July 2022, our joint venture with Zash, ZVV, acquired an 80% equity interest in Lomotif. We determined that in accordance with variable interest entity accounting, we would consolidate the results and position of ZVV into our consolidated financial statements.
Use of Estimates
 
Preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, together with amounts disclosed in the related notes to the financial statements.
 
The Company’s significant estimates used in these financial statements include, but are not limited to, accounts receivable reserves, the valuation allowance related to the Company’s deferred tax assets, the recoverability and useful lives of long-lived assets, debt conversion features, stock-based compensation, certain assumptions related to the valuation of the reserved shares and the assets acquired and liabilities assumed related to the Company’s acquisitions. Certain of the Company’s estimates could be affected by external conditions, including those unique to the Company and general economic conditions. It is reasonably possible that these external factors could have an effect on the Company’s estimates and could cause actual results to differ from those estimates.
Long-Lived Assets
 
We record intangible assets based on their fair value on the date of acquisition. Intangible assets include the cost of developed technology, customer relationships, trademarks and identifiable media and influencer platforms. Intangible assets are amortized utilizing the straight-line method over their remaining economic useful lives. A significant percentage of the Company’s’ long term assets are intangibles assets and therefore, estimates regarding the fair value of these assets have a material impact on our financial statements.
Goodwill
 
Goodwill is recorded for the difference between the fair value of the purchase consideration over the fair value of the net identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired. We perform an impairment assessment of goodwill on an annual basis, or whenever impairment indicators exist. In the absence of any impairment indicators, goodwill is assessed for impairment during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. Judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on market conditions and operational performance of the business.
 
We may assess our goodwill for impairment initially using a qualitative approach to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of these assets is greater than their carrying value. When performing a qualitative test, we assess various factors including industry and market conditions, macroeconomic conditions and performance of our businesses. If the results of the qualitative assessment indicate that it is more likely than not that our goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are impaired, a quantitative impairment analysis would be performed to determine if impairment is required. We may also elect to perform a quantitative analysis of goodwill initially rather than using a qualitative approach.
 
The impairment testing for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level. The valuation methods used in the quantitative fair value assessment, discounted cash flow and market multiples method, requires our management to make certain assumptions and estimates regarding certain industry trends and future profitability of our reporting units. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds the related carrying value, the reporting unit’s goodwill is considered not to be impaired and no further testing is performed. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recorded for the difference. The valuation of goodwill is affected by, among other things, our business plan for the future and estimated results of future operations. Future events could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist, and, therefore, that goodwill may be impaired. Goodwill is a significant percentage of the Company’s’ long term assets and therefore, estimates regarding the fair value of our goodwill have a material impact on our financial statements.
Warrant Accounting
 
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”.
 
The Company classifies a warrant to purchase shares of its common stock as a liability on its consolidated balance sheets as this warrant is a free-standing financial instrument that may require the Company to transfer consideration upon exercise Each warrant is initially recorded at fair value on date of grant using the Monte-Carlo simulation pricing model and net of issuance costs, and it is subsequently re-measured to fair value at each subsequent balance sheet date. Changes in fair value of the warrant are recognized as a component of other income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The Company will continue to adjust the liability for changes in fair value until the earlier of the exercise or expiration of the warrant. A significant percentage of the Company’s’ long term liabilities are warrant liability and therefore, estimates regarding the fair value of our goodwill have a material impact on our financial statements.
Results of Operations
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenues from continuing operations decreased by $2,224,000 or 18.5%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the significant decrease in personal protection equipment sales experienced during 2021 as compared to 2020. The Company’s new line of business, including its Lomotif business line and related content creation and distribution, did not generate significant revenues during 2021 as those business lines concentrated on growing Lomotif’s user bases. In February, 2022, the Company acquired AdRizer, a digital advertising company, which is expected to be integrated into the Company’s media and entertainment platforms, including Lomotif, and to facilitate generating revenue for the Lomotif business lines. AdRizer is also generating revenue from its existing business.
Cost of Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of revenues decreased by $2,258,000 or 23.6%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the significant decrease in personal protection equipment sales experienced during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Gross Profit
For the year ended December 31, 2021, gross profit increased by $33,000, or 1.3%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase reflected the impact of the Company replacing lost personal protection equipment sales with higher margin revenue from its Honey Badger and NFT business lines.
Operating Expenses
Selling, general and administrative costs
Selling, general and administrative costs (“SGA costs”) expenses increased significantly during 2021 as compared to 2020 due to a significant expansion of the Company’s activities requiring SGA costs as it transitioned into a digital media and entertainment company during 2021. Total operating expenses from continuing operations were $79,947,000 in 2021 as compared to $10,010,000 in 2020, an increase of $68,937,000. The largest increase was due to stock-based compensation, which increased $40,114,000, which represented 58.2% of the total year over year increase in SGA costs. The increase in stock-based compensation was primarily due to vesting of equity grants associated with the transition of the Company’s executive management teams during the fourth quarter of 2021, along with stock-based compensation due to stock options issued to Lomotif employees for shares of Lomotif, which is a VIE consolidated by the Company. The next largest increase in SGA costs between 2021 and 2020 was an increase of $10,660,000 in legal and professional fees, which were driven by professional fees associated with the acquisition of the Company’s share of Lomotif through ZVV, its joint venture with ZASH, along with increased audit and accounting costs, and legal and professional costs associated with the Company’s various new business lines and proposed spin-off of certain of its business lines. In addition, during 2021, the Company significantly increased its advertising, marketing and promotion cost as it worked to build the awareness of the Lomotif application in the United States and its other worldwide user bases, including India, Brazil and Nigeria. In addition, the Company’s compensation costs and general and administrative costs increased during 2021, driven by an increase in its employee headcount, primarily driven by the addition of Lomotif in July 2021.
Impairment
For the year ended December 31, 2021, there were impairment charges of $3,742,000 related to our annual impairment assessment of our consumer products business. The amount recognized for impairment is equal to the difference between the carrying value and the asset’s fair value. There were no impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 related our consumer products business.
Other Income (Expense)
Rental Income
Rental income was $71,543 for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus $102,815 in the previous year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the sale of a rental property during the year.
Interest expense
Interest expense was approximately $72,784,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus approximately $3,378,000 in the previous year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense was related to the amortization of financing fees of the convertible notes issued to Hudson Bay Master Fund Ltd. (“Hudson Bay”) during 2021.
Loss of issuances of warrants
The Company classifies a warrant to purchase shares of its common stock as a liability on its consolidated balance sheets as this warrant is a free-standing financial instrument that may require the Company to transfer consideration upon exercise. Each warrant is initially recorded at fair value on date of grant using the sing the Monte-Carlo simulation pricing model and subsequently re-measured to fair value at each subsequent balance sheet date. Changes in fair value of the warrant are recognized as a component of other income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The Company will continue to adjust the liability for changes in fair value until the earlier of the exercise or expiration of the warrant.
During 2021, loss on issuances of warrants was approximately $656,504,000 while the change in fair value of warrant liability was an increase of $94,818,000, for a net other expense of approximately $561,686,000 due to warrants recognized by the Company for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Change in fair value of short term investment
Change in fair value of short-term investment was $840,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus $22,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease $818,000 or 3718%.
Loss on Disposal of Assets and Interests in VIE’s
Loss on disposal of assets and interests in VIE was approximately $1,194,000. The loss related to the dissolution of Ed Roses, LLC and a change in ownership related to Global Clean Solutions, LLC from 50% to 75%.
Income tax (benefit) expense
In 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized an income tax expense of $190,000 and $19,000, respectively, which were primarily driven by state tax liabilities. In general, the Company has reserved against recognizing the income tax benefit generated by the net operating losses it generated in 2021 and 2020.
Income (Loss) from discontinued operations
Income (loss) from discontinued operations represents the operations of Cloud B. which was divested in 2021. Loss from discontinued operations increased to $5,112,000 in 2021, compared to a gain of $5,185,000 in 2020.
Net Loss
The Company incurred a net loss of $713,173,000 during 2021 as compared to a net loss of $5,153,000 during 2020, a 13738.8% increase. The increase in net loss was primarily triggered by the impact of the Company’s requirement to recognize the fair value of warrants that the Company issued and the change in fair values of exercised and outstanding warrants during 2021. The total impact of warrant accounting was a net other expense of $561,686,000. In addition, stock based compensation was $43,381,000 during 2021. Each of these expense elements are affected by the fair value of the Company’s stock which is the market price of the Company’s common stock as traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market. During 2021, the Company experienced a wide range of prices from a low of $1.24 and high of $10.82 per share, which can have a significant impact on the fair market value of the Company’s warrants and equity compensation instruments of their grant dates, vesting dates and exercise dates. In the aggregate, these two cost elements constituted 84.8% of the Company’s net loss during 2021. The remaining increase in net loss during 2021 was driven by the increased size of the Company due to ZVV’s acquisition of an 80% equity interest in Lomotif and its transition into a media and entertainment Company, which caused the Company to increase its headcount, its sales and marketing activities, and its legal and professional fees incurred in connection with its acquisitions, contracts and proposed spin-off activities.
Cash Flows
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our sources and uses of cash were as follows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $47,507,000, which included a net loss of $715,229,000 that included non-cash expense items which had a significant impact on the Company’s results. The use of cash for operations during 2021 reflected the costs incurred by the business, including the costs associated with the acquisition and subsequent operation and marketing and promotion of Lomotif, along with the large amount of professional fees incurred by the Company during the year. Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2,439,000, which included a net loss of $6,307,000 that included $1,092,000 of cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities stock-based compensation of $3,242,000, depreciation and amortization of $1,354,000 and amortization of debt issuance costs of $2,358,000 offset by gains of divestitures of $4,912,000.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $118,644,000 and $1,648,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in investing activities in 2021 was attributable to ZVV’s acquisition of an 80% equity interest in Lomotif and to loans made by the Company to ZASH, and for investment purposes to PZAJ
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $353,514,000, which related mostly to net proceeds from exercise of warrants and borrowings from convertible notes payable. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $3,924,000, which related mostly to borrowings from notes payable.
Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents
As a result of the cash activities described above, during 2021, the Company’s cash increased by $187,363,000 and as of December 31, 2021, the Company had $187,612,000 in cash and cash equivalents, which included $100,000,000 held in a restricted cash account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As discussed above, the Company incurred significant losses during 2021, and has a history of losses since inception. In 2021, a significant percentage of its loss was driven by non-cash expenses items. When looking at the Company’s use of cash for operations, the Company used approximately $43 million in cash for operations which more closely reflected the expected cash requirements for the current business of the operations. To fund its operations, the Company will need to utilize its unrestricted cash on hand until it begins to generate positive cash flows from operations. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $87,612,000 of unrestricted cash on hand, which is expected to provide the Company sufficient cash resources needed to maintain its operations for at least the next 12 months. Furthermore, the Company may determine it is in the best interests of the Company to pursue additional investments, acquisitions, or funding of marketing and promotional efforts as the Company expands its presence and capabilities within the digital media marketplace. To do so, the Company may require additional cash resources. As an example, in February 2022, the Company completed an acquisition of AdRizer, a digital advertising Company, which included a cash payment of $38,000,000 from the Company’s unrestricted cash balance. To offset this expense, the Company generated approximately $79,182,000 in net new funding from the exercise of warrants during January and February of 2022. The Company expects that it will continue to have access to financing, if needed, to pursue additional investments and acquisitions while its builds the profitability of its business.
In addition, if the Company is unable to raise capital through the sale of additional equity or the exercise of outstanding warrants, the Company believes it can implement steps that would alleviate any going concern issues, including but not limited to the following steps:
● Borrow money under debt securities,
● Extend maturities of existing debt securities,
● Reduce headcount,
● Reduce marketing and promotional activities,
● Sell its subsidiaries.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any relationships with any organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities, that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.