ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). These forward-looking statements are not historical facts but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections. We may use words such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “foresee,” “estimate” and variations of these words and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond our control, are difficult to predict and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or forecasted. You should read this report completely and with the understanding that actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. The forward-looking statements included in this report are made as of the date of this report and should be evaluated with consideration of any changes occurring after the date of this Report. We will not update forward-looking statements even though our situation may change in the future, and we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues:
The Company’s revenues were $774,388 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,379,580 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is due to fewer projects being completed and delivered to customers. The company had multiple large orders sold during the year which have longer production times. In addition, the average revenue per job for the customer orders that were completed were lower during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. This is due to an increase in pass-through sales rather than jobs that required fabrication.
Cost of Sales:
The Company’s cost of materials was $419,098 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $455,360 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in costs in relation to revenue was due to an increase in raw material costs as a result of supply chain issues and the continuing impact of COVID-19. The company also had a higher number of smaller customer orders with low profit margins. COVID-19 related safety measures also resulted in a reduction of manufacturing productivity.
Operating Expenses:
Operating expenses consisted primarily of consulting fees, professional fees, salaries and wages, office expenses and fees associated with preparing reports and SEC filings relating to being a public company. Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $7,661,953 and $9,905,885, respectively. Although the company had an increase in G&A expenses and salaries and wages in 2021, the decrease in overall expenses was due to a reduction in share-based compensation pursuant to Licensing and Distribution Agreements that were executed in 2020.
Other Income (Expense):
Other income (expense) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $(4,390,446) and $(7,343,185), respectively. Other income (expense) consisted of gain or loss on derivative valuation, gain or loss on disposal of assets, loss on conversions, debt forgiveness and interest expense. The gain or loss on derivative valuation is directly attributable to the change in fair value of the derivative liability. Interest expense is primarily attributable the initial interest expense associated with the valuation of derivative instruments at issuance and the accretion of the convertible debentures over their respective terms. The variance primarily resulted from the fluctuation of the Company’s stock price which impacted the valuation of the derivative liabilities on the convertible debt.
Net Loss:
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11,697,109 compared with $16,324,850 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decreased loss can be explained by the decrease in share-based consulting fees and the decrease in derivative expenses in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has a shareholders’ deficit of $16,138,003 since its inception, working capital deficit of $3,085,906, negative cash flows from operations, and has limited business operations, which raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as going concern. The ability of the Company to meet its commitments as they become payable is dependent on the ability of the Company to obtain necessary financing or achieving a profitable level of operations. There is no assurance the Company will be successful in achieving these goals.
The overall working capital (deficit) decreased from $(4,057,343) at December 31, 2020 to $(3,085,906) at December 31, 2021 due to an increase in cash and raw material purchases and a decrease in derivative liabilities and accrued liabilities.
The Company requires additional capital to fully execute its marketing program and increase revenues. Presently we are relying on short term loans from our sole officer and director to meet operational shortfalls. There can be no assurance that continued funding will be available on satisfactory terms. We intend to raise additional capital through the sale of equity, loans or other short-term financing options.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,316,469 compared to $964,667 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The variance primarily resulted from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities, an increase in operating assets and a decrease in operating liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $(185,289) compared to $(33,823) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activity is due to an increase in fixed assets purchases in 2021.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, cash from financing activities was $1,648,177 compared to $1,069,810 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash from financing activity is due to an increase in proceeds from convertible debt and promissory notes during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Significant Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, warranty liabilities, share-based payments, income taxes and litigation. We base our estimates on historical and anticipated results and trends and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, including assumptions as to future events. These estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. By their nature, estimates are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Actual results that differ from our estimates could have a significant adverse effect on our operating results and financial position. We believe that the significant accounting policies and assumptions as detailed in Note 1 to the financial statements contained herein may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity than others.
Emerging Growth Company
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
● have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
● comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis);
● submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency;” and
● disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would occur if the market value of our ordinary shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and are not required to provide the information under this item.