Item 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The Company is a leading provider of business management solutions for small and mid-sized companies. The Company has developed a management platform that integrates a knowledge-based approach from the management consulting industry with tools from the human resource outsourcing industry. This platform, through the effective leveraging of human capital, helps our business owner clients run their businesses more effectively. We believe this platform, delivered through a decentralized organizational structure, differentiates BBSI from our competitors.
We report revenues in our financial results in two categories of services: professional employer services (“PEO”) and staffing.
With our PEO clients, we enter into a co-employment arrangement in which we become the administrative employer while the client maintains physical care, custody and control of their workforce. Our PEO services are billed as a percentage of client payroll; the gross amount invoiced includes direct payroll costs plus an additional percentage amount to cover employer payroll-related taxes, workers’ compensation coverage (if provided), other service related costs and a margin. However, actual costs can be higher or lower than anticipated. PEO customers are invoiced following the end of each payroll processing cycle, with payment generally due on the invoice date. Revenues for PEO services exclude direct payroll billings because we are not the primary obligor for those payments.
We generate staffing services revenues primarily from short-term staffing, contract staffing, on-site management and direct placement services. For staffing services other than direct placement, invoiced amounts include direct payroll, an amount intended to cover employer payroll-related taxes, workers’ compensation coverage, other service related costs and a margin. Staffing customers are invoiced weekly and typically have payment terms of 30 days. Direct placement services are billed at agreed fees at the time of a successful placement.
Our business is concentrated in California, and we expect to continue to derive a majority of our revenues from this market in the future. Revenues generated in our California operations accounted for 73% of our total revenues in 2021, 75% in 2020 and 77% in 2019. Consequently, any weakness in economic conditions or changes in the regulatory or insurance environment in California could have a material adverse effect on our financial results.
Our cost of revenues for PEO services includes employer payroll-related taxes and workers' compensation costs. Our cost of revenues for staffing services includes direct payroll costs, employer payroll-related taxes, employee benefits, and workers’ compensation costs. Direct payroll costs represent the gross payroll earned by staffing services employees based on salary or hourly wages. Payroll taxes and employee benefits consist of the employer's portion of Social Security and Medicare taxes, federal and state unemployment taxes and staffing services employee reimbursements for materials, supplies and other expenses, which are paid by our customer. Workers' compensation costs consist primarily of the costs associated with our workers' compensation program, including premiums for the insured program, claims reserves for the self-insured program, claims administration fees, legal fees, medical cost containment (“MCC”) expense, state administrative agency fees, third-party broker commissions, risk manager payroll, premiums for excess insurance, and costs associated with operating our two wholly owned insurance companies, AICE and Ecole.
Selling, general and administrative expenses represent both branch office and corporate-level operating expenses. Branch operating expenses consist primarily of branch office staff payroll and personnel related costs, advertising, rent, office supplies, professional and legal fees and branch incentive compensation. Corporate-level operating expenses consist primarily of executive and office staff payroll and personnel related costs, professional and legal fees, travel, occupancy costs, information systems costs, and executive and corporate staff incentive compensation.
Depreciation and amortization represent depreciation of property and equipment, leasehold improvements, software and internally developed software costs. Property, equipment, software and internally developed software costs are depreciated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, which range from 3 to 39 years. Leasehold improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over the shorter of the lease term or estimated useful life.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the following accounting estimate as critical to our business and the understanding of our results of operations. For a detailed discussion of the application of this and other accounting policies, see “Note 1 - Summary of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report. The preparation of this Annual Report on Form 10-K requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Workers' Compensation Reserves
We recognize our liability for the ultimate payment of incurred claims and claims adjustment expenses by establishing a reserve that represents our estimates of future amounts necessary to pay claims and related expenses with respect to workplace injuries that have occurred. When a claim involving a probable loss is reported, our independent third-party administrator for workers’ compensation claims (“TPA”) establishes a case reserve for the estimated amount of ultimate loss. The estimate reflects a judgment based on established case reserving practices and the experience and knowledge of the TPA regarding the nature and expected amount of the claim, as well as the estimated expenses of settling the claim, including legal and other fees and expenses of claims administration. The adequacy of such case reserves depends in part on the professional judgment of the TPA to properly and comprehensively evaluate the economic consequences of each claim.
Our reserves include an additional component for potential future increases in the cost to finally resolve open injury claims and claims incurred in prior periods but not reported (together, "IBNR") based on actuarial estimates provided by the Company’s independent actuary. IBNR reserves, unlike specific case reserves, do not apply to a specific claim but rather apply to the entire population of claims arising from a specific time period. IBNR primarily covers costs relating to:
•
Future claim payments in excess of case reserves on recorded open claims;
•
Additional claim payments on closed claims; and
•
Claims that have occurred but have not yet been reported to us.
The process of estimating unpaid claims and claims adjustment expense involves a high degree of judgment and is affected by both internal and external events, including changes in claims handling practices, modifications in reserve estimation procedures, changes in individuals involved in the reserve estimation process, inflation, trends in the litigation and settlement of pending claims, and legislative changes.
Our estimates are based on actuarial analyses and informed judgment, derived from individual experiences and expertise applied to multiple sets of data and analyses. We consider significant facts and circumstances known both at the time that loss reserves are initially established and as new facts and circumstances become known. Due to the inherent uncertainty underlying loss reserve estimates, the expenses incurred through final resolution of our liability for our workers’ compensation claims will likely vary from the related loss reserves at the reporting date. Therefore, as specific claims are paid out in the future, actual paid losses may be materially different from our current loss reserves.
A basic premise in most actuarial analyses is that historical data and past patterns demonstrated in the incurred and paid historical data form a reasonable basis upon which to project future outcomes, absent a material change. Significant structural changes to the available data can materially impact the reserve estimation process. To the extent a material change affecting the ultimate claim liability becomes known, such change is quantified to the extent possible through an analysis of internal company data and, if available and when appropriate, external data. Actuaries exercise a considerable degree of judgment in the evaluation of these factors and the need for such actuarial judgment is more pronounced when faced with material uncertainties.
We believe that the amounts recorded for our estimated liabilities for workers’ compensation claims, which are based on informed judgment, analysis of data, actuarial estimates, and analysis of other trends associated with the Company’s historical universe of claims data, are reasonable. Nevertheless, adjustments to such estimates will be required in future periods if the development of claim costs varies materially from our estimates, and such future adjustments may be material to our results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their potential effect on the Company's results of operations and financial condition, see “Note 1 - Summary of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report.
Forward-Looking Information
Statements in this Item or in Items 1, 1A, 3 and 9A of this report include forward-looking statements, which are not historical in nature and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements include, among others, discussion of economic conditions in our market areas and their effect on revenue levels, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations, the competitiveness of our service offerings, our ability to attract and retain clients and to achieve revenue growth, the effect of changes in our mix of services on gross margin, the effect of tight labor market conditions, the adequacy of our workers' compensation reserves, the effect of changes in estimates of our future claims liabilities on our workers’ compensation reserves, including the effect of changes in our reserving practices and claims management process on our actuarial estimates, expected levels of required surety deposits and letters of credit, our ability to generate sufficient taxable income in the future to utilize our deferred tax assets, the effect of our formation and operation of two wholly owned licensed insurance subsidiaries, the risks of operation and cost of our insured program, the financial viability of our excess insurance carriers, the effectiveness of our management information systems, our relationship with our primary bank lender and the availability of financing and working capital to meet our funding requirements, litigation costs, the effect of changes in the interest rate environment on the value of our investment securities and long-term debt, the adequacy of our allowance for doubtful accounts, and the potential for and effect of acquisitions.
All of our forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of the Company or industry to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Such factors with respect to the Company include our ability to retain current clients and attract new clients, the effects of governmental orders, laws or regulations imposing requirements related to the COVID-19 pandemic, difficulties associated with integrating clients into our operations, economic trends in our service areas, the potential for material deviations from expected future workers’ compensation claims experience, changes in the workers’ compensation regulatory environment in our primary markets, security breaches or failures in the Company’s information technology systems, collectability of accounts receivable, changes in effective payroll tax rates and federal and state income tax rates, the carrying values of deferred income tax assets and goodwill (which may be affected by our future operating results), the effects of inflation on our operating expenses and those of our clients, the impact of and potential changes to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, escalating medical costs, and other health care legislative initiatives on our business, the effect of conditions in the global capital markets on our investment portfolio, and the availability of capital, borrowing capacity on our revolving credit facility, or letters of credit necessary to meet state-mandated surety deposit requirements for maintaining our status as a qualified self-insured employer for workers' compensation coverage or our insured program. Additional risk factors affecting our business are discussed in Item 1A of Part I of this report. We disclaim any obligation to publicly announce any revisions to any of the forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect future events or developments.
Results of Operations
The spread of COVID-19 and resulting restrictions and labor shortages across the United States are having, and will continue to have, a negative impact on the operating results of the Company. As our clients respond to the effects of efforts to address the consequences of the pandemic, including the measures taken at various levels of government to contain the virus’s spread, we expect that our ability to add new customers, as well as to grow revenues from existing customers, will be adversely affected due to economic slowdown, business closures, labor shortages and reductions in hours worked.
The following table sets forth the percentages of total revenues represented by selected items in the Company's consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, included in Item 8 of Part II of this report.
We report PEO revenues net of direct payroll costs because we are not the primary obligor for wage payments to our clients’ employees. However, management believes that gross billings and wages are useful in understanding the volume of our business activity and serve as an important performance metric in managing our operations, including the preparation of internal operating forecasts and establishing executive compensation performance goals. We therefore present for purposes of analysis gross billings and wage information for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Because safety incentives represent consideration payable to PEO customers, safety incentive costs are netted against PEO revenue in our consolidated statements of operations. We therefore present below for purposes of analysis non-GAAP gross workers’ compensation expense, which represents workers’ compensation costs including safety incentive costs. We believe this non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating the total costs of our workers’ compensation program. In July 2020, the Company began limiting its safety incentive offering in certain markets, resulting in a substantial reduction in safety incentive costs.
In monitoring and evaluating the performance of our operations, management also reviews the following ratios, which represent selected amounts as a percentage of gross billings. Management believes these ratios are useful in understanding the efficiency and profitability of our service offerings.
The presentation of revenue on a net basis and the relative contributions of staffing and PEO services revenue can create volatility in our gross margin as a percentage of revenue. A relative increase in PEO services revenue will result in a higher gross margin as a percentage of revenue. Improvement in gross margin percentage occurs because incremental client services revenue dollars are reported as revenue net of all related direct payroll and safety incentive costs.
We refer to employees of our PEO clients as worksite employees (“WSEs”). Management reviews average and ending WSE growth to monitor and evaluate the performance of our operations. Average WSEs are calculated by dividing the number of unique individuals paid in each month by the number of months in the period. Ending WSEs represents the number of unique individuals paid in the last month of the period.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net income for 2021 was $38.1 million compared to net income of $33.8 million for 2020. Diluted income per share for 2021 was $5.00 compared to diluted income per share of $4.39 for 2020.
Revenue for 2021 totaled $955.2 million, an increase of $74.3 million or 8.4% over 2020, which reflects an increase in the Company’s PEO service fee revenue of $66.4 million or 8.5% and an increase in staffing services revenue of $8.0 million or 7.7%.
The increase in PEO services revenues was primarily attributable to an increase in average billing per WSE as well as an increase in the average number of WSEs. The increase in staffing services revenue was due primarily to the reopening of business after the impacts of COVID-19 during the prior year period.
Gross margin for 2021 totaled $204.5 million or 21.4% of revenue compared to $182.9 million or 20.8% of revenue for 2020. The increase in gross margin as a percentage of revenues is primarily a result of the factors discussed within the separate components of gross margin below.
Direct payroll costs for 2021 totaled $83.8 million or 8.8% of revenue compared to $78.4 million or 8.9% of revenue for 2020. The decrease in direct payroll costs percentage was primarily due to the increase in PEO services and decrease in staffing services within the mix of our customer base in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Payroll taxes and benefits for 2021 totaled $469.9 million or 49.2% of revenue compared to $418.8 million or 47.5% of revenue for 2020. The increase in payroll taxes and benefits as a percentage of revenues is due primarily to an increase in newly hired WSEs, which increased the amount of payroll subject to payroll taxes in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Workers’ compensation expense for 2021 totaled $196.9 million or 20.6% of revenue compared to $200.7 million or 22.8% of revenue for 2020. The decrease in workers’ compensation expense as a percentage of revenue was primarily due to favorable claims development as well as a favorable adjustment of $9.2 million related to prior period claims in 2021, compared to a favorable adjustment of $6.4 million in 2020.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for 2021 totaled $155.3 million or 16.3% of revenue compared to $141.9 million or 16.1% of revenue for 2020. The increase of $13.4 million in SG&A expense in 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in IT expense related to the launch of our myBBSI portal in 2020 and increased employee related expenses due to prior year reductions during the COVID-19 pandemic that have since been reversed, as well as increased variable employee compensation and incentive pay in 2021 related to stronger than expected financial results.
Other income, net for 2021 totaled $6.7 million compared to other income of $6.4 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a decrease in interest expense, partially offset by decreased investment income due to lower interest rates.
Our effective income tax rate for 2021 was 24.8% compared to 20.7% for 2020. Our income tax rate typically differs from the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to state taxes as well as federal and state tax credits. See “Note 9 - Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this report for additional information regarding income taxes.
A discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 can be found in Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 8, 2021.
Fluctuations in Quarterly Operating Results
We have historically experienced significant fluctuations in our quarterly operating results, including losses in the first quarter of each year, and expect such fluctuations to continue in the future. Our operating results may fluctuate due to a number of factors such as seasonality, wage limits on statutory payroll taxes, claims experience for workers’ compensation, demand for our services, and competition. Payroll taxes, as a component of cost of revenues, generally decline throughout a calendar year as the applicable statutory wage bases for federal and state unemployment taxes and Social Security taxes are exceeded on a per employee basis. Our revenue levels may be higher in the third quarter due to the effect of increased business activity of our customers’ businesses in the agriculture, food processing and forest products-related industries. In addition, revenues in the fourth quarter may be reduced by many customers’ practice of operating on holiday-shortened schedules. Workers’ compensation expense varies with both the frequency and severity of workplace injury claims reported during a quarter and the estimated future costs of such claims. In addition, positive or adverse loss development of prior period claims during a subsequent quarter may also contribute to the volatility in the Company’s estimated workers’ compensation expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's cash balance of $78.6 million, which includes cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash, decreased $155.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to a decrease of $39.5 million for the comparable period of 2020. The decrease in cash at December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 was primarily due to purchases of investments and restricted investments, decreased workers’ compensation claims liabilities, increased trade accounts receivable and repurchase of common stock, partially offset by proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments and restricted investments, increased accrued payroll, payroll taxes and related benefits and net income.
Net cash used in operating activities in 2021 amounted to $15.5 million, compared to net cash used in $27.9 million for the comparable period of 2020. In 2021, cash used in operating activities was primarily due to decreased workers’ compensation claims liabilities of $77.6 million, increased trade accounts receivable of $37.2 million and decreased safety incentive of $14.5 million, partially offset by increased accrued payroll, payroll taxes and related benefits of $49.7 million and net income of $38.1 million.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $112.9 million in 2021, compared to net cash provided of $4.1 million for the comparable period of 2020. In 2021, net cash used in investing activities consisted primarily of proceeds from sales and maturities of investments and restricted investments of $202.6 million, partially offset by purchases of investments and restricted investments of $308.6 million and purchases of property, equipment and software of $6.8 million.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2021 was $26.9 million compared to net cash used of $15.7 million for the comparable period of 2020. In 2021, cash used in financing activities primarily consisted of repurchases of common stock of $17.3 million, dividend payments of $9.1 million and common stock repurchased on vesting of stock awards to settle income tax obligations of $1.5 million, partially offset by proceeds from exercises of stock options of $1.2 million.
The Company is required to maintain minimum collateral levels for certain policies issued under the insured program, which is held in trust accounts (the “trust accounts”). The balance in the trust accounts was $273.6 million and $290.7 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The trust account balances are included as a component of the current and long-term restricted cash and investments in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
On June 30, 2021, the Company entered into a loss portfolio transfer agreement to remove all remaining outstanding workers’ compensation claims obligations for client policies issued under its insured program up to June 30, 2018. This transaction reduced the Company’s outstanding workers’ compensation liabilities by $53.1 million. The payment terms of the LPT required $5.0 million to be paid prior to June 30, 2021, with the remaining amount paid in July 2021.
In March 2022, the Company entered into an amended credit agreement (the “Amended Agreement”) with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (the “Bank”), which supersedes the previous agreement. The Amended Agreement increased the revolving credit line from $33.0 million to $50.0 million and maintained the sublimit for standby letters of credit at $8.0 million. Advances under the credit line bear interest, as selected by the Company, of (a) the daily Simple Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) plus 1.75% or (b) the one-month Term SOFR plus 1.75%. The Amended Agreement also provides for an unused commitment fee of 0.30% per year on the average daily unused amount of the revolving credit line.
The Amended Agreement replaced the financial covenants in the Agreement (as defined below) with the following financial covenants:
•
adjusted free cash flow [net profit after taxes plus interest expense (net of capitalized interest), depreciation, expense and amortization expense, less dividends/distributions] not less than $10 million as of each fiscal quarter end, determined on a rolling 4-quarter basis.
•
tangible net worth [aggregate of total stockholders' equity plus subordinated debt less any intangible assets and less any loans or advances to, or investments in, any related entities or individuals] not less than $100 million at each fiscal quarter end.
Other than as described above, the Agreement (as defined below) previously in place during 2021 is substantially unchanged.
At December, 31, 2021, the Company maintained an agreement (the “Agreement”) with the Bank for a revolving credit line of $33.0 million and a sublimit for standby letters of credit of $8.0 million. At December 31, 2021, $6.2 million of the sublimit for standby letters of credit was used. Advances under the revolving credit line bear interest, as selected by the Company, of (a) the daily floating rate of one-month London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 1.75% or (b) the fixed rate of LIBOR plus 1.75%. The Agreement also provided for an unused commitment fee of 0.375% per year on the average daily unused amount of the revolving credit line, as well as a fee of 1.75% of the face amount of each letter of credit reserved under the line of credit. The Company had no outstanding borrowings on its revolving credit line at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The credit facility was collateralized by the Company’s accounts receivable and other rights to receive payment.
The Agreement also provided a $63.7 million standby letter of credit (the “Letter of Credit”). In April 2021, the Company and the insurance carrier reached an agreement to replace the Letter of Credit with other collateral assets and cancel the Letter of Credit in its entirety. As part of the transaction, the Bank released the $38.7 million of collateral held in support of the Letter of Credit, and the Company transferred the $38.7 million along with an additional $25.0 million to the trust accounts to satisfy the collateral requirements of the insured program.
The Agreement required the satisfaction of certain financial covenants as follows:
•
EBITDA [net income before taxes plus interest expense (net of capitalized interest expense), depreciation expense, and amortization expense] on a rolling four-quarter basis must be not less than $30 million at the end of each fiscal quarter; and
•
the ratio of restricted and unrestricted cash and investments to workers’ compensation and safety incentive liabilities must be at least 1.0:1.0, measured quarterly.
The Agreement imposed certain additional restrictions unless the Bank provides its prior written consent as follows:
•
incurring additional indebtedness is prohibited, other than purchase financing for the acquisition of assets, provided that the aggregate of all purchase financing does not exceed $1 million at any time;
•
the Company may not terminate or cancel any of the AICE policies; and
•
if an event of default would occur, and is continuing, including on a pro forma basis, no dividends or distributions would be permitted to be paid and redemptions and repurchases of the Company’s stock would be permitted only up to $15 million in any rolling 12-month period.
The Agreement also contained customary events of default and specified cross-defaults under the Company's workers' compensation insurance arrangements. If an event of default under the Agreement occurs and is continuing, the Bank may declare any outstanding obligations under the Agreement to be immediately due and payable. At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants.
The Company maintained a mortgage loan with the Bank with a balance of approximately $3.5 million and $3.7 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, secured by the Company’s corporate office building in Vancouver, Washington. This loan required payment of monthly installments of $18,375, bearing interest at the one-month LIBOR plus 2.0%, with the unpaid principal balance due July 1, 2022. On January 31, 2022, the Company paid the outstanding balance of the mortgage loan.
Management expects that the funds anticipated to be generated from operations, current liquid assets, and availability under the Company’s revolving credit facility will be sufficient in the aggregate to fund the Company’s working capital needs for the next twelve months.
Contractual Obligations
The Company's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 are summarized below:
(1) As of December 31, 2021, the Company has additional operating leases that have not yet commenced of $2.1 million and remaining balances on short-term operating leases of $22,394. In January 2022, the Company paid off all of its long-term debt.