Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. Unless otherwise noted, transactions and other factors significantly impacting our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity are discussed in order of magnitude. Our MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Refer to Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021, for discussion of the results of operations for the year ended January 30, 2021, compared to the year ended February 1, 2020, which is incorporated by reference herein.
Overview
We are driven by our purpose to enrich lives through technology and our vision to personalize and humanize technology solutions for every stage of life. We accomplish this by leveraging our combination of technology and a human touch to meet our customers’ everyday needs, whether they come to us online, visit our stores or invite us into their homes. We have operations in the U.S. and Canada.
We have two reportable segments: Domestic and International. The Domestic segment is comprised of our operations in all states, districts and territories of the U.S. and our Best Buy Health business, and includes the brand names Best Buy, Best Buy Ads, Best Buy Business, Best Buy Health, CST, Current Health, Geek Squad, Lively, Magnolia, Pacific Kitchen and Home and Yardbird and the domain names bestbuy.com, currenthealth.com, lively.com and yardbird.com. All of our former stores in Mexico were closed as of the end of the first quarter of fiscal 2022, and our International segment is now comprised of all operations in Canada under the brand names Best Buy, Best Buy Mobile and Geek Squad and the domain name bestbuy.ca.
Our fiscal year ends on the Saturday nearest the end of January. Fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 included 52 weeks. Our business, like that of many retailers, is seasonal. A large proportion of our revenue and earnings is generated in the fiscal fourth quarter, which includes the majority of the holiday shopping season.
Comparable Sales
Throughout this MD&A, we refer to comparable sales. Comparable sales is a metric used by management to evaluate the performance of our existing stores, websites and call centers by measuring the change in net sales for a particular period over the comparable prior-period of equivalent length. Comparable sales includes revenue from stores, websites and call centers operating for at least 14 full months. Revenue from online sales is included in comparable sales and represents sales initiated on a website or app, regardless of whether customers choose to pick up product in store, curbside, at an alternative pick-up location or take delivery direct to their homes. Revenue from acquisitions is included in comparable sales beginning with the first full quarter following the first anniversary of the date of the acquisition. Comparable sales also includes credit card revenue, gift card breakage, commercial sales and sales of merchandise to wholesalers and dealers, as applicable. Revenue from stores closed more than 14 days, including but not limited to relocated, remodeled, expanded and downsized stores, or stores impacted by natural disasters, is excluded from comparable sales until at least 14 full months after reopening. Comparable sales excludes the impact of revenue from discontinued operations and the effect of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates (applicable to our International segment only). All periods presented apply this methodology consistently.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic. All stores that were temporarily closed as a result of COVID-19 or operating a curbside-only operating model are included in comparable sales.
On November 24, 2020, we announced our decision to exit our operations in Mexico. As a result, all revenue from Mexico operations has been excluded from our comparable sales calculation beginning in December of fiscal 2021.
On May 9, 2019, we acquired all outstanding shares of Critical Signal Technologies, Inc. (“CST”). On November 2, 2021, we acquired all outstanding shares of Current Health Ltd. (“Current Health”). On November 4, 2021, we acquired all outstanding shares of Two Peaks, LLC d/b/a Yardbird Furniture (“Yardbird”). Consistent with our comparable sales policy, the results of CST were included in our comparable sales calculation beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, and the results of Current Health and Yardbird are excluded from our comparable sales calculation until the first quarter of fiscal 2024.
We believe comparable sales is a meaningful supplemental metric for investors to evaluate revenue performance resulting from growth in existing stores, websites and call centers versus the portion resulting from opening new stores or closing existing stores. The method of calculating comparable sales varies across the retail industry. As a result, our method of calculating comparable sales may not be the same as other retailers’ methods.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This MD&A includes financial information prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”), as well as certain adjusted or non-GAAP financial measures, such as constant currency, non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP effective tax rate and non-GAAP diluted earnings per share (“EPS”). We believe that non-GAAP financial measures, when reviewed in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, can provide more information to assist investors in evaluating current period performance and in assessing future performance. For these reasons, our internal management reporting also includes non-GAAP financial measures. Generally, our non-GAAP financial measures include adjustments for items such as restructuring charges, goodwill and intangible impairments, price-fixing settlements, gains and losses on certain investments, intangible asset amortization, certain acquisition-related costs and the tax effect of all such items. In addition, certain other items may be excluded from non-GAAP financial measures when we believe doing so provides greater clarity to management and our investors. These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, and not superior to or as a substitute for, GAAP financial measures. We strongly encourage investors and shareholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure. Non-GAAP financial measures as presented herein may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
In our discussions of the operating results of our consolidated business and our International segment, we sometimes refer to the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates or the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which are references to the differences between the foreign currency exchange rates we use to convert the International segment’s operating results from local currencies into U.S. dollars for reporting purposes. We also may use the term “constant currency,” which represents results adjusted to exclude foreign currency impacts. We calculate those impacts as the difference between the current period results translated using the current period currency exchange rates and using the comparable prior period currency exchange rates. We believe the disclosure of revenue changes in constant currency provides useful supplementary information to investors in light of significant fluctuations in currency rates.
Refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section below for detailed reconciliations of items impacting non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP effective tax rate and non-GAAP diluted EPS in the presented periods.
Business Strategy Update
In fiscal 2022, we delivered record revenue and earnings. Our leaders continued to drive new ways of operating, and our employees continued to support our customers’ technology needs in knowledgeable, fast and convenient ways in the face of unprecedented challenges and change.
As we entered the year, we anchored on three concepts we believed to be permanent and structural implications of the pandemic that were, and are, shaping our strategic priorities and investments:
1.Customer shopping behavior will be permanently changed in a way that is even more digital and puts customers entirely in control to shop how they want. Our strategy is to embrace that reality, and to lead, not follow.
2.Our workforce will need to evolve in a way that meets the needs of customers while we provide more flexible opportunities for our employees.
3.Technology is a need and is playing an even more crucial role in peoples’ lives, and, as a result, our purpose to enrich lives through technology has never been more important.
With these concepts in mind, we piloted numerous store formats to test and learn in the past year. We advanced our flexible workforce initiative and invested in our employees’ well-being and we introduced new technology tools designed to support both our customers and our employees.
We also launched a bold new membership program called Best Buy Totaltech, designed to significantly elevate our customer experience and drive incremental sales. Totaltech leverages our strengths across merchandising, fulfillment, installation, tech support and product repair and is designed to give our customers the confidence that whatever their technology needs are, we will be there to help. Members receive product discounts and priority access to certain in-demand products, free delivery and standard installation, free technical support, up to 24 months of product protection on most purchases with active membership and other benefits. While this new offering introduces pressure to our near-term profitability, we believe Totaltech is a membership experience that customers will love, and in turn, will generate a higher customer lifetime value and drive a larger share of consumer electronics spending to Best Buy.
All of this was advanced against a constantly evolving backdrop. During the year we navigated supply chain and transportation challenges, uncertainty as COVID-19 peaks rolled across the country and then, most recently, the disruption from the COVID-19 Omicron wave. Our teams have expertly managed supply chain challenges since the beginning of the pandemic to bring in products our customers needed.
During the year, we continued serving our customers digitally at much higher rates than before the pandemic. Our online revenue was 34% of our Domestic revenue, compared to 43% last year and 19% two years ago. And while online revenue declined compared to last year, it was up 115%, or $8.8 billion, compared to two years ago.
At the same time, we reached our fastest package delivery speeds. The percent of online orders we delivered in one day was twice as high as pre-pandemic levels, despite the significant increase in volume during that same timeframe.
These strong results were driven by the investment decisions we have made in the last several years in our supply chain, store operations, our people and technology. More importantly, these results are driven by our employees across the company. Over the past 24 months, they have flexibly dealt with rapidly changing store operations as we responded to impacts of the pandemic, created safe environments for our customers and worked tirelessly to provide excellent service. In fact, despite all the changes throughout the year, we delivered customer satisfaction improvements both online and in our stores.
As we look to the future, we view technology as a permanent and growing need in the home, and we expect technology to constantly evolve as the world's largest technology companies continue to innovate. We are investing now to ensure we pivot to meet the needs of our customers, helping enrich their lives through technology in ways we believe no one else can and retaining our unique position in our industry.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Results
Selected consolidated financial data was as follows ($ in millions, except per share amounts):
(1)Because retailers vary in how they record costs of operating their supply chain between cost of sales and SG&A, our gross profit rate and SG&A rate may not be comparable to other retailers' corresponding rates. For additional information regarding costs classified in cost of sales and SG&A, refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In fiscal 2022, we generated $51.8 billion in revenue and our comparable sales increased 10.4%. We continued to experience elevated demand for technology products and services throughout most of the year, as consumers continued to leverage technology to meet their needs, and we provided solutions that help them work, learn, entertain, cook and connect at home. Our performance resulted in an operating income rate increase of 0.8% compared to fiscal 2021.
Revenue, SG&A and operating income rate changes in fiscal 2022 were primarily driven by our Domestic segment. The gross profit rate change in fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by our International segment. For further discussion of each segment’s rate changes, see Segment Performance Summary, below.
Segment Performance Summary
Domestic Segment
Selected financial data for the Domestic segment was as follows ($ in millions):
(1)Comparable online sales are included in the comparable sales calculation.
The increase in revenue in fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by the comparable sales growth across most of our product categories, partially offset by the loss of revenue from permanent store closures in the past year. Online revenue of $16.4 billion decreased 12.0% on a comparable basis in fiscal 2022, primarily due to channel shifts in customer shopping behavior as a result of the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Domestic segment stores open at the end of each of the last three fiscal years were as follows:
(1)Excludes stores that were temporarily closed as a result of COVID-19.
We continuously monitor store performance as part of a market-driven, omnichannel strategy. As we approach the expiration of leases, we evaluate various options for each location, including whether a store should remain open. We currently expect to close approximately 20 to 30 Best Buy stores annually through fiscal 2025, consistent with prior-year trends. We also expect to increase the number of Outlet Centers to approximately 30 by the end of fiscal 2023.
Domestic segment revenue mix percentages and comparable sales percentage changes by revenue category were as follows:
Notable comparable sales changes by revenue category were as follows:
• Computing and Mobile Phones: The 5.1% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by computing, mobile phones and wearables, partially offset by a comparable sales decline in networking.
• Consumer Electronics: The 15.9% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by home theater, headphones and portable speakers and digital imaging.
• Appliances: The 24.1% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by large appliances.
• Entertainment: The 7.4% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by virtual reality.
• Services: The 5.9% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by membership offerings.
Our gross profit rate decreased in fiscal 2022, primarily driven by lower services margin rates, which included pressure associated with our Totaltech membership offering that includes incremental customer benefits, and associated costs, compared to our previous Total Tech Support offer. The decrease was partially offset by higher profit-sharing revenue from our private label and co-branded credit card arrangement and improved product margins.
Our SG&A increased in fiscal 2022, primarily due to higher short-term incentive compensation, technology investments, advertising expenses and store payroll expenses, which included $81 million of employee retention credits in the prior-year period as a result of the Federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act. This was partially offset by the impact of a $40 million donation to the Best Buy Foundation in the prior year.
The restructuring credit in fiscal 2022 was primarily related to subsequent adjustments to termination benefits resulting from changes in our previously planned organizational changes and higher-than-expected retention rates. Refer to Note 3, Restructuring, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our operating income rate increased in fiscal 2022, primarily driven by increased leverage from higher sales volume on our fixed expenses, which resulted in a favorable SG&A rate, and lower restructuring charges, partially offset by the unfavorable gross profit rate described above.
International Segment
Selected financial data for the International segment was as follows ($ in millions):
The decrease in revenue in fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by lower revenue in Mexico as a result of our decision in fiscal 2021 to exit operations, partially offset by favorable foreign currency exchange fluctuations and comparable sales growth across most of our product categories in Canada.
International segment stores open at the end of each of the last three fiscal years were as follows:
(1)Excludes stores that were temporarily closed as a result of COVID-19.
International segment revenue mix percentages and comparable sales percentage changes by revenue category were as follows:
Notable comparable sales changes by revenue category were as follows:
• Computing and Mobile Phones: The 1.6% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by mobile phones, partially offset by a comparable sales decline in tablets.
• Consumer Electronics: The 4.0% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by home theater and health and fitness, partially offset by a comparable sales decline in portable speakers.
• Appliances: The 6.2% comparable sales growth was driven by both small and large appliances.
• Entertainment: The 3.5% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by virtual reality, partially offset by a comparable sales decline in gaming.
• Services: The 7.9% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by warranty services.
• Other: The 8.8% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by sporting goods.
Our gross profit rate increased in fiscal 2022, primarily driven by improved product margin rates in Canada and sales mixing out of Mexico, which had a lower gross profit rate than Canada. The increases were also driven by higher inventory markdowns in the prior year associated with our decision to exit operations in Mexico.
Our SG&A in fiscal 2022 was flat compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to the unfavorable impact of foreign currency rates and increased store payroll and incentive compensation expenses in Canada, offset by lower expenses in Mexico as a result of our decision to exit operations there.
The restructuring charges in fiscal 2022 related to our decision to exit operations in Mexico. Refer to Note 3, Restructuring, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our operating income rate increased in fiscal 2022, primarily driven by lower restructuring charges and the increase in gross profit rate described above.
Additional Consolidated Results
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense decreased in fiscal 2022, primarily due to multi-jurisdiction, multi-year non-cash benefits from the resolution of certain discrete tax matters, partially offset by the impact of increased pre-tax earnings. Our effective tax rate decreased in fiscal 2022, primarily due to these non-cash benefits from the resolution of certain discrete tax matters, as well as a decrease in losses for which tax benefits were not recognized.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Reconciliations of operating income, effective tax rate and diluted EPS (GAAP financial measures) to non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP effective tax rate and non-GAAP diluted EPS (non-GAAP financial measures), respectively, were as follows ($ in millions, except per share amounts):
For additional information regarding the nature of charges discussed below, refer to Note 2, Acquisitions; Note 3, Restructuring; Note 4, Goodwill and Intangible Assets; and Note 11, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1)Represents inventory markdowns recorded within cost of sales associated with the decision to exit operations in Mexico.
(2)Represents a price-fixing litigation settlement received in relation to products purchased and sold in prior fiscal years.
(3)Represents charges associated with acquisitions, including: (1) the non-cash amortization of definite-lived intangible assets, including customer relationships, tradenames and developed technology; and (2) acquisition-related transaction and due diligence costs, primarily comprised of professional fees.
(4)Represents charges in fiscal 2021 and subsequent adjustments in fiscal 2022 related to actions taken in the Domestic segment to better align the company’s organizational structure with its strategic focus and the decision to exit operations in Mexico in the International segment, and charges and subsequent adjustments associated with U.S. retail operating model changes in fiscal 2020.
(5)Represents an increase in the fair value of a minority equity investment in fiscal 2021.
(6)The non-GAAP adjustments primarily relate to the U.S. and Mexico. As such, the income tax charge is generally calculated using the statutory tax rate of 24.5% for U.S. non-GAAP items for all periods presented. There is no income tax charge for Mexico non-GAAP items and a minimal amount of U.S. non-GAAP items, as there was no tax benefit recognized on these expenses in the calculation of GAAP income tax expense.
Our non-GAAP operating income rate increased in fiscal 2022, primarily driven by an increase in gross profit rate and increased leverage from higher sales volume on our fixed expenses, which resulted in a favorable SG&A rate.
Our non-GAAP effective tax rate decreased in fiscal 2022, primarily due to multi-jurisdiction, multi-year non-cash benefits from the resolution of certain discrete tax matters.
Our non-GAAP diluted EPS increased in fiscal 2022, primarily driven by the increase in non-GAAP operating income, lower diluted weighted-average common shares outstanding from share repurchases and a lower effective tax rate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We closely manage our liquidity and capital resources. Our liquidity requirements depend on key variables, including the level of investment required to support our business strategies, the performance of our business, capital expenditures, dividends, credit facilities, short-term borrowing arrangements and working capital management. We modify our approach to managing these variables as changes in our operating environment arise. For example, at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in fiscal 2021, we adopted several measures to preserve cash, such as reducing capital expenditures, suspending share repurchases and temporarily drawing down on our revolving credit facility. We have a disciplined approach to capital allocation, which focuses on investing in key priorities that support our strategy.
Cash and cash equivalents were as follows ($ in millions):
The decrease in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to share repurchases, investments in capital expenditures, dividends paid and the acquisitions of Current Health and Yardbird. These decreases were partially offset by positive cash flows from operations, primarily driven by earnings.
Cash Flows
Cash flows were as follows ($ in millions):
Operating Activities
In fiscal 2021, cash provided by operating activities was higher than historical averages, primarily due to higher inventory turnover and the timing of inventory purchases and payments to meet continued higher demand. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to the timing and volume of inventory purchases and payments, reflecting an earlier build of inventory and greater inventory availability in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, which resulted in a higher proportion of inventory purchases having been paid for, compared to fiscal 2021. This decrease was partially offset by higher earnings in fiscal 2022.
Investing Activities
The increase in cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to the acquisitions of Current Health and Yardbird.
Financing Activities
The increase in cash used in financing activities in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to higher share repurchases.
Sources of Liquidity
Funds generated by operating activities, available cash and cash equivalents, our credit facilities and other debt arrangements are our most significant sources of liquidity. We believe our sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund operations and anticipated capital expenditures, share repurchases, dividends and strategic initiatives, including business combinations. However, in the event our liquidity is insufficient, we may be required to limit our spending. There can be no assurance that we will continue to generate cash flows at or above current levels or that we will be able to maintain our ability to borrow under our existing credit facilities or obtain additional financing, if necessary, on favorable terms.
On May 18, 2021, we entered into a $1.25 billion five year senior unsecured revolving credit facility agreement (the “Five-Year Facility Agreement”) with a syndicate of banks. The Five-Year Facility Agreement replaced the previous $1.25 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the “Previous Facility”) with a syndicate of banks, which was originally scheduled to expire in April 2023, but was terminated on May 18, 2021. The Five-Year Facility Agreement permits borrowings of up to $1.25 billion and expires in May 2026. There were no borrowings outstanding under the Five-Year Facility Agreement as of January 29, 2022, or under the Previous Facility as of January 30, 2021.
Our ability to continue to access the Five-Year Facility Agreement is subject to our compliance with its terms and conditions, including financial covenants. The financial covenants require us to maintain certain financial ratios. As of January 29, 2022, we were in compliance with all financial covenants. If an event of default were to occur with respect to any of our other debt, it would likely constitute an event of default under the Five-Year Facility Agreement as well.
Our credit ratings and outlook as of March 16, 2022, are summarized below. On May 20, 2021, Standard & Poor’s upgraded its rating to BBB+ and confirmed its outlook of Stable. Moody’s rating and outlook remained unchanged from those disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021.
Credit rating agencies review their ratings periodically, and, therefore, the credit rating assigned to us by each agency may be subject to revision at any time. Factors that can affect our credit ratings include changes in our operating performance, the economic environment, conditions in the retail and consumer electronics industries, our financial position and changes in our business strategy. If changes in our credit ratings were to occur, they could impact, among other things, interest costs for certain of our credit facilities, our future borrowing costs, access to capital markets, vendor financing terms and future new-store leasing costs.
Restricted Cash
Our liquidity is also affected by restricted cash balances that are primarily restricted to use to cover self-insurance liabilities and product protection plans provided under our Totaltech membership offering. Restricted cash, which is included in Other current assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, was $269 million and $131 million as of January 29, 2022, and January 30, 2021, respectively. The increase in restricted cash was primarily due to the initial funding related to the national launch of our Totaltech membership offering in October 2021.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures were as follows ($ in millions):
(1)Store-related projects are primarily comprised of store remodels and various merchandising projects.
(2)Total capital expenditures exclude non-cash capital expenditures of $46 million, $32 million and $10 million in fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Non-cash capital expenditures are comprised of additions to property and equipment included in accounts payable, as well as finance leases.
We currently expect to increase our annual capital expenditures to at least $1 billion over the next three fiscal years as we continue to invest in our stores and information technology to further our strategy.
Debt and Capital
As of January 29, 2022, we had $500 million of principal amount of notes due October 1, 2028 (“2028 Notes”) and $650 million of principal amount of notes due October 1, 2030 (“2030 Notes”). Refer to Note 8, Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information about our outstanding debt.
Share Repurchases and Dividends
We repurchase our common stock and pay dividends pursuant to programs approved by our Board. The payment of cash dividends is also subject to customary legal and contractual restrictions. Our long-term capital allocation strategy is to first fund operations and investments in growth and then return excess cash over time to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases while maintaining investment-grade credit metrics.
On February 16, 2021, our Board approved a $5.0 billion share repurchase program. On February 28, 2022, our Board approved a new $5.0 billion share repurchase program, replacing the then-existing program, which had $1.6 billion remaining available for repurchases as of January 29, 2022. There is no expiration date governing the period over which we can repurchase shares under this authorization. On March 3, 2022, we announced our plans to spend approximately $1.5 billion on share repurchases in fiscal 2023.
Share repurchase and dividend activity were as follows ($ and shares in millions, except per share amounts):
The total cost of shares repurchased increased in fiscal 2022, primarily due to our announced plan to repurchase more than $2.5 billion shares in fiscal 2022, following the temporary suspension of all share repurchases from March to November of fiscal 2021 to preserve liquidity in light of COVID-19-related uncertainties. Between the end of fiscal 2022 on January 29, 2022, and March 16, 2022, we repurchased an incremental 2.4 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $239 million.
Cash dividends declared and paid increased in fiscal 2022, primarily due to an increase in the regular quarterly cash dividend per share. On March 3, 2022, we announced the Board’s approval of a 26% increase in the regular quarterly dividend to $0.88 per share.
Other Financial Measures
Our current ratio, calculated as current assets divided by current liabilities, decreased to 1.0 as of January 29, 2022, compared to 1.2 as of January 30, 2021, primarily due to the decrease in cash and cash equivalents. Our debt to earnings ratio, calculated as total debt (including current portion) divided by net earnings, decreased to 0.5 as of January 29, 2022, compared to 0.8 as of January 30, 2021, primarily due to higher earnings.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
We do not have outstanding off-balance-sheet arrangements. Contractual obligations as of January 29, 2022, were as follows ($ in millions):
For additional information regarding the nature of contractual obligations discussed below, refer to Note 6, Derivative Instruments; Note 7, Leases; Note 8, Debt; and Note 13, Contingencies and Commitments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1)Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, are legally binding and specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations do not include agreements that are cancelable without penalty. Additionally, although they do not contain legally binding purchase commitments, we included open purchase orders in the table above. Substantially all open purchase orders are fulfilled within 30 days.
(2)Lease obligations exclude $51 million of legally binding fixed costs for leases signed but not yet commenced.
(3)Operating lease obligations exclude payments to landlords covering real estate taxes and common area maintenance. These charges, if included, would increase total operating lease obligations by $0.6 billion as of January 29, 2022.
(4)Represents principal amounts only and excludes interest rate swap valuation adjustments related to our long-term debt obligations.
(5)Interest payments related to our 2028 Notes and 2030 Notes include the variable interest rate payments included in our interest rate swaps.
Additionally, we have $1.25 billion in undrawn capacity on our Five-Year Facility Agreement as of January 29, 2022, which if drawn upon, would be included in either short-term or long-term debt on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors believed to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Other than our adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases, in the first quarter of fiscal 2020, we have not made any material changes to our accounting policies or methodologies during the past three fiscal years. We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. These estimates require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments and generally incorporate significant uncertainty.
Vendor Allowances
Description
We receive funds from our merchandise vendors through a variety of programs and arrangements, primarily in the form of purchases-based or sales-based volumes and for product advertising and placement. We recognize allowances based on purchases and sales as a reduction of cost of sales when the associated inventory is sold. Allowances for advertising and placement are recognized as a reduction of cost of sales ratably over the corresponding performance period. Funds that are determined to be a reimbursement of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to sell a vendor's products are recorded as an offset to the related expense within SG&A when incurred.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Due to the quantity and diverse nature of our vendor agreements, estimates are made to determine the amount of funding to be recognized in earnings or deferred as an offset to inventory. These estimates require a detailed analysis of complex factors, including (1) proper classification of the type of funding received; and (2) the methodology to estimate the portion of purchases-based funding that should be recognized in cost of sales in each period, which considers factors such as inventory turn by product category and actual sell-through of inventory.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
A 10% change in our vendor funding deferral as of January 29, 2022, would have affected net earnings by approximately $35 million in fiscal 2022. The overall level of vendor funding deferral has remained relatively stable over the last three fiscal years.
Goodwill
Description
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually in the fiscal fourth quarter or whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. The impairment test involves a comparison of the fair value of each reporting unit with its carrying value. Fair value reflects the price a potential market participant would be willing to pay for the reporting unit in an arms-length transaction.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Determining fair value of a reporting unit is complex and typically requires analysis of discounted cash flows and market information, such as trading multiples and other observable metrics. Cash flow analysis requires judgment regarding many factors, such as revenue growth rates, expenses and capital expenditures. Market information requires judgmental selection of relevant market comparables. We have goodwill in two reporting units - Best Buy Domestic and Best Buy Health - with carrying values of $491 million and $893 million, respectively, as of January 29, 2022. There is greater uncertainty surrounding the key assumptions used to estimate the fair value of the Best Buy Health reporting unit and therefore a greater degree of complexity and judgment involved in our impairment analysis. Our valuation of Best Buy Health incorporates relatively higher levels of revenue growth than our valuation of Best Buy Domestic, and incorporates estimates such as new customer growth, customer retention rates, capital expenditure requirements, advertising and cost-to-serve expenses and weighted-average cost of capital rates, all of which incorporate significant judgment.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
A 10% change in the fair value of the Best Buy Health reporting unit as of January 29, 2022, would not have triggered an impairment of goodwill in fiscal 2022. The fair value of our Best Buy Health reporting unit has remained substantially in excess of its carrying value over the last three fiscal years.
Inventory Markdown
Description
Our merchandise inventories were $6.0 billion as of January 29, 2022. We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value through the establishment of inventory markdown adjustments. Markdown adjustments reflect the excess of cost over the net recovery we expect to realize from the ultimate sale or other disposal of inventory and establish a new cost basis. No adjustment is recorded for inventory that we are able to return to our vendors for full credit.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Markdown adjustments involve uncertainty because the calculations require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment about the expected revenue and incremental costs we will generate for current inventory. Such estimates include the evaluation of historical recovery rates, as well as factors such as product type and condition, forecasted consumer demand, product lifecycles, promotional environment, vendor return rights and the expected sales channel of ultimate disposition. We also apply judgment in the assumptions about other components of net realizable value, such as vendor allowances and selling costs.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
A 10% change in our markdown adjustment as of January 29, 2022, would have affected net earnings by approximately $12 million in fiscal 2022. The level of markdown adjustments has remained relatively stable over the last three fiscal years.
Tax Contingencies
Description
Our income tax returns are routinely examined by domestic and foreign tax authorities. Taxing authorities audit our tax filing positions, including the timing and amount of income and deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. At any one time, multiple tax years are subject to audit by the various taxing authorities. In evaluating the exposures associated with our various tax filing positions, we may record a liability for such exposures. A number of years may elapse before a particular matter, for which we have established a liability, is audited and fully resolved or clarified. We adjust our liability for unrecognized tax benefits and income tax provisions in the period in which an uncertain tax position is effectively settled, the statute of limitations expires for the relevant taxing authority to examine the tax position or when more information becomes available. Our effective income tax rate is also affected by changes in tax law, the tax jurisdiction of new stores or business ventures, the level of earnings and the results of tax audits.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Our liability for unrecognized tax benefits contains uncertainties because management is required to make assumptions and apply judgment to estimate the exposures associated with our various tax filing positions. Such assumptions can include complex and uncertain external factors, such as changes in tax law, interpretations of tax law and the timing of such changes, and uncertain internal factors such as taxable earnings by jurisdiction, the magnitude and timing of certain transactions and capital spending.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
Although we believe that the judgments and estimates discussed herein are reasonable, actual results could differ, and we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. To the extent we prevail in matters for which a liability has been established or are required to pay amounts in excess of our established liability, our effective income tax rate in a given financial statement period could be materially affected. An unfavorable tax settlement generally would require use of our cash and may result in an increase in our effective income tax rate in the period of resolution. A favorable tax settlement may reduce our effective income tax rate in the period of resolution. See Note 11, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Service Revenue
Description
We sell membership plans that include access to benefits such as technical support, price discounts on certain products and services, product protection plans and anti-virus software. We allocate the transaction price to all performance obligations identified in the contract based on their relative fair value. For performance obligations provided over the term of the contract, we typically recognize revenue on a usage basis, an input method of measuring progress over the related contract term. This method involves the estimation of expected usage patterns, primarily derived from historical information.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
There is judgment in (1) measuring the relative standalone selling price for bundled performance obligations, and (2) assessing the appropriate recognition and methodology for each performance obligation, and for those based on usage, estimating the expected pattern of consumption across a large portfolio of customers. When insufficient reliable and relevant history is available to estimate usage, we generally recognize revenue ratably over the life of the contract until such history has accumulated.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
A 10% change in the amount of services membership deferred revenue as of January 29, 2022, would have affected net earnings by approximately $26 million in fiscal 2022. While our underlying assumptions have remained relatively consistent, the amount of services membership deferred revenue has increased over the last three fiscal years, primarily due to growth in our membership program offerings.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of new applicable accounting pronouncements, see Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.