ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains certain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth under the Section entitled “Risk Factors” in Item 1A, and other documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Special Note Regarding Smaller Reporting Company Status
As a result of having been a “smaller reporting company” (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended), we are allowed and have elected to omit certain information, including three years of year-to-year comparisons, from this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations; however, we have provided all information for the periods presented that we believe to be appropriate and necessary.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage company focused on developing cellular and cell-derived therapeutics for cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases with large unmet medical needs. We are committed to applying our expertise in the fields of autologous and allogeneic cell-based therapies to improve the lives of patients with cardiovascular and pulmonary conditions. Our CardiAMP cell therapy platform provides an autologous bone marrow derived cell therapy (using a patient’s own cells) for the treatment of two clinical indications: heart failure that develops after a heart attack (BCDA-01) and chronic myocardial ischemia (BCDA-02). Our allogeneic mesenchymal stem cell therapy platform, derived from donor cells and intended to be provided “off the shelf,” is also being advanced for two indications, heart failure (BCDA-03) and for the pulmonary indication of acute respiratory distress that has developed from COVID-19 (BCDA-04).
Our Helix™ Biotherapeutic Delivery System platform, or Helix, delivers therapeutics into the heart muscle with a helical needle from within the heart. It enables local delivery of cell, gene and protein-based therapies, including our own cell therapies to treat cardiac indications. The Helix system is CE marked in Europe and under investigational use in the United States. We selectively partner with firms developing other cell, gene and protein therapies utilizing the Helix and other biotherapeutic delivery systems that we have developed.
Our AVANCE™ product offering for transseptal cardiac procedures has begun early commercialization activities in the United States through commission-only 1099 sales representatives.
To date, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development efforts relating to our therapeutic candidates and biotherapeutic delivery systems, including conducting clinical trials, developing manufacturing and sales capabilities, in-licensing related intellectual property, providing general and administrative support for these operations and protecting our intellectual property. We have also generated modest revenues from sales of our approved products. We have funded our operations primarily through the sales of equity and convertible debt securities, and certain government and private grants.
CardiAMP Cell Therapy System for Heart Failure and Chronic Myocardial Ischemia
The Company’s lead platform, CardiAMP cell therapy, is an autologous cell therapy being advanced for two indications in pivotal clinical trials: heart failure and chronic myocardial ischemia.
The CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial is a Phase III, multi-center, randomized, double-blinded, sham-controlled study of up to 260 patients at 40 centers nationwide, which includes a 10-patient roll-in cohort. The Phase III pivotal trial is designed to provide the primary support for the safety and efficacy of the CardiAMP Cell Therapy System for heart failure which develops after a patient has a heart attack (BCDA-01). The trial is active at 26 clinical sites and 110 patients have been enrolled to date, with 7 additional control patients having crossed over to receive therapy.
In January 2022, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted Breakthrough Device Designation for the CardiAMP Cell Therapy System for the treatment of heart failure. This Breakthrough Device Program is designed to expedite FDA approval of certain novel devices or device-led combination products (i.e., products that combine drugs, devices or biological products) that have the potential to provide more effective treatment or diagnosis of life-threatening or irreversibly debilitating diseases or conditions. It is believed that the CardiAMP Cell Therapy System is the first cardiac cell therapy to receive an FDA Breakthrough designation.
In February 2022, the independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) completed a prespecified data review, including a risk-benefit assessment. Following the review, the DSMB indicated that it had no significant safety concerns and recommended that the study continue as designed. Also in February 2022, Health Canada, the country’s health services agency, sent BioCardia a No Objection Letter, allowing the CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial to expand into Canada. Four world-class Canadian clinical sites are currently working through the activation process to begin enrolling patients in the near future.
Enrollment in the CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial remains our primary focus. We expect enrollment to improve in the months ahead due to:
●
reduced impact of COVID-19;
●
FDA’s January 2022 grant of the Breakthrough Device Designation for the CardiAMP Cell Therapy;
●
Health Canada’s February 2022 issuance of a No Objection Letter, allowing expansion of the study to Canadian sites;
●
CMS’s March 2022 issuance of procedure code C9782, which applies to both of our CardiAMP Cell Therapy clinical trials;
●
our active efforts to include patients whose insurance does not cover the study;
●
our previously obtained FDA authorization to provide therapy for patients in the control arm of the trial that otherwise would not receive therapy after the two-year follow-up, and
●
enhanced outreach to sites and increased clinical marketing activities.
The CardiAMP Chronic Myocardial Ischemia Trial is a Phase III, multi-center, randomized, double-blinded, controlled study of up to 343 patients at up to 40 clinical sites. The Phase III pivotal trial is designed to provide the primary support for the safety and efficacy of the CardiAMP Cell Therapy System for the indication of chronic myocardial ischemia (BCDA-02). This therapeutic approach uses many of the same novel aspects as the CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial and is expected to leverage our experience and investment in the heart failure trial. The trial has been activated and one patient has been treated.
The Department of Health & Human Services Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, or CMS, has designated that both CardiAMP pivotal trials qualify for Medicare national coverage. The covered costs under Medicare include patient screening, the CardiAMP Cell Therapy System and procedure, and clinical follow-up at one and two years after the procedure. Private insurance plans covering 50 million insured Americans follow the CMS reimbursement policy and are similarly anticipated to cover these costs. This coverage significantly reduces our cost of conducting these pivotal trials. In March of 2022, the United States Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) issued a new reimbursement code (designated C9782) for the CardiAMP Cell Therapy procedures. The code is for a blinded procedure for NYHA class II or III heart failure, or Canadian Cardiovascular Society class III or IV chronic refractory angina; transcatheter intramyocardial transplantation of autologous bone marrow cells or placebo control, autologous bone marrow harvesting and preparation for transplantation, left heart catheterization including ventriculography, all laboratory service and all imaging with or without guidance, performed in approved IDE study. This new CMS code is available to submitting hospitals performing the CardiAMP cell therapy procedure on April 1, 2022, enabling clear reimbursement for the study procedure for both the treatment and control arms of both pivotal cell therapy trials.
Allogeneic Cell Therapy for Cardiac and Pulmonary Disease (BCDA-03 and BCDA-04)
Our second therapeutic platform is our investigational culture expanded bone marrow derived allogeneic, Neurokinin-1 Receptor Positive mesenchymal stem cells (NK1R+ MSC). This “off the shelf” mesenchymal cell therapy is being advanced for cardiac and pulmonary disease.
We are working to secure FDA acceptance of an IND application for a Phase I/II trial to deliver these allogeneic cells for the treatment of ischemic systolic heart failure. We have completed the manufacturing validation runs and stability testing for the Chemistry Manufacturing and Controls section of the IND and have initiated the preclinical pharmacology toxicology animal testing. Should the results be in line with our previous results, we expect to submit the IND application promptly thereafter.
In March 2022, the Company submitted an Investigational New Drug (IND) for a Phase I/II trial for the use of this allogeneic cell therapy for ARDS caused by COVID-19 (BCDA-04). The FDA requires a 30-day waiting period after the submission of an IND application before clinical trials may begin. We are working to receive FDA acceptance of the IND and begin the trial in 2022.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Update
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced significant disruption to the Company’s business and in delays in the Company’s development programs and regulatory and commercialization timelines, including adversely impacting operations at certain clinical sites involved in our ongoing clinical studies. The COVID-19 pandemic could continue to adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition and/or liquidity in the future. These adverse impacts could include delayed or slowed enrollment of our, or our collaborators’, planned or ongoing clinical trials, delayed or cancelled clinical site initiations, delayed regulatory review for regulatory approvals, delayed commercialization of one or more of our product candidates, if approved, and workforce shortages. Our production capabilities, or those of our partners or suppliers, and our supply chains could also be adversely impacted.
Additionally, while the potential continuing economic impact brought by, and the duration of, the COVID-19 pandemic is difficult to assess or predict, the impact of COVID-19 on the global financial markets may reduce the Company’s ability to access capital, which could negatively impact the Company’s liquidity and ability to raise the capital to complete its preclinical and clinical studies on a timely basis, or at all. In addition, a recession, market correction or depression resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or the response to it, could materially affect our business and the value of our common stock.
Litigation Settlement
On March 12, 2021, we agreed to settle, pending final documentation and dismissal, the legal proceedings and any and all claims, counterclaims, actions and/or proceedings relating to or arising from the case captioned Boston Scientific Corp., et al., v. BioCardia Inc., Case No. 3:19-05645-VC, U.S.D.C., N. D. Cal. As described in Note 16 of our notes to the consolidated financial statements, in March 2022 we entered into agreements with our litigation service providers and the Funder to terminate the Funding Agreement and conclude all remaining matters thereunder. Under the terms of these agreements, litigation and corporate counsel have agreed to provide credits and refunds of legal fees totaling $688,000 and to provide up to $300,000 in future discounts on legal services. The Company will remit these future discounts, as received, to the Funder on a quarterly basis. The settlement resulted in $195,000 of legal expense, which is included in selling, general and administrative expenses during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. BioCardia retains all rights to any nontangible assets obtained in the confidential litigation settlement. See Notes 16 and 18 of our notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We currently have a portfolio of enabling and delivery products, from which we have generated modest revenue. Net product revenues include commercial sales of our Morph vascular access system in the US and EU and collaboration agreement revenues include revenue from partnering agreements with corporate and academic institutions. Under these partnering agreements, we provide our Helix biotherapeutic delivery system and customer training and support for use in preclinical and clinical studies.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
salaries and related overhead expenses, which include share-based compensation and benefits for personnel in research and development functions;
•
fees paid to consultants and contract research organizations, or CROs, including in connection with our preclinical studies and clinical trials and other related clinical trial fees, such as for investigator grants, patient screening, laboratory work, clinical trial management and statistical compilation and analysis;
•
costs related to acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials;
•
costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•
payments related to licensed products and technologies.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress of completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and clinical sites. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are then expensed as the related goods are delivered and the services are received.
We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the pivotal CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial, advance the pivotal CardiAMP Chronic Myocardial Ischemia Trial, and further develop our autologous and allogeneic cell therapy candidates. We typically use our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs, and accordingly, we have not historically allocated resources specifically to our individual programs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees in executive, finance and administration, sales, corporate development and administrative support functions, including share-based compensation expenses and benefits. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include sales commissions, rent, accounting and legal services, obtaining and maintaining patents, the cost of consultants, occupancy costs, insurance premiums and information systems costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income and expense consist primarily of interest income we earn on our cash, cash equivalents and investments, changes in fair value of redemptive features embedded in convertible notes, loss on extinguishment of convertible notes, gain on extinguishment of Paycheck Protection Program note payable, and interest charges we incurred in periods during 2020 when we had debt outstanding.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various judgements that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not clear from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We define our critical accounting policies as those that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. The following discussion addresses what we believe to be the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements that require significant estimates and judgments.
Research and Development-Clinical Trial Accruals
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors and consultants and clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. Our clinical trial accrual is dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of expenses of our CROs and other third-party vendors.
Our objective is to reflect the appropriate clinical trial expenses in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates through discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion of clinical trials, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust the rate of clinical trial expense recognition if actual results differ from the estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known at that time. Although we do not expect that our estimates will be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period. Through December 31, 2021, there had been no material adjustments to our prior period estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot provide assurance that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical trials.
Share-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize share-based compensation expense for equity awards to employees, directors and consultants based on fair value at the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, or BSM, to calculate the fair value of stock options, which includes subjective assumptions such as the risk-free interest rate, the expected volatility in the value of the Company’s common stock, and the expected term of the option. Restricted stock units (RSUs) are measured based on the fair market values of the underlying stock on the dates of grant. Share-based compensation expense recognized in the statements of operations is based on awards at the time of grant and is reduced for actual forfeitures at the time that the forfeitures occur. Compensation cost for employee share-based awards will be recognized over the vesting period of the applicable award on a straight-line basis.
Results of Operations
The table set forth below summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands). The results of operations from 2020 compared to 2019 and related discussion can be found in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 30, 2021, and such results and related discussion are incorporated herein by reference.
Revenue. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $1,015,000 compared to $145,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $870,000 increase was primarily due to increased collaboration activity with corporate partners and completion of a contract. The amount and timing of collaboration revenues largely depends on our partners activities and may be inconsistent and create significant quarter-to-quarter variation.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses decreased by $1,251,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to lower stock compensation expense following a repricing of stock options in 2020, coupled with reduced clinical service provider costs as we staff more work with internal personnel.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $774,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to lower compensation expense following a repricing of stock options in 2020, coupled with reduced professional service fees.
Other Income (Expense). In 2020, Other income (expense) consisted primarily of interest expense and the gain on extinguishment associated with the Paycheck Protection Program loan obtained on May 1, 2020 and forgiven on November 7, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred net losses each year since our inception and as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $128.7 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for at least the next several years.
We have funded our operations principally through the sales of equity and convertible debt securities as well as the cash acquired through the Merger. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $12.9 million.
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. The decrease in overall spending for operating activities of approximately $2.0 million through the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 related primarily to the timing of advance payments from collaboration partners coupled with decreases in payments to third parties for professional fees.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities of $116,000 and $32,000 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively consists of purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities of $1.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of gross proceeds from the sale of common stock in March 2021 less issuance costs. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of proceeds from sales of common stock totaling approximately $27.9 million (net of issuance costs) and proceeds from the Paycheck Protection note payable totaling $506,000, partially offset by tax withholding-related payments on the settlement of restricted unit awards.
Lincoln Park Capital Stock Purchase Agreement
In March 2021, we and Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (Lincoln Park) entered into a purchase agreement (the Purchase Agreement) and a registration rights agreement (the Registration Rights Agreement), pursuant to which we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park shares of our common stock having an aggregate value of up to $20 million, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, at the time we signed the Purchase Agreement, we sold 373,832 shares of our common stock at a price of $5.35 per share pursuant to the Purchase Agreement for gross proceeds of $2 million (and issued 80,000 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park as consideration for its commitment to purchase shares of our common stock, which consisted of 75,000 shares for Lincoln Park’s initial commitment and 5,000 shares issued on a pro rata basis in respect of Lincoln Park’s initial purchase of 373,832 shares). Thereafter, as often as every business day from and after one business day following the date of the Initial Purchase and over the 36-month term of the Purchase Agreement, we have the right, from time to time, at our sole discretion and subject to certain conditions, to direct Lincoln Park to purchase up to 100,000 shares of common stock, with such amount increasing as the closing sale price of the common stock increases; provided Lincoln Park’s obligation under any single such purchase will not exceed $2 million, unless we and Lincoln Park mutually agree to increase the maximum amount of such single purchase (each, a Regular Purchase). If we direct Lincoln Park to purchase the maximum number of shares of common stock it then may sell in a Regular Purchase, then in addition to such Regular Purchase, and subject to certain conditions and limitations in the Purchase Agreement, we may direct Lincoln Park in an Accelerated Purchase to purchase an additional amount of common stock that may not exceed the lesser of (i) 300% of the number of shares purchased pursuant to the corresponding Regular Purchase or (ii) 30% of the total number of shares of our common stock traded during a specified period on the applicable purchase date as set forth in the Purchase Agreement. Under certain circumstances and in accordance with the Purchase Agreement, we may direct Lincoln Park to purchase shares in multiple Accelerated Purchases on the same trading day. We expect to use the proceeds from this agreement for general corporate purposes and working capital. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not made any sales of common stock to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement other than the Initial Purchase.
Future Funding Requirements
To date, we have generated modest revenue from sales of our approved products. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from our development stage biotherapeutic programs. We do not expect to generate any revenue from sales of our autologous and allogeneic cell therapy candidates unless and until we obtain regulatory approval. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our therapeutic candidates. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval for any of our therapeutic candidates and companion diagnostic, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We anticipate that we will need additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that the cash and cash equivalents of $12.9 million as of December 31, 2021 are not sufficient to fund our planned expenditures and meet our obligations beyond the fourth quarter of 2022. In order to continue development of our therapeutic candidates beyond the fourth quarter of 2022, we plan to raise additional capital, potentially including non-dilutive collaboration and licensing arrangements, debt or equity financing, or a combination from these sources. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our therapeutic candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures necessary to complete the development of our therapeutic candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the progress, costs, results and timing of our autologous CardiAMP Cell Therapy System and allogeneic Neurokinin-1 Receptor Positive clinical trials and related development programs;
•
FDA acceptance of our autologous CardiAMP Cell Therapy System and allogeneic Neurokinin-1 Receptor Positive therapies for heart failure and for other potential indications;
•
the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA and any other regulatory approvals;
•
the costs associated with securing, establishing and maintaining commercialization and manufacturing capabilities;
•
the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue, including our product candidates in preclinical development;
•
the ability of our product candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
•
our need to expand our research and development activities;
•
the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, products, product candidates and technologies;
•
our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•
the general and administrative expenses related to being a public company;
•
our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific, medical and sales personnel;
•
the effect of competing technological and market developments;
•
our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems; and
•
the cost of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Until such time that we can generate meaningful revenue from the sales of approved therapies and products, if ever, we expect to finance our operating activities through public or private equity or debt financings, government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements, and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements or a combination of these approaches. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include conversion discounts or covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, or strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, products, or therapeutic candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 have been prepared on the basis that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the ordinary course of business. Due to the factors described above, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date these financial statements are issued. Our ability to continue as a going concern will depend in a large part, on our ability to raise additional capital. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to reduce operating expenses, delay or reduce the scope of our product development programs, obtain funds through arrangements with others that may require us to relinquish rights to certain of our technologies or products that we would otherwise seek to develop or commercialize ourselves, or cease operations. While we believe in the viability of our strategy to raise additional funds, there can be no assurances that we will be able to obtain additional capital on acceptable terms and in the amounts necessary to fully fund our operating needs.
The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. If we are unable to continue as a going concern, we may be forced to liquidate assets. In such a scenario, the values received for assets in liquidation or dissolution could be significantly lower than the values reflected in our financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of our notes to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements that are of significance or potential significance to us.