Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involves risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements. All information presented herein is based on our fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to our fiscal years ended December 31 and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company utilizing our differentiated platform to discover and develop novel antibody-based therapeutics to treat a range of solid tumor types. While more traditional oncology drug discovery approaches attempt to generate antibodies against known targets, our approach relies on the human immune system to direct us to unique antibody-target pairs from patients experiencing a clinically meaningful, active immune response against their tumors. These unique antibody-target pairs represent a potentially novel and previously unexplored landscape of oncology targets. We believe the fact that our approach has the potential to deliver novel, previously unexplored oncology targets provides us with a significant competitive advantage over traditional approaches which focus on known targets that many companies are aware of and can pursue. We have utilized our drug discovery approach to identify over 2,000 distinct human antibodies that bind preferentially to tumor tissue from patients who are not the source of the antibody. Our lead product candidate, ATRC-101, is a monoclonal antibody with a novel mechanism of action and target derived from an antibody identified using our discovery platform. ATRC-101 reacts in vitro with a majority of human ovarian, non-small cell lung, colorectal and breast cancer samples from multiple patients. It has demonstrated robust anti-tumor activity as a single agent in multiple preclinical models, including one model in which PD-1 checkpoint inhibitors typically display limited activity. In 2020, we commenced clinical development of ATRC-101 with a Phase 1b clinical trial evaluating ATRC-101 as a monotherapy in patients with select solid tumors which is ongoing, and in 2021 we expanded clinical development by opening a new cohort to evaluate ATRC-101 in combination with a PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor. Our efforts beyond ATRC-101 are focused on expanding our clinical pipeline by advancing additional product candidates using our large library of "hit" antibodies that bind preferentially to tumor tissue across patients. To that end, via internal efforts and partnerships, we are both continuing to develop our platform and combining the novel antibodies that are generated by our platform with antibody "weaponization" technologies.
We commenced operations in 2010, and have since devoted substantially all our resources to research and development, identifying product candidates, undertaking preclinical studies, conducting clinical trials, raising capital, building our management team and building our intellectual property portfolio. We do not have any products approved for marketing or sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve or sustain profitability will depend on the successful development, regulatory approval and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through equity offerings of our securities. Our net losses were $109.3 million and $86.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $359.8 million. We anticipate that a substantial portion of our capital resources and efforts in the foreseeable future will be focused on discovering, completing the necessary development, obtaining regulatory approval for and preparing for potential commercialization of product candidates. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $148.1 million. Although it is difficult to predict our funding requirements, we anticipate that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, should enable us to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months, assuming our programs and collaborations advance as currently contemplated.
- 69 -
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing of our planned preclinical studies and clinical trials and expenditures on other research and development activities. We expect our expenses will increase substantially over time as we:
◾ complete clinical trials for ATRC-101 and initiate preclinical studies on any additional product candidates that we may pursue in the future;
◾ continue research and development to expand our growing library of more than 2,000 antibodies and develop potential future product candidates from that collection;
◾ continue to invest in advancing our differentiated discovery platform, and the underlying technologies;
◾ seek marketing approvals for product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
◾ maintain, protect and expand our portfolio of intellectual property rights, including patents, trade secrets and know-how;
◾ implement additional operational, financial and management systems; and
◾ attract, hire and retain additional administrative, clinical, regulatory and research personnel.
Impact of COVID-19
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken, and continue to take, proactive measures to prioritize health and safety, including of our employees and other personnel, and to maintain business continuity. Following guidance from federal, state and local authorities, we transitioned to a fully remote working environment in March 2020 and partially re-opened in June 2020 for lab-based personnel and certain essential personnel only. In July 2021, a limited number of additional personnel resumed working on site for a portion of the year, but the majority of our personnel are still working remotely. All onsite personnel are required to adhere to our COVID-19 safety protocols for their protection. In addition, in our clinical trial for ATRC-101, we experienced delays in initiating sites, achieving patient compliance with study-related procedures, and enrolling patients in the second and third quarters of 2020 due to COVID-19, and we experienced delays in enrolling and treating patients at a few sites in 2021 due to COVID-19 infections and staff shortages.
To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our productivity or our business, and as of December 31, 2021, we have not identified any significant disruption or impairment of our assets due to the pandemic. However, we cannot predict the potential future impacts of COVID-19, including its variants, on us and third parties with whom we conduct business, including on our clinical studies and our clinical trial for ATRC-101 and related timelines, as well as our preclinical activities. These impacts will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the outbreak and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain, vaccinate against, and treat the disease and other factors identified in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K. Given these uncertainties, COVID-19 could impact our business operations and our ability to execute on our associated business strategies and initiatives, and adversely impact our consolidated results of operations and our financial condition in the future, and could disrupt the business of third parties with whom we do business, including our existing and potential future collaborators. We will continue to closely monitor and evaluate the nature and extent of the impacts of COVID-19 on our business, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition.
- 70 -
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have no products approved for marketing or commercial sale and have never generated any revenue from product sales.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred in performing research, development and manufacturing activities in support of our own product development efforts, including Phase 1b clinical trials for ATRC-101, intellectual property legal expenses, salaries, employee benefits and stock-based compensation for personnel contributing to research and development activities, laboratory supplies, outsourced research and development expenses, professional services and allocated facilities-related costs. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in our differentiated discovery platform to expand our pipeline of product candidates, advance our product candidates into and through preclinical studies and clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, allocated facilities costs and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, human resource, audit and accounting services. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as we continue to support the growth of our business and incur the costs of compliance associated with being a public company.
Interest and Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) includes other income which represents amounts received from partners for research and discovery services, interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments, interest expense and gains or losses on the periodic disposals of property and equipment.
- 71 -
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations during the respective periods:
*
Not meaningful
Research and Development
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the respective periods:
Research and development expenses increased by $16.3 million, or 26%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher personnel-related expenses of $5.7 million as a result of additional employee headcount, a $1.3 million increase in facility expenses due to the construction of certain tenant improvements for the Company’s headquarters, a $5.1 million increase in product and other consulting services due to continued clinical trial and discovery activities, a $2.7 million increase in laboratory supplies and equipment for increased research and development activities and a $1.6 million increase in other expenses due to higher leasehold improvement amortization expense and increased software subscriptions.
General and Administrative
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses incurred during the respective periods:
- 72 -
General and administrative expenses increased by $5.1 million, or 19%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase consists of a $2.4 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, as a result of additional employee headcount, a $0.2 million increase in facility expenses due to the construction of certain tenant improvements for the Company’s headquarters, and a $2.8 million increase in other expenses due mainly to an increase in amortization expenses attributable to the San Carlos lease and a $1.5 million cease-use expense as a result of vacating the South San Francisco office space.
Other Income
Other income is comprised of amounts earned from research and discovery services provided to partners under service agreements. Other income decreased by $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 due to the completion of the services provided to a third party partner.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased to $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to a significant decrease in market interest rates on fixed income and money market securities and decrease in the investment balance.
Interest Expense
Interest expense during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 pertained to the interest portion of payments made on capital leases under which we acquired certain property and equipment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources; Plan of Operations
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments totaling $148.1 million. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of bank deposits and money market funds. Our investments consist of U.S. government treasury and agency securities and corporate debt securities.
Due to our significant research and development expenditures, we have generated significant operating losses since inception. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of convertible preferred stock and common stock.
In July 2020, we issued and sold 7,642,125 shares of our Class A common stock, and 781,250 shares of our Class B common stock at an offering price of $16.00 per share. The net proceeds to us from this offering was $126.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $8.1 million and other offering expenses of $0.6 million.
- 73 -
In August 2020, we entered into a sales agreement, or Sales Agreement, with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we may, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth therein, issue and sell through Cowen, acting as our sales agent and/or principal, shares of the our Class A common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $100.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we issued and sold 793,361 shares of our Class A common stock have been sold under the Sales Agreement. The net proceeds from the sales was $4.4 million after deducting underwriting fee of $0.1 million and issuance costs of $0.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $359.8 million.
Our management evaluates whether there are relevant conditions and events that in the aggregate raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and to meet its obligations as they become due within one year from the date that the financial statements are issued. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. We believe we will meet longer-term expected future cash requirements and obligations through a combination of available cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, our Sales Agreement, and access to other private and public financing sources. The adequacy of our available funds and our ability to raise any necessary additional capital to meet longer-term operating and capital requirements will depend on many factors, including successfully developing product candidates, obtaining regulatory approvals to market and commercialize product candidates, manufacturing any approved products on commercially reasonable terms, entering into potential future partnerships, establishing a sales and marketing organization or suitable third-party alternatives for any approved product and raising sufficient funds to finance business activities. As a result, we believe we may be unable to meet longer-term expected future cash requirements and obligations and we are likely to seek additional private and public financing.
We are subject to risks and uncertainties common to early-stage companies in the biotechnology industry, including, but not limited to, development by competitors of new technological innovations, dependence on key personnel, protection of proprietary technology, compliance with government regulations and the ability to secure additional capital to fund operations. Identification and development of product candidates will require significant additional research and development efforts, including extensive preclinical and clinical testing and regulatory approval prior to commercialization. These efforts require significant amounts of additional capital, adequate personnel and infrastructure and extensive compliance-reporting capabilities. Even if our drug development efforts are successful, it is uncertain when, if ever, we will realize significant revenue from product sales.
Material Cash Requirements
We expect our net losses to increase substantially as we continue clinical development of our lead product candidate, ATRC 101. We have used substantial funds to develop our discovery platform and ATRC 101 and we will continue to require significant funds to continue to develop our discovery platform and conduct further research and development, including preclinical studies and clinical trials of ATRC 101 and additional potential future product candidates, to seek regulatory approvals for ATRC 101 and potential future product candidates and to manufacture and market products, if any, that are approved for commercial sale. In addition, we expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and other marketing and distribution arrangements. We cannot assure you that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us. If we are unable to
- 74 -
obtain adequate financing when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or suspend one or more of our preclinical studies, clinical trials, research and development programs or commercialization efforts.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
The operating lease obligations noted above represent operating lease obligations related to our currently occupied premises in South San Francisco, California and premises in San Carlos, California, which we are obligated to occupy in the future. These leases expire at various dates through the first half of 2033.
In July 2019, we entered into a lease agreement, or the San Carlos Lease, for the lease of approximately 99,557 rentable square feet of office space located in San Carlos, California, which is intended to serve as our permanent headquarters, office and laboratory space following the completion of construction and certain tenant improvements. The term of the San Carlos Lease commenced in August 2020, and the premises were delivered to us for the construction of certain tenant improvements. The term will end on the date that is 144 months from the first day of the first full month after rent commences. Base rent for the San Carlos Lease is $557,519 per month, with annual increases of 3%. We are obligated to provide a security deposit of $1.1 million in the form of a letter of credit.
The capital lease obligations noted above represent certain property and equipment we acquired under capital leases. In 2017, we financed purchases of $226,000 in equipment under a capital lease agreement. Outstanding amounts under the capital lease agreements are generally secured by liens on the related property and equipment.
In addition, we enter into contracts in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for preclinical and clinical studies as well as with contract development manufacturing organizations for the manufacture of materials for those studies. These agreements generally provide for termination at the request of either party with less than one-year notice and are, therefore, cancelable contracts and not reflected in the table above.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $60.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $109.3 million, partially offset by $23.0 million in non-cash charges and a net change of $25.4 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of depreciation and amortization of $4.6 million and stock-based compensation of $16.9 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $16.7 million increase in deferred rent because of increased lease incentive obligations and a $5.4 million increase in
- 75 -
accrued expenses attributable to the accrual of the Company’s cease use liabilities and a higher contract manufacturing accrual, a $3.0 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets attributable to decrease in tenant improvement receivable from the Company’s leasehold improvement construction for San Carlos location and a $1.3 million increase in account payables mainly due to increase in payable balance for contractual manufacturers. These activities were partially offset by a $0.9 million decrease in other current liabilities attributable to a decrease in contract liabilities from our completion of services provided to an external partner.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $66.7 million, which consisted of a net loss of $86.3 million, partially offset by $15.2 million in non-cash charges and a net change of $4.5 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of depreciation and amortization of $2.4 million and stock-based compensation of $12.5 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accrued expense of $0.8 million resulting from an increase in personnel-related expenses as a result of additional employee headcount, a $0.8 million increase in other current liabilities resulting from an increase in contract liabilities from our new arrangement with an external partner, and a $8.4 million increase in deferred rent primarily due to increases in lease incentive obligations and deferred rent, which was partially offset by a $5.4 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets attributable to increases in tenant improvement receivable from the Company’s leasehold improvement construction for San Carlos location and prepaid insurance.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by investing activities of $89.2 million was primarily related to $124.3 million in net proceeds from maturities of investments, partially offset by $35.1 million in purchases of property and equipment, primarily related to leasehold improvements for the San Carlos Lease.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of $159.0 million was primarily related to $154.1 million in net purchases of investments attributable to the proceeds from the common stock offering in July 2020 and $5.0 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $5.4 million, which primarily related to $4.4 million proceeds from the common stock sales related to the ATM program, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, $0.8 million and $0.3 million of proceeds from our 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) and employee stock option exercises, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $128.9 million, which primarily related to $126.7 million proceeds from the common stock offering, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, and $1.0 million and $1.9 million proceeds from our 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan and employee stock option exercises, respectively, partially offset by $0.6 million in common stock offering costs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
- 76 -
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360-10, Property, Plant & Equipment-Overall, we review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of property and equipment may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. In the event that such cash flows are not expected to be sufficient to recover the carrying amount of the assets, we write down the assets to their estimated fair values and recognize the loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Research and Development Expenses and Accrued Research and Development Costs
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Research and development expenses consist of personnel costs for our research and product development employees. Also included are non-personnel costs such as professional fees payable to third parties for preclinical studies, clinical trials and research services, laboratory supplies and equipment maintenance and depreciation, intellectual property licenses and other consulting costs.
We estimate preclinical studies, clinical trials and research expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to contracts with research institutions that conduct and manage preclinical studies, clinical trials and research services on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on discussions with management and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount services provided but not yet invoiced, and include these costs in development expenses. We accrue for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with our third party service provides under the service agreements. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued liabilities. We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, the status and timing of actual services performed may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our results of operations. Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire exclusive license to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternate future use are expensed as incurred.
Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services by the third parties are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered. We evaluate these payments for current or long-term classification based on when we expect to receive these services.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain a stock-based compensation plan as a long-term incentive for employees, consultants and members of our board of directors. The plan allows for the issuance of non-statutory options, or NSOs, incentive stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units to employees and NSOs to nonemployees.
Stock-based payments are measured using fair-value-based measurements and recognized as compensation expense over the service period in which the awards are expected to vest. Our fair-value-based measurements of awards to employees and directors as of the grant date utilize the single-option award-valuation approach, and we use the straight-line method for expense attribution. The valuation model used for calculating the estimated fair value of stock awards is the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculations, including the expected term (weighted-average period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding), the expected volatility of our common stock, the related risk-free interest rate and the expected dividend. We have elected to recognize forfeitures of stock-based payment awards as they occur.
For stock-based awards issued to non-employees, we record expense related to stock options based on the fair value of the options calculated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model over the service performance period.
- 77 -
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
◾ Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term for option grants is determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the stock-based awards, as we do not have sufficient exercise history to determine a better estimate of expected term.
◾ Expected Volatility. Since we have been privately held and do not have any trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biotechnology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
◾ Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
◾ Expected Dividend. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards, including but not limited to Topic 842, the new lease accounting standard, that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We early adopted Accounting Standards Update 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606), and Accounting Standards Update 2018-07, Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718), as the JOBS Act does not preclude an emerging growth company from early adopting a new or revised accounting standard earlier than the time that such standard applies to private companies. We expect to use the extended transition period for any other new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2024, (ii) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC, which means the market value of our voting and non-voting common equity that is held by non-affiliates is equal to or exceeds $700.0 million as of the prior June 30th and (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.