ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
THE BRINK’S COMPANY
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2021 AND 2020
AND FOR EACH OF THE YEARS IN THE THREE-YEAR PERIOD ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021
Page
OPERATIONS
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Analysis of Results
Income and Expense Not Allocated to Segments
Other Operating Income and Expense
Nonoperating Income and Expense
Income Taxes
Noncontrolling Interests
Non-GAAP Results Reconciled to GAAP
Foreign Operations
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
Operating Activities
Investing Activities
Financing Activities
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes on Cash and Cash Equivalents
Capitalization
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
U.S Retirement Liabilities
Contingent Matters
APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowance
Business Acquisitions
Goodwill, Other Intangible Assets and Property and Equipment Valuations
Retirement and Postemployment Benefit Obligations
Foreign Currency Translation
The discussion of operating results and financial condition comparing 2020 versus 2019 can be found in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 ("2020 10-K"), starting on page 21.
OPERATIONS
The Brink’s Company offers secure transportation and route-based logistics management services for cash and valuables throughout the world. These services include:
•Cash-in-transit services - armored vehicle transportation of valuables
•Basic ATM services - replenishing and maintaining customers’ automated teller machines; providing network infrastructure services
•Global services - secure international transportation of valuables
•Cash management services
◦Money processing (e.g., counting, sorting, wrapping, checking condition of bills, etc.) and other cash management services
◦Digital cash payment services that provide advance credit for cash deposited in Brink’s-provided tech-enabled safe devices and other services related to deploying and servicing “intelligent” safes and safe control devices (including our patented CompuSafe® service)
◦Check imaging services
•Vaulting services - combines cash-in-transit services, cash management services, vaulting and electronic reporting technologies for banks
•ATM managed services - services for ATM management, including cash replenishment, replenishment forecasting, cash optimization, ATM remote monitoring, service call dispatching, transaction processing, installation services, and first and second line maintenance.
•Payment services - bill payment and collection services on behalf of utility companies and other billers at any of our Brink’s or Brink’s - operated payment locations in Latin America and Brink’s Money™ general purpose reloadable prepaid cards and corporate debit cards in the U.S.
•Commercial security systems services - design and installation of security systems in designated markets in Europe
•Guarding services - protection of airports, offices, and certain other locations in Europe, Rest of World and Latin America with or without electronic surveillance, access control, fire prevention and highly trained patrolling personnel
We manage our business in the following four segments:
•North America - operations in the U.S. and Canada, including the Brink’s Global Services ("BGS") line of business,
•Latin America - operations in Latin American countries where we have an ownership interest, including the BGS line of business,
•Europe - total operations in European countries that primarily provide services outside of the BGS line of business, and
•Rest of World - operations in the Middle East, Africa and Asia. This segment also includes total operations in European countries that primarily provide BGS services and BGS activity in Latin American countries where we do not have an ownership interest.
We believe that Brink’s has significant competitive advantages including:
•brand name recognition
•reputation for a high level of service and security
•risk management and logistics expertise
•global network and customer base
•proven operational excellence, and
•high-quality insurance coverage and financial strength
We focus our time and resources on service quality, protecting and strengthening our brand, and addressing our risks. Our marketing and sales efforts are enhanced by the “Brink’s” brand, so we seek to protect and build its value. Because our services focus on handling, transporting, protecting and managing valuables, we strive to understand and manage risk.
In order to earn an adequate return on capital, we focus on the effective and efficient use of resources in addition to our pricing discipline. We attempt to maximize the amount of business that flows through our branches, vehicles and systems in order to obtain the lowest costs possible without compromising safety, security or service.
Operating results may vary from period to period. Because revenues are generated from charges per service performed or based on the value of goods transported, they can be affected by both the level of economic activity and the volume of business for specific customers. We also periodically incur costs to change the scale of our operations when volumes increase or decrease. Incremental costs incurred usually relate to increasing or decreasing the number of employees and increasing or decreasing branches or administrative facilities. In addition, security costs can vary depending on performance, the cost of insurance coverage, and changes in crime rates (i.e., attacks and robberies).
Brink’s revenues and related operating profit are generally higher in the second half of the year, particularly in the fourth quarter, due to generally increased economic activity associated with the holiday season.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Analysis of Results
Consolidated Results
GAAP and Non-GAAP Financial Measures We provide an analysis of our operations below on both a generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and non-GAAP basis. The purpose of the non-GAAP information is to report our operating profit, income from continuing operations and earnings per share without certain income and expense items that do not reflect the regular earnings of our operations. The non-GAAP financial measures are intended to provide investors with a supplemental comparison of our operating results and trends for the periods presented. Our management believes these measures are also useful to investors as such measures allow investors to evaluate our performance using the same metrics that our management uses to evaluate past performance and prospects for future performance. We do not consider these items to be reflective of our core operating performance. The non-GAAP adjustments used to reconcile our GAAP results are described in detail on pages 28-30 and are reconciled to comparable GAAP measures on pages 35-37.
Definition of Organic Growth Organic growth represents the change in revenues or operating profit between the current and prior period excluding the effect of acquisitions for and dispositions for one year after the transaction and changes in currency exchange rates. See definitions on page 26.
(a)Amounts reported in this table are attributable to the shareholders of Brink’s and exclude earnings related to noncontrolling interests.
(b)Non-GAAP results are reconciled to the applicable GAAP results on pages 35-37.
GAAP Basis
Analysis of Consolidated Results: 2021 versus 2020
Consolidated Revenues Revenues increased $509.3 million primarily due to the favorable impact of acquisitions ($315.4 million), organic increases in Latin America ($102.2 million), North America ($64.4 million), Europe ($15.4 million), and Rest of World ($8.6 million), and the favorable impact of currency exchange rates ($3.3 million). The currency impact was driven primarily by the euro, the Mexican peso, and most other currencies globally, partially offset by the Argentine peso and Brazilian real. Revenues increased 5% on an organic basis due to volume recovery versus prior year results which were more impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as price increases in the U.S. and Argentina. See above for our definition of “organic.”
Consolidated Costs and Expenses Cost of revenues increased 12% to $3,235.8 million primarily due to the impact of acquisitions, higher labor and other operational costs from volume recovery, and currency exchange rates, partially offset by lower costs incurred related to restructuring actions. Selling, general and administrative costs increased 8% to $629.7 million due to the impact of corporate expenses and the operating impact of acquisitions, partially offset by lower costs incurred versus the prior year related to acquisitions (including integration) and on an internal loss in the U.S. global services operations.
Consolidated Operating Profit Operating profit increased $141.2 million due mainly to:
•organic increases in Latin America ($45.7 million), North America ($44.9 million), Europe ($28.1 million), and Rest of World ($2.5 million)
•the following items included in "Other items not allocated to segments":
◦income and lower charges related to an internal loss in the U.S. global services operations versus charges incurred in the prior year ($28.0 million),
◦lower charges related to reorganization and restructuring ($23.0 million), and
◦lower costs related to business acquisitions and dispositions ($10.6 million), including the impact of acquisition-related charges and intangible asset amortization in 2021,
•the favorable impact of business acquisitions ($29.6 million), excluding intangible amortization and acquisition-related charges,
partially offset by:
•higher corporate expenses on an organic basis ($53.0 million),
•an estimated loss of $9.5 million in the third quarter of 2021 related to a potential fine for a Chile antitrust matter included in "Other items not allocated to segments", and
•unfavorable changes in currency exchange rates ($9.1 million) driven by the Argentine peso and Brazilian real and partially offset by lower foreign currency transaction losses as 2020 included a loss of $10.4 million from converting Argentine pesos into U.S. dollars, as well as a favorable impact from the Mexican peso, euro, and most other currencies globally.
Consolidated Income from Continuing Operations Attributable to Brink’s and Related Per Share Amounts Income from continuing operations attributable to Brink’s shareholders increased $86.3 million to $103.1 million primarily due to the operating profit increase mentioned above, lower interest and other non-operating expense ($30.7 million), partially offset by higher income tax expense ($63.7 million), higher interest expense ($15.7 million), and higher income attributable to noncontrolling interests ($6.2 million). Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $2.06, up from $0.33 in 2020.
Non-GAAP Basis
Analysis of Consolidated Results: 2021 versus 2020
Non-GAAP Consolidated Revenues Non-GAAP revenues increased $509.3 million primarily due to the favorable impact of acquisitions ($315.4 million), organic increases in Latin America ($102.2 million), North America ($64.4 million), Europe ($15.4 million), and Rest of World ($8.6 million), and the favorable impact of currency exchange rates ($3.3 million). The currency impact was driven primarily by the euro, the Mexican peso, and most other currencies globally, partially offset by the Argentine peso and Brazilian real. Revenues increased 5% on an organic basis due to volume recovery versus prior year results which were more impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as price increases in the U.S. and Argentina. See above for our definition of “organic.”
Non-GAAP Consolidated Operating Profit Non-GAAP operating profit increased $89.2 million due mainly to:
•organic increases in Latin America ($45.7 million), North America ($44.9 million), Europe ($28.1 million), and Rest of World ($2.5 million), and
•the favorable impact of business acquisitions ($29.6 million), excluding intangible amortization and acquisition-related charges,
partially offset by:
•higher corporate expenses on an organic basis ($53.0 million), and
•unfavorable changes in currency exchange rates ($8.6 million) driven by the Argentine peso and Brazilian real and partially offset by lower foreign currency transaction losses as third quarter of 2020 included a loss of $10.4 million from converting Argentine pesos into U.S. dollars, as well as a favorable impact from the Mexican peso, euro, and most other currencies globally.
Non-GAAP Consolidated Income from Continuing Operations Attributable to Brink’s and Related Per Share Amounts Non-GAAP income from continuing operations attributable to Brink’s shareholders increased $47.1 million to $237.9 million due to the operating profit increase mentioned above and higher interest and other non-operating income ($15.8 million), partially offset by higher income tax expense ($34.8 million), higher interest expense ($16.3 million), and higher non-controlling interest ($6.8 million). Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $4.75, up from $3.76 in 2020.
Revenues and Operating Profit by Segment
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
(a)Non-GAAP amounts include the impact of prior year comparable period results for acquired and disposed businesses. GAAP results also include the impact of acquisition-related intangible amortization, restructuring and other charges, and disposition related gains/losses.
(b)The amounts in the “Currency” column consist of the effects of Argentina devaluations under highly inflationary accounting and the sum of monthly currency changes. Monthly currency changes represent the accumulation throughout the year of the impact on current period results of changes in foreign currency rates from the prior year period.
(c)Segment revenues equal our total reported non-GAAP revenues.
(d)In the first quarter of 2021, North America operating profit benefited $12.3 million from a change in our method to calculate the allowance for doubtful accounts, with an offsetting higher expense at Corporate. There was no net impact on consolidated operating profit. See further discussion below in Analysis of Segment Results.
(e)Corporate expenses are not allocated to segment results. Corporate expenses include salaries and other costs to manage the global business and to perform activities required by public companies.
(f)See pages 28-30 for more information.
Analysis of Segment Results: 2021 versus 2020
North America
Revenues increased 12% ($145.7 million) primarily due to the favorable impact of acquisitions ($72.4 million), a 5% organic increase ($64.4 million), and the favorable impact of currency exchange rates ($8.9 million) from the Canadian dollar. Organic revenue increased primarily due to price increases and global services volume growth in the U.S. and organic growth from PAI. Operating profit increased 62% ($56.7 million) primarily due to an organic increase ($44.9 million), the favorable impact of acquisitions ($11.6 million), and the favorable impact of currency exchange rates ($0.2 million). The organic profit increase was driven by the impact of bad debt expense versus the prior year, productivity initiatives in the U.S. and Canada, and revenue growth from U.S. global services and PAI. The increase was partially offset by higher labor costs due to wage increases in the U.S.
The change in bad debt expense was driven by a first quarter of 2021 change to the allowance for doubtful accounts calculation method for the segment’s U.S. business, which resulted in a $12.3 million operating profit increase, and which was offset by a $12.3 million increase to Corporate expense, resulting in no impact to consolidated operating profit for the first quarter. Historically, all Brink’s business units followed an internal Company policy for determining an allowance for doubtful accounts and the allowances were then reconciled to the required U.S. GAAP estimated consolidated allowance, with any differences reported as part of Corporate expense. Other than for the U.S. business, the reconciling differences were not significant. We changed the U.S. calculation of the allowance in order to more closely align it with the U.S. GAAP consolidated calculation and to minimize reconciling differences, resulting in the offsetting $12.3 million adjustments to align the methods.
Latin America
Revenues increased 5% ($54.1 million) primarily due to an organic increase of 10% ($102.2 million) and the favorable impact of acquisitions ($8.4 million), partially offset by the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($56.5 million), primarily from the Argentine peso and Brazilian real and partially offset by the Mexican peso. The organic increase was due to organic growth in Argentina driven by inflation-based price increases and organic growth in Mexico from volume growth and price increases versus prior year results which were more impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Operating profit was up 10% ($23.7 million) primarily due to an organic increase of 20% ($45.7 million), including the benefit of labor and other operational cost saving actions, which includes those taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the favorable impact of acquisitions ($0.6 million), partially offset by unfavorable currency ($22.6 million). The organic increase was driven by Argentina and Mexico.
Europe
Revenues increased 22% ($163.5 million) due to the favorable impact of acquisitions ($120.8 million) and currency exchange rates ($27.3 million), and a 2% organic increase ($15.4 million). The favorable currency impact was driven by the euro. The organic increase was primarily due to organic volume growth in France. Operating profit increased 75% ($38.6 million) due to an organic increase ($28.1 million), the favorable impact of acquisitions ($9.7 million) and currency exchange rates ($0.8 million). The organic increase was primarily driven by France due to higher volumes and the impact of labor and other operational cost saving actions, including those taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by lower government assistance. Results were also helped by higher government COVID-19 assistance in several other countries.
Rest of World
Revenues increased 24% ($146.0 million) due to the favorable impact of acquisitions ($113.8 million), the favorable impact of currency exchange rates ($23.6 million), and a 1% organic increase ($8.6 million). The currency impact was driven by most currencies throughout the segment. Operating profit increased 12% ($14.4 million) due to the favorable impact of acquisitions ($7.7 million), the favorable impact of currency exchange rates ($4.2 million), driven by most currencies throughout the segment, and an organic increase ($2.5 million). The organic increase was primarily due to the impact of labor and other operational cost saving actions throughout the segment, including those taken in response to COVID-19, partially offset by lower government COVID-19 assistance in several countries.
Income and Expense Not Allocated to Segments
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses include corporate headquarters costs, regional management costs, currency transaction gains and losses, costs related to global initiatives and adjustments to reconcile segment accounting policies to U.S. GAAP.
Corporate expenses in 2021 were $44.2 million higher than the prior year primarily driven by higher bad debt expense ($28.5 million) included in Corporate expense as part of the reconciliation of segment policies to U.S. GAAP, as discussed in more detail in the next paragraph below. Current year expense also increased as a result of higher costs related to development of new service offerings ($11.2 million), an increase in employee compensation, including share-based and other incentives ($9.5 million), and higher legal fees ($4.0 million). These increases were partially offset by lower foreign currency transaction losses in the current year period ($9.2 million).
Historically, all Brink’s business units followed an internal accounting policy for determining an allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowances were then reconciled to the required U.S. GAAP estimated consolidated allowance, with any differences reported as part of Corporate expense. In 2020, the Corporate reconciling adjustment was a reduction of Corporate expense of $11.0 million, to offset business unit allowances that were higher than U.S. GAAP required. In 2021, the adjustment was an increase of Corporate expense of $17.5 million. The 2021 increase was primarily from a change in the first quarter of 2021 to the allowance calculation method of the North America segment’s U.S. business. This change resulted in a $12.3 million increase to Corporate expense offset by a $12.3 million operating profit increase in the North America segment, resulting in no impact to consolidated operating profit for the first quarter of 2021. We changed the U.S. calculation of the allowance in order to more closely align it with the U.S. GAAP consolidated calculation and to minimize reconciling differences. Other than for the U.S. business, the reconciling differences were not significant. The bad debt expense increase excludes the impact of the internal loss in our U.S. global services operations described on the next page.
Other Items Not Allocated to Segments
2021 versus 2020
The impact of other items not allocated to segments on operating profit was a smaller loss ($115.8 million in 2021 versus $167.8 million in the prior year). The change was primarily due to lower reorganization and restructuring expenses, a reduction in net charges related to the internal loss matter and a decrease in costs related to acquisitions and dispositions. These favorable changes were partially offset by the Chile antitrust matter charge recognized in the current year period.
Reorganization and Restructuring
Other Restructurings
Management periodically implements restructuring actions in targeted sections of our business. As a result of these actions, we recognized net costs of $28.8 million in 2019, primarily severance costs and charges related to the modification of share-based compensations awards in 2019. We recognized $66.6 million of net costs in operating profit and $0.6 million of costs in interest and other nonoperating income (expense) in 2020, primarily severance costs. We recognized $43.6 million of net costs in 2021, primarily severance costs. Substantially all of the costs from 2021 restructuring plans result from management initiatives to address the COVID-19 pandemic. When completed, the current restructuring actions will reduce our workforce by 1,600 to 1,800 positions and result in in annualized cost savings of $35 million to $40 million. For the current restructuring actions, we expect to incur additional costs between $1 million and $3 million in future periods.
Due to the unique circumstances around these charges, they have not been allocated to segment results and are excluded from non-GAAP results. Charges related to the employees, assets, leases and contracts impacted by these restructuring actions were excluded from the segments and corporate expenses as shown in the table below.
Acquisitions and dispositions Part of our strategy is the pursuit of accretive business acquisitions. In 2021, we acquired business operations in the U.S. and we completed the remaining planned acquisitions from G4S. In 2020, we acquired multiple business operations from G4S at different times during the year. In 2019, we completed four business acquisitions in the U.S., Brazil and Colombia. Certain acquisition and disposition items that are not considered part of the ongoing activities of the business and are special in nature are consistently excluded from non-GAAP results. These items are described below:
2021 Acquisitions and Dispositions Items
•Amortization expense for acquisition-related intangible assets was $47.7 million in 2021.
•We incurred $10.5 million in integration costs, primarily related to G4S, in 2021.
•Transaction costs related to business acquisitions were $6.5 million in 2021.
•Restructuring costs related to acquisitions were $5.3 million in 2021.
•Compensation expense related to the retention of key PAI employees was $1.8 million in 2021.
2020 Acquisitions and Dispositions Items
•Amortization expense for acquisition-related intangible assets was $35.1 million in 2020.
•We incurred $23.5 million in integration costs related primarily to Dunbar and G4S in 2020.
•Transaction costs related to business acquisitions were $19.3 million in 2020.
•Restructuring costs related to acquisitions were $4.7 million in 2020.
2019 Acquisitions and Dispositions Items
•We incurred $43.1 million in integration costs related to Dunbar, Rodoban, TVS and COMEF in 2019.
•Amortization expense for acquisition-related intangible assets was $27.8 million in 2019.
•Transaction costs related to business acquisitions were $7.9 million in 2019.
•Restructuring costs related to acquisitions, primarily Rodoban and Dunbar, were $5.6 million in 2019.
•In 2019, we recognized $2.2 million in net charges, primarily asset impairment and severance costs, related to the exit from our top-up prepaid mobile phone business in Brazil.
•Compensation expense related to the retention of key Dunbar employees was $1.5 million in 2019.
Argentina highly inflationary impact Beginning in the third quarter of 2018, we designated Argentina's economy as highly inflationary for accounting purposes. As a result, Argentine peso-denominated monetary assets and liabilities are now remeasured at each balance sheet date to the currency exchange rate then in effect, with currency remeasurement gains and losses recognized in earnings. In addition, nonmonetary assets retain a higher historical basis when the currency is devalued. The higher historical basis results in incremental expense being recognized when the nonmonetary assets are consumed. In 2019, we recognized $14.5 million in pretax charges related to highly inflationary accounting, including currency remeasurement losses of $11.3 million. In 2020, we recognized $10.7 million in pretax charges related to highly inflationary accounting, including currency remeasurement losses of $7.7 million. In 2021, we recognized $11.9 million in pretax charges related to highly inflationary accounting, including currency remeasurement losses of $9.0 million. These amounts are excluded from segment and non-GAAP results.
Chile antitrust matter We recognized an estimated loss of $9.5 million in the third quarter of 2021 related to a potential fine. Due to the special nature of this matter, this charge has not been allocated to segment results and is excluded from non-GAAP results. See Note 23 for details.
Internal loss A former non-management employee in our U.S. global services operations embezzled funds from Brink's in prior years. Except for a small deductible amount, the amount of the internal loss related to the embezzlement of funds was covered by our insurance. In an effort to cover up the embezzlement, the former employee intentionally misstated the underlying accounts receivable subledger data. In 2019, we incurred $4.5 million in costs (primarily third party expenses) to reconstruct the accounts receivables subledger. In 2020, we incurred an additional $0.3 million in costs related to this activity.
In the third quarter of 2019, we were able to identify $4.0 million of revenues billed and collected in prior periods which had never been recorded in the general ledger. We also identified and recorded $0.3 million in bank fees, which had been incurred in prior periods. Based on the reconstructed subledger, we were able to analyze and quantify the uncollected receivables from prior periods. Although we planned to attempt to collect these receivables, we estimated an increase to bad debt expense of $13.7 million in the third quarter of 2019. The estimate of the allowance for doubtful accounts was adjusted in the fourth quarter of 2019 for an additional $6.4 million and again in 2020 for an additional $6.6 million. In 2021, we recognized a decrease in bad debt expense of $3.7 million, primarily related to collection of these receivables. We also recognized $1.3 million of legal charges in 2021 as we attempted to collect additional insurance recoveries related to these receivables losses. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we successfully collected $18.8 million of insurance recoveries related to these internal losses.
We have defined accounts receivable impacted by the embezzlement as accounts receivable recorded as of and prior to the third quarter of 2019. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we wrote off the remaining accounts receivable of $8.1 million which had previously been fully reserved. Due to the unusual nature of this internal loss and the related errors in the subledger data, along with the fact that management has excluded these amounts when evaluating internal performance, we have excluded these amounts from segment and non-GAAP results.
Reporting compliance Certain compliance costs (primarily third party expenses) are excluded from segment and non-GAAP results. These costs relate to the implementation and January 1, 2019 adoption of the new lease accounting standard (amounts were not significant in 2021, $0.5 million in 2020 and $1.8 million in 2019). We also incurred $0.3 million in 2019 in costs related to mitigation of material weaknesses. We did not incur any such costs in 2020 or 2021.
Other Operating Income and Expense
Amounts below represent consolidated other operating income and expense.
2021 versus 2020
We reported other operating income of $20.0 million in 2021 versus other operating expense of $15.6 million in the prior year. The change was primarily due to $18.8 million in insurance recoveries related to the internal loss in our U.S. global services operations. In addition, we recognized gains related to litigation in our Romania business and lower losses from foreign currency items in 2021 as compared to 2020. The foreign currency items above do not include business acquisition-related currency items which are reported in interest and other nonoperating income (expense).
Nonoperating Income and Expense
Interest Expense
Interest expense was higher in 2021 primarily due to higher borrowing levels due to business acquisitions. See Note 15 for further information.
Interest and Other Nonoperating Income (Expense)
(a)The gain is primarily related to the market value increase of an investment in MoneyGram International, Inc. The investment was sold in 2021 and the gain was fully realized.
(b)Amounts in 2021 and 2020 primarily represent currency transaction gains and losses on contingent consideration payable related to G4S business acquisitions.
(c)Represents loss on foreign currency forward contracts related to acquisition of business operations from G4S.
(d)Adjustments to indemnification asset related to business operations acquired from G4S. This adjustment was recognized outside of the measurement period for the related business operations acquired from G4S.
(e)This amount includes a gain on settlement with G4S related to business operations acquired. The gain was partially offset by losses associated with the write off of indemnification assets related to income tax contingency reversals from businesses acquired in Brazil. These adjustments were recognized outside of the measurement periods for the related business operations acquired.
(f)Represents penalties and interest on non-income taxes that have not yet been paid.
(g)Related to an unfavorable court ruling in 2019 on a non-income tax claim in Colombia. The court ruled that Brink's must pay interest accruing from 2009 to the current date. The principal amount of the claim was less than $1 million and was recognized in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2019.
(h)Certain of our Latin American subsidiaries incur non-income taxes related to the billing of intercompany charges. These intercompany charges do not impact Latin America segment results and are eliminated in our consolidation.
(i)Charges incurred for providing financial support to Brink's Venezuelan subsidiaries after the June 30, 2018 deconsolidation. We do not expect any future funding of the Venezuela business, as long as current U.S. sanctions remain in effect.
(j)Gain on termination of a mining lease obligation related to former coal operations. We have no remaining mining leases.
(k)This gain is primarily related to the sale of our former French security services subsidiary in the first quarter of 2020.
(l)Represents interest on non-income tax credits related to our business operations in Brazil. In the third quarter of 2021, our Brazil operations received a favorable court decision related to non-income taxes paid in prior years and will be able to recover the overpayments, plus interest, by reducing payments on future tax obligations.
(m)Adjustment to the liability for contingent consideration pertaining to the 2019 Balance Innovations business acquisition.
(n)Related to a favorable court ruling in litigation with a customer of our Romania business. The court ruled that the customer must pay our subsidiary in Romania for services provided many years ago. The principal amount of the settlement is reported in operating income (expense). The penalties for years of non-payment are reported in interest and other nonoperating income (expense).
Interest and other nonoperating income (expense) was higher in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to higher interest income and gain on equity securities. Interest and other nonoperating income (expense) was higher in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to higher retirement benefit costs in 2019, mainly due to settlement charges in the U.S. frozen pension plan.
Income Taxes
Summary Rate Reconciliation - GAAP
(a)In 2019, we recognized a benefit of $7.3 million related to a previously recognized $23.5 million current tax expense that accelerated U.S. taxable income in 2015.
Summary Rate Reconciliation - Non-GAAP(a)
(a)See pages 35-37 for a reconciliation of non-GAAP results to GAAP.
Overview
Our effective tax rate has varied in the past three years from the statutory U.S. federal rate due to various factors, including
•changes in judgment about the need for valuation allowances,
•changes in the geographical mix of earnings,
•changes in laws in the U.S., France, Mexico, and Argentina,
•U.S. tax on accelerated taxable income,
•timing of benefit recognition for uncertain tax positions,
•state income taxes, and
•tax benefit for distributions of share-based payments.
We establish or reverse valuation allowances for deferred tax assets depending on all available information including historical and expected future operating performance of our subsidiaries. Changes in judgment about the future realization of deferred tax assets can result in significant adjustments to the valuation allowances. Based on our historical and future expected taxable earnings, we believe it is more-likely-than-not that we will realize the benefit of the deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances.
Continuing Operations
2021 Compared to U.S. Statutory Rate
The effective income tax rate on continuing operations in 2021 was greater than the 21% U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the geographical mix of earnings, book losses for which no tax benefit can be recorded, nondeductible expenses in Mexico, taxes on cross border payments and the characterization of a French business tax as an income tax.
2020 Compared to U.S. Statutory Rate
The effective income tax rate on continuing operations in 2020 was greater than the 21% U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the geographical mix of earnings, book losses for which no tax benefit can be recorded, nondeductible expenses in Mexico, taxes on cross border payments and the characterization of a French business tax as an income tax, partially offset by the significant tax benefits related to the distribution of share-based payments.
Noncontrolling Interests
Compared to 2020, the increase in net income attributable to noncontrolling interests to $12.1 million in 2021 is primarily due to the G4S acquisitions which closed in the first quarter of 2021 and higher operating results reported by some of our subsidiaries in 2021. Compared to 2019, the increase in net income attributable to noncontrolling interests to $5.9 million in 2020 is primarily due to the G4S acquisitions that closed in the second and third quarters of 2020.
Non-GAAP Results Reconciled to GAAP
Non-GAAP results described in this filing are financial measures that are not required by or presented in accordance with GAAP. The purpose of the Non-GAAP results is to report financial information from the primary operations of our business by excluding the effects of certain income and expenses that do not reflect the ordinary earnings of our operations. The specific items excluded have not been allocated to segments, are described in detail on pages 28-30, and are reconciled to comparable GAAP measures below. The full-year Non-GAAP tax rate in each year excludes certain pretax and income tax amounts. Amounts reported for prior periods have been updated in this report to present information consistently for all periods presented.
The Non-GAAP financial measures are intended to provide investors with a supplemental comparison of our operating results and trends for the periods presented. Our management believes these measures are also useful to investors as such measures allow investors to evaluate our performance using the same metrics that our management uses to evaluate past performance and prospects for future performance. We do not consider these items to be reflective of our operating performance as they result from events and circumstances that are not a part of our core business. Additionally, non-GAAP results are utilized as performance measures in certain management incentive compensation plans.
Non-GAAP results should not be considered as an alternative to revenue, income or earnings per share amounts determined in accordance with GAAP and should be read in conjunction with their GAAP counterparts. Non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to Non-GAAP financial measures presented by other companies.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
(a)From continuing operations.
(b)See “Other Items Not Allocated To Segments” on pages 28-30 for details. We do not consider these items to be reflective of our operating performance as they result from events and circumstances that are not a part of our core business.
(c)Our U.S. retirement plans are frozen and costs related to these plans are excluded from non-GAAP results. Certain non-U.S. operations also have retirement plans. Settlement charges related to these non-U.S. plans are also excluded from non-GAAP results.
(d)The non-GAAP tax rate excludes the 2019 foreign tax benefits that resulted from the transaction that accelerated U.S. tax in 2015.
(e)There was a change in judgement resulting in a valuation allowance against certain tax attributes with a limited statutory carryforward period that are no longer more-likely-than-not to be realized due to lower than expected Canada operating results.
(f)Gain on termination of a mining lease obligation related to former coal operations. We have no remaining mining leases.
(g)Amounts in 2020 and 2019 primarily relate to interest incurred on a cross currency swap hedging foreign currency risk on the intercompany financing of the Rodoban acquisition.
(h)In addition to the items discussed in “Other Items Not Allocated To Segments” on pages 28-30, includes a $4.5 million gain on the sale of a French security services business in 2020, acquisition-related pretax currency transaction losses of $3.6 million in 2020 and acquisition-related pretax losses on foreign currency forward contracts of $7.0 million in 2020.
(i)Post-deconsolidation funding of ongoing costs related to our Venezuelan operations was $0.9 million in 2019 and was expensed as incurred and reported in interest and other nonoperating income (expense). We do not expect any future funding of the Venezuela business, as long as current U.S. sanctions remain in effect.
Non-GAAP reconciled to GAAP
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
See page 35 for footnote explanations.
Non-GAAP reconciled to GAAP
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
See page 35 for footnote explanations.
Foreign Operations
We currently serve customers in more than 100 countries, including 53 countries where we operate subsidiaries.
We are subject to risks customarily associated with doing business in foreign countries, including labor and economic conditions, the imposition of international sanctions, including by the U.S. government, political instability, controls on repatriation of earnings and capital, nationalization, expropriation and other forms of restrictive action by local governments. Changes in the political or economic environments in the countries in which we operate could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. The future effects, if any, of these risks are unknown. In April 2019, the U.S. government sanctioned the Venezuela central bank and, as a result, we have ceased support of our Venezuela business.
Our international operations conduct a majority of their business in local currencies. Because our financial results are reported in U.S. dollars, they are affected by changes in the value of various local currencies in relation to the U.S. dollar. Recent strengthening of the U.S. dollar relative to certain currencies has reduced our reported dollar revenues and operating profit, which may continue in 2022. See Application of Critical Accounting Policies-Foreign Currency Translation on pages 57-58 for a description of our accounting methods and assumptions used to include our Argentina operations in our consolidated financial statements, and a description of the accounting for subsidiaries operating in highly inflationary economies. See also Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for a description of how we account for currency remeasurement for our Argentine subsidiaries, beginning July 1, 2018 under the heading, "Argentina".
At December 31, 2021, Argentina's economy remains highly inflationary for accounting purposes. At December 31, 2021, we had net monetary assets denominated in Argentine pesos of $60.1 million (including cash of $52.9 million) and nonmonetary net assets of $155.3 million (including $99.8 million of goodwill, $8.2 million in equity securities denominated in Argentine pesos and $4.3 million in debt securities denominated in pesos).
During September 2019, the Argentine government announced currency controls on both companies and individuals. Under the exchange procedures implemented by the central bank, approval is required for many transactions, including dividend repatriation abroad.
During the third quarter of 2020 and during the fourth quarter of 2019, we elected to use other market mechanisms to convert Argentine pesos into U.S. dollars. Conversions under these other market mechanisms generally settle at rates that are less favorable than the rates at which we remeasure the financial statements of Brink’s Argentina. As a result, we recognized $10.4 million in 2020 and $4.7 million in 2019 of such conversion losses when we converted Argentine pesos into U.S. dollars at rates that were approximately 100% and 25%, respectively, less favorable than the rates at which we remeasured the financial statements of Brink’s Argentina. These conversion losses are classified in the consolidated statements of operations as other operating income (expense). We did not have any such conversion losses in 2021.
Although the Argentine government has implemented currency controls, Brink’s management continues to provide guidance and strategic oversight, including budgeting and forecasting for Brink’s Argentina. We continue to control our Argentina business for purposes of consolidation of our financial statements and continue to monitor the situation in Argentina.
Changes in exchange rates may also affect transactions which are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of a given foreign entity. From time to time, we use short term foreign currency forward and swap contracts to hedge transactional risks associated with foreign currencies, as discussed in