ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion provides an analysis of the Company’s financial condition, cash flows, and results of operations from management’s perspective and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included under Part II, Item 8 in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. See the section titled “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks, and assumptions associated with those statements. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly under Part I, Item 1A, in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
In addition, the following discussion and analysis compares our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 that was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 26, 2021.
Overview
Blucora, Inc. (the “Company,” “Blucora,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) is a leading provider of integrated tax-focused wealth management services and software, assisting consumers, small business owners, tax professionals, financial professionals, and certified public accounting (“CPA”) firms. Our mission is to enable financial success by changing the way individuals and families plan and achieve their goals through tax-advantaged solutions. We conduct our operations through two primary businesses: (1) the Wealth Management business and (2) the Tax Software business. Our common stock is listed on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “BCOR.”
Wealth Management
Our Wealth Management business consists of the operations of Avantax Wealth Management and Avantax Planning Partners (collectively, the “Wealth Management business” or the “Wealth Management segment”).
Avantax Wealth Management provides tax-focused wealth management solutions for financial professionals, tax professionals, CPA firms, and their clients. Avantax Wealth Management offers its services through its registered broker-dealer, registered investment advisor (“RIA”), and insurance agency subsidiaries and is a leading U.S. tax-focused independent broker-dealer. Avantax Wealth Management works with a nationwide network of financial professionals that operate as independent contractors. Avantax Wealth Management provides these financial professionals with an integrated platform of technical, practice, compliance, operations, sales, and product support tools that enable them to offer tax-advantaged investing and wealth management services to their clients.
Avantax Planning Partners is an in-house/employee-based RIA and wealth management business that partners with CPA firms in order to provide their consumer and small business clients with holistic financial planning and advisory services, as well as retirement plan solutions through Avantax Retirement Plan Services. Avantax Planning Partners formerly operated as Honkamp Krueger Financial Services, Inc. (“HKFS”). We acquired HKFS in July 2020 (the “HKFS Acquisition”) and subsequently rebranded it in order to create tighter brand alignment through one common and recognizable brand. Any reference to Avantax Planning Partners in this Form 10-K is inclusive of HKFS.
Tax Software
Our Tax Software business consists of the operations of TaxAct, Inc. (“TaxAct,” the “Tax Software business,” or the “Tax Software segment”) and provides digital tax preparation services and ancillary services for consumers, small business owners, and tax professionals through its website www.TaxAct.com and its mobile applications. We referred to this business as the “Tax Preparation business” and “Tax Preparation segment” in previous filings.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 42
Business Environment
COVID-19 pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic, including precautionary measures and societal response, has had a significant negative impact on the U.S. and global economy and caused substantial disruption in the U.S. and global securities markets, and as a result, has negatively impacted both our Wealth Management and Tax Software businesses.
In our Wealth Management business, this economic and financial market disruption negatively impacted the value of some of our clients’ assets in the first quarter of 2020, which caused a corresponding decline in the amount of revenue that we derived from these client assets. Further, beginning in the first quarter of 2020, we experienced a decline in commission revenue from lower trading volumes. Positive financial market movement in the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020 and in 2021 increased advisory and brokerage asset balances, with higher client asset balances benefiting advisory fees and trailing commissions. Additionally, in response to this economic and market disruption, the Federal Reserve decreased the federal funds rate in 2020 and maintained a low-interest rate environment in 2021, causing a significant decline in cash sweep revenue. The Federal Reserve has signaled adjustments to monetary policy that would increase the federal funds rates, which we expect would positively impact cash sweep revenue. If the Federal Reserve does not increase, or further decreases, the federal funds rates, cash sweep revenue would continue to be negatively impacted. Overall, we expect that revenues in our Wealth Management business will remain susceptible to being adversely affected in future periods in which pandemic-influenced economic and market factors remain present.
In our Tax Software segment, the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) extended the filing and payment deadline for tax year 2019 federal tax returns to July 15, 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. This extension resulted in elevated sales and marketing expenses in 2020. Additionally, the IRS was selected by the U.S. Congress as the vehicle for distribution of the first round of Economic Impact Payments (“EIP1”), which caused significant disruption to the 2020 tax season. As a result of the extension of the 2020 tax season and the EIP1 disruption, our results of operations for our Tax Software segment were negatively impacted in 2020 compared to prior years.
For additional information on the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, see “Results of Operations” below. For more information on the risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, see Part I, Item 1A under the subheading, “The current COVID-19 pandemic could have a Material Adverse Effect.”
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 43
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Summary
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, net income increased $350.5 million primarily due to the following factors:
•Wealth Management segment operating income increased $10.0 million primarily due to a $112.0 million increase in revenue, partially offset by a $102.0 million increase in operating expenses. Wealth Management segment operating income included $9.6 million of incremental operating income from the inclusion of a full year of Avantax Planning Partners, which was largely offset by a $6.3 million decrease in cash sweep revenue caused by reduced interest rates. In addition, Wealth Management segment results for 2020 were negatively affected by suppressed client asset levels and transaction activity during 2020 resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and related financial market disruption.
•Tax Software segment operating income increased $32.3 million primarily due to an $18.2 million increase in revenue, and a $14.0 million decrease in operating expenses. Operating income during 2020 was impacted by incremental advertising and marketing spend caused by the extension of the 2020 tax season and efforts to address weak performance during the first two months of the 2020 tax season.
•Operating loss within corporate-level activity decreased $257.5 million primarily due to the $270.6 million Wealth Management goodwill impairment recognized in the first quarter of 2020, offset partially by a $10.9 million increase in expenses associated with contested proxy and other legal and consulting costs for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•The Company recorded an income tax benefit of $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and income tax expense of $42.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the income tax benefit primarily resulted from a reduction in our valuation allowance. This reduction included the utilization of net operating losses for current year taxable income, the write-off of expired federal net operating losses, and the write-off of expired capital loss carryforwards. For the year ended December 31, 2020, income tax expense was driven by the impact of the non-deductible goodwill impairment recorded in 2020, the write-off of expired federal net operating losses, and incremental valuation allowance.
SEGMENT REVENUE & OPERATING INCOME
The revenue and operating income amounts in this section are presented on a basis consistent with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and include certain reconciling items attributable to our segments. We have two reportable segments: (1) the Wealth Management segment and (2) the Tax Software segment. Segment information is presented on a basis consistent with our current internal management financial reporting. We do not allocate certain general and administrative costs (including personnel
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 44
and overhead costs), stock-based compensation, depreciation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition and integration costs, executive transition costs, headquarters relocation costs, contested proxy and other legal and consulting costs, or impairment of goodwill to the reportable segments. Such amounts are reflected under “Corporate-level activity.” In addition, we do not allocate interest expense and other, net, or income taxes to the reportable segments.
Wealth Management
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, Wealth Management segment operating income increased $10.0 million due to a $112.0 million increase in revenue partially offset by a $102.0 million increase in operating expenses.
•Wealth Management revenue increased $112.0 million primarily due to an $81.0 million increase in advisory revenue, a $25.5 million increase in commission revenue, and a $7.1 million increase in transaction and fee revenue, partially offset by a $1.6 million decrease in asset-based revenue. These revenue increases primarily resulted from increased client asset levels and favorable transaction activity compared to the suppressed client asset levels and transaction activity in 2020 resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and related financial market disruption. In addition, Wealth Management revenue included $21.5 million of incremental revenue compared to 2020 from the inclusion of a full year of Avantax Planning Partners. These increases were partially offset by a $6.3 million decrease in cash sweep revenue due to a sharp decline in interest rates after the first quarter of 2020 that persisted throughout 2021.
•Wealth Management operating expenses increased $102.0 million primarily due to a $77.2 million increase in cost of revenue for advisory fees and commissions paid, and an $18.8 million increase in sales and marketing expenses. Payout ratios to financial professionals increased due to improved market performance, the exit of lower producing financial professionals who were concentrated at lower payout levels, and the alignment of our payout grids. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to increases in travel and conference costs, and incremental personnel and support costs. Wealth Management operating expenses included $11.9 million of incremental costs from the inclusion of a full year of Avantax Planning Partners.
•Segment margin compression during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the reduction in cash sweep revenue, coupled with the increase in operating expenses outlined above. Absent any change in the federal funds rate, we expect further margin compression in the near term due to increased travel and conference costs associated with reduced COVID-19 travel restrictions and higher payout ratios as we continue to grow and scale the business.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 45
Sources of revenue
Wealth Management revenue is derived from multiple sources. We track sources of revenue, primary drivers of each revenue source, and recurring revenue. In addition, we focus on several business and key financial metrics in evaluating the success of our business relationships, our resulting financial position, and operating performance. A summary of our sources of revenue and business and financial metrics is as follows:
Recurring revenue consists of advisory fees, trailing commissions, fees from cash sweep programs, and certain transaction and fee revenue, all as described further under the headings “Advisory revenue,” “Commission revenue,” “Asset-based revenue,” and “Transaction and fee revenue,” respectively. Certain recurring revenues are associated with asset balances and fluctuate depending on market values and current interest rates. Accordingly, our recurring revenue can be negatively impacted by adverse external market conditions. However, we believe recurring revenue is meaningful because it is not dependent upon transaction volumes or other activity-based revenues, which are more difficult to predict, particularly in declining or volatile markets.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 46
Business metrics
____________________________
(1)In connection with our ongoing integration of acquisitions, as of December 31, 2021, we refined the methodology by which we calculate client assets to align the methodologies within our Wealth Management segment for calculating such metrics. Specifically, such changes to the methodology include alignment to one third party data aggregator for assets not placed in custody with our clearing firm and to one consistent set of logic for all assets and transaction types. We have not recast client assets for prior periods to conform to our current presentation as we believe the changes to the calculation to be immaterial.
(2)The number of independent financial professionals includes licensed financial professionals that work with Avantax Wealth Management and operate as independent contractors, as well as licensed referring representatives at CPA firms that partner with Avantax Planning Partners.
(3)The number of in-house/employee financial professionals includes licensed financial planning consultants, all of which are affiliated with Avantax Planning Partners.
(4)Calculation based on advisory and commission revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Client assets. Total client assets include assets that we hold directly or indirectly on behalf of clients under a safekeeping or custody arrangement or for which we provide administrative services for clients. To the extent that we provide more than one service for a client’s assets, the value of the asset is only counted once in the total amount of total client assets. Total client assets include advisory assets, non-advisory brokerage accounts, annuities, and mutual fund positions held directly with fund companies. These assets are not reported on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
Advisory assets include client assets for which we provide investment advisory and management services as a fiduciary under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940. Our compensation for providing such services is typically a fee based on the value of the advisory assets for each advisory client. These assets are not reported on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
Brokerage assets represent total client assets other than advisory assets.
Total client assets increased $6.1 billion at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 primarily due to $8.1 billion of favorable market change and asset reinvestment following the pandemic-influenced market downturn in 2020, partially offset by net client outflows of $2.1 billion.
Advisory assets as a percentage of total client assets increased to 47.3% at December 31, 2021 compared to 42.9% at December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by net client inflows of $2.6 billion, relating in part to our focus on converting off platform, direct to fund assets when appropriate for the client, to fee based advisory platforms that include ongoing management and which incur higher margins.
While financial markets have substantially stabilized since the pandemic-influenced financial market conditions in 2020, we cannot predict with certainty the extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and future financial market fluctuations on our client assets. However, the continued volatility in the U.S. and global economy and uncertainty in financial markets due to the pandemic may cause declines in the amount of our total client assets.
Financial professionals. The number of our financial professionals decreased 9% at December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020, with the decrease primarily due to attrition related to lower revenue-producing financial professionals. This attrition led to a 34% increase in advisory and commission revenue per financial
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 47
professional for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the number of financial professionals was partially offset by our continued recruitment and onboarding of independent financial professionals.
Advisory revenue. Advisory revenue primarily includes fees charged to clients in advisory accounts for which we are the RIA. These fees are based on the value of assets within these advisory accounts. For advisory revenues generated by Avantax Wealth Management, advisory fees are typically billed quarterly, in advance, and the related advisory revenues are deferred and recognized ratably over the period in which our performance obligations have been completed. For advisory revenue generated by Avantax Planning Partners, advisory fees are typically billed quarterly, in arrears, and the related advisory revenues are accrued and recognized ratably over the period in which our performance obligations were completed. Because advisory fees are based on advisory assets on the last day of each quarter, our revenues are impacted, in part, by the timing of market movements relative to when clients are billed.
Advisory asset balances were as follows:
The activity within our advisory assets was as follows:
____________________________
(1)For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, average advisory fee rate equals the sum of each quarterly average advisory fee rate within the relevant year-to-date period.
At December 31, 2021, advisory assets increased by $6.6 billion, including $3.9 billion from market growth and a $2.6 billion increase in net new advisory assets. Net new advisory assets benefited from a focus on converting off platform, direct to fund assets when appropriate for the client, to fee based advisory platforms that include ongoing management and which incur higher margins.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the average advisory fee rate decreased primarily due to our tiered fee structure, which has generated lower average fee rates as average client asset balances have increased. In addition, the average advisory fee rate decreased due to the inclusion of Avantax Planning Partners, which has a lower advisory fee structure, for the full year.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, advisory revenue increased $81.0 million primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of Avantax Planning Partners, stabilized market conditions compared to the volatility during 2020 from the COVID-19 pandemic, and net new advisory assets.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 48
Commission revenue. The Wealth Management segment generates two types of commissions: (1) transaction-based commissions and (2) trailing commissions. Transaction-based commissions, which occur when clients trade securities or purchase investment products, represent gross commissions generated by our financial professionals. The level of transaction-based commissions can vary from period-to-period based on the overall economic environment, number of trading days in the reporting period, market volatility, interest rate fluctuations, and investment activity of our financial professionals’ clients. We earn trailing commissions (a commission or fee that is paid periodically over time) on certain mutual funds and variable annuities held by clients. Trailing commissions are recurring in nature and are based on the market value of investment holdings in trail-eligible assets.
Our commission revenue, by product category and by type of commission revenue, was as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, transaction-based commission revenue and trailing commission revenue increased $15.2 million and $10.3 million, respectively, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were primarily due to an increase in transaction activity and client asset levels, each of which was lower in 2020, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related financial market disruption.
Asset-based revenue. Asset-based revenue primarily includes fees from financial product manufacturer sponsorship programs, cash sweep programs, asset-based retirement plan service fees, and other asset-based revenues.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, asset-based revenue decreased $1.6 million, primarily due to a $6.3 million decrease in cash sweep revenue caused by the decline in interest rates after the first quarter of 2020 that persisted throughout 2021. This decline was partially offset by a $2.8 million increase in revenue generated from financial product manufacturer sponsorship programs and a $1.7 million increase in revenue generated from asset-based retirement plan service fees.
Transaction and fee revenue. Transaction and fee revenue primarily includes support fees charged to financial professionals, fees charged for executing certain transactions in client accounts, and other fees related to services provided and other account charges as generally outlined in agreements with financial professionals, clients, financial institutions, and retirement plan sponsors.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 transaction and fee revenue increased $7.1 million primarily due to incremental revenue generated from financial professional support fees, and inclusion of a full year of Avantax Planning Partners.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 49
Tax Software
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, Tax Software segment operating income increased $32.3 million due to an $18.2 million increase in revenue and a $14.0 million decrease in operating expenses.
•Tax Software revenue increased $18.2 million primarily due to a $17.5 million increase in consumer revenue. Consumer revenue during 2021 benefited from incremental ancillary services revenue as compared to 2020.
•Tax Software operating expenses decreased $14.0 million primarily due to decreased advertising and marketing expense in 2021 as compared to 2020. Advertising and marketing costs were elevated in 2020 due to the extended tax season and incremental marketing efforts to address weak performance through the first two months of the tax season. The decline in advertising and marketing costs and the increase in revenue were the primary drivers of the margin increase during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Sources of revenue
Tax Software revenue is derived primarily from the sale of tax preparation digital services, ancillary services, packaged tax preparation software, and arrangements that may include a combination of these items. Ancillary services primarily include refund payment transfer and audit defense.
We classify Tax Software revenue into two different categories: consumer revenue and professional revenue. Consumer revenue is derived from products sold directly to customers primarily for the preparation of individual and business tax returns. Professional revenue is derived from products sold to tax return preparers who utilize our offerings to service end user customers.
Revenue by category was as follows:
Business metrics
We measure the performance of our Tax Software business using three sets of non-financial metrics, which we consider to be important indicators of the performance of our Tax Software business and are especially relevant through the end of a completed tax season. These non-financial metrics include key performance indicators for our total Tax Software business, in addition to the consumer and professional tax software portions of the Tax Software business:
•We measure our total tax software customers using the total number of accepted federal tax e-files completed by both our consumer tax software customers and our professional tax software customers.
•We measure our consumer tax software customers using the number of accepted federal tax e-files made through our software and digital services.
•We measure our professional tax software customers using three metrics: (1) the number of accepted federal tax e-files made through our software, (2) the number of units sold, and (3) the number of e-files per unit sold.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 50
Total, consumer, and professional metrics were as follows:
____________________________
(1)We participate in the Free File Alliance that is part of an IRS partnership that provides free electronic tax filing services to taxpayers meeting certain income-based guidelines. Free File Alliance e-files are included within total e-files and consumer e-files above.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, total e-files increased 5%. This increase was primarily due to increased market share in the professional tax software market.
Corporate-Level Activity
Certain corporate-level activity, including certain general and administrative costs (such as personnel and overhead costs), stock-based compensation, acquisition and integration costs, depreciation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, impairment of goodwill, executive transition costs, headquarters relocation costs, and contested proxy and other legal and consulting costs, is not allocated to our segments.
Corporate-level activity by category was as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, corporate-level activity decreased $257.5 million primarily due to the following factors:
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized goodwill impairment of $270.6 million related to our Wealth Management reporting unit.
•Executive transition costs of $10.7 million were recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the departure of certain Company executives.
Partially offsetting this decrease in corporate-level activity:
•Stock-based compensation increased $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as stock-based compensation in 2020 was reduced by stock award forfeitures resulting from executive departures.
•Contested proxy and other legal and consulting costs of $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 51
•Acquisition and integration expenses increased $1.7 million. Fair value increases of $14.1 million for the HKFS Contingent Consideration (as defined herein) liability were partially offset by a decline in professional services costs incurred during the prior year for the acquisition of Avantax Planning Partners.
OPERATING EXPENSES
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of costs related to our Wealth Management and Tax Software businesses, which include commissions and advisory fees paid to independent financial professionals, payments made to CPA firms under fee sharing arrangements, third-party costs, and costs associated with the technical support team and the operation of our data centers. Data center costs include personnel expenses, the cost of temporary help and contractors, professional services fees, software support and maintenance, bandwidth and hosting costs, and depreciation (including depreciation related to software development costs in the Tax Software segment). Cost of revenue does not include compensation paid to in-house/employee financial professionals in our Wealth Management business. The compensation of our in-house/employee financial professionals is reflected in “Sales and marketing” expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of revenue increased $81.6 million primarily due to the increase in advisory fees and commissions paid to financial professionals associated with incremental Wealth Management revenues. Payout ratios for the same period also increased due to improved market performance, which resulted in a shift in the number of financial professionals earning higher payout levels, the exit of lower producing financial professionals who were concentrated at lower payout levels, and the alignment of our payout grids. Higher payout ratios are expected to continue in the near term as we continue to grow and scale the business. Furthermore, the Tax Software segment had increased personnel costs and depreciation of capitalized software. Continued investments in internally developed software for the Tax Software segment are expected to result in increased depreciation in future periods.
Engineering and Technology
Engineering and technology expenses are associated with the research, development, support, and ongoing enhancements of our offerings, which include personnel expenses, the cost of temporary help and contractors, software support and maintenance, bandwidth and hosting, and professional services fees. Engineering and technology expenses do not include the costs of computer hardware and software that are capitalized, depreciated over their useful lives, and recognized on the consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) as either “Cost of Revenue” or “Depreciation.” For more information, see the “Cost of Revenue” and “Depreciation and Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets” sections contained within this discussion of “Operating Expenses.”
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, engineering and technology expenses increased $3.4 million primarily due incremental personnel expenses in the Tax Software and Wealth Management segments, partially offset by decreased consulting fees in our Tax Software business.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 52
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of marketing expenses associated with our Tax Software business (including expenses related to marketing agencies and media companies) and our Wealth Management business, personnel expenses, compensation paid to Avantax Planning Partners in-house/employee financial professionals, the cost of temporary help and contractors, and back office processing support expenses for our Wealth Management business.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, sales and marketing expenses decreased $4.3 million primarily due to a $23.2 million reduction in advertising and marketing costs in our Tax Software business. Advertising and marketing costs in our Tax Software business were elevated for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the extension of the 2020 tax season and incremental marketing efforts in March 2020 to address weak performance through the first two months of the tax season. This decline was partially offset by an $18.8 million increase in sales and marketing expenses in our Wealth Management business due to the inclusion of a full year of Avantax Planning Partners expenses, incremental travel and conference costs, and increased headcount to support growth in the Wealth Management business. Travel and conference costs increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the relaxation of travel restrictions implemented during 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses primarily consist of personnel expenses, the cost of temporary help and contractors, professional services fees, general business development and management expenses, occupancy and general office expenses, business taxes, and insurance expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, G&A expenses increased $16.5 million primarily due to the following factors:
•Stock-based compensation increased $10.7 million. Stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2020 was reduced due to stock award forfeitures resulting from executive departures.
•Contested proxy and other legal and consulting costs of $10.9 million were incurred for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Incremental general and administrative costs of $5.6 million were incurred in 2021, primarily personnel costs.
These increases were partially offset by $10.7 million of executive transition costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the departure of certain Company executives, which did not recur in 2021.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 53
Acquisition and Integration
Acquisition and integration expenses primarily relate to the costs incurred for the acquisition of Avantax Planning Partners and 1st Global and consist of employee-related expenses, professional services fees, changes in the fair value of contingent consideration, and other expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, acquisition and integration expenses increased $1.7 million, primarily due to a $14.1 million increase in the fair value of the HKFS Contingent Consideration (as defined herein) liability. Professional services costs incurred for the acquisition of Avantax Planning Partners during the year ended December 31, 2020 that did not recur in 2021 partially offset this increase.
Depreciation and Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets
Depreciation of property, equipment, and software, net includes depreciation of computer equipment and software (including internally developed software), office equipment and furniture, and leasehold improvements. Amortization of acquired intangible assets primarily includes the amortization of financial professional, sponsor, and customer relationships, which are amortized over their estimated lives.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expense increased $2.2 million primarily due to increased depreciation resulting from property, equipment, and software, net put into service at our new headquarters in July 2020 and an increase in capitalized software costs.
Impairment of Goodwill and an Intangible Asset
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized goodwill impairment of $270.6 million related to our Wealth Management reporting unit. There was no impairment recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021. For additional information, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5.”
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 54
INTEREST EXPENSE AND OTHER, NET
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense and other, net, increased $0.8 million primarily due to a $4.8 million increase in total interest expense. This increased interest expense was primarily due to higher outstanding debt balances as a result of the $175.0 million increase in the Term Loan (as defined below) under the Senior Secured Credit Facility (as defined below) in the third quarter of 2020. The increase in the Term Loan in the third quarter of 2020 resulted in the recognition of $3.7 million of non-capitalized debt issuance expenses, partially offsetting this increase.
INCOME TAXES
For 2021, we recorded an income tax benefit of $9.2 million. Our effective income tax rate differed from the 21% statutory rate primarily due to a reduction in our valuation allowance. This reduction included the utilization of net operating losses for current year taxable income, the write-off of expired federal net operating losses, and the write-off of expired capital loss carryforwards.
At December 31, 2021, we had deferred tax assets recorded for gross temporary differences representing future tax deductions of $240.4 million, primarily comprised of $105.2 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards and $2.0 million of federal capital loss carryforwards. We currently estimate that approximately $75.3 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards will expire, if unutilized, in 2022 through 2024, and $2.0 million of federal capital loss carryforwards will expire, if unutilized, in 2022 through 2023. We have recorded a valuation allowance of $16.8 million against deferred tax assets related to the federal net operating and capital loss carryforwards that are anticipated to expire unutilized. The ultimate realization of our deferred tax assets depends on our ability to generate future taxable income. Our actual future taxable income may differ from our projected taxable income as a result of differences in pre-tax income, as well as future originating book-tax differences, including excess tax benefits (windfalls) for stock compensation, which, due to inherent uncertainty, we do not forecast. In the future, if we determine more or less of the recognized net deferred tax assets is more likely than not to be realized, we will record a charge or benefit to the income statement to account for the further change in valuation allowance.
For 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $42.3 million. Our effective income tax rate differed from the 21% statutory rate in 2020 primarily due to $56.8 million of tax expense related to the impairment of goodwill (which was not deductible for tax purposes), $23.9 million of tax expense related to an increase in our valuation allowance, and $21.1 million from the write-off of expired federal net operating losses.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 55
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), determined in accordance with GAAP, excluding the effects of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization of acquired intangible assets, interest expense and other, net, acquisition and integration costs, contested proxy and other legal and consulting costs, impairment of goodwill, executive transition costs, headquarters relocation costs, and income tax benefit (expense). Interest expense and other, net primarily consists of interest expense, net and non-capitalized debt issuance expenses. Acquisition and integration costs primarily relate to the acquisitions of Avantax Planning Partners and 1st Global. Impairment of goodwill relates to the impairment of our Wealth Management reporting unit goodwill in the first quarter of 2020. Executive transition costs relate to the departure of certain Company executives in the first quarter of 2020. Headquarters relocation costs relate to the process of moving from our Dallas and Irving offices to our new headquarters.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance. We use this non-GAAP financial measure for internal management and compensation purposes, when publicly providing guidance on possible future results, and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a common measure used by investors and analysts to evaluate our performance, that it provides a more complete understanding of the results of operations and trends affecting our business when viewed together with GAAP results, and that management and investors benefit from referring to this non-GAAP financial measure. Items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant and necessary components to the operations of our business and, therefore, Adjusted EBITDA should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, GAAP net income (loss). Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently and, therefore, our Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
A reconciliation of GAAP net income (loss), which we believe to be the most comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA, is presented below:
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) and Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) per share
We define Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) as net income (loss), determined in accordance with GAAP, excluding the effects of stock-based compensation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition and integration costs, contested proxy and other legal and consulting costs, impairment of goodwill, executive transition costs, non-capitalized debt issuance expenses, headquarters relocation costs, gain on the sale of a business, the related cash tax impact of those adjustments, and non-cash income tax (benefit) expense. We exclude the non-cash portion of income taxes because of our ability to offset a substantial portion of our cash tax liabilities by using deferred tax assets, which primarily consist of U.S. federal net operating losses. The majority of these net operating losses will expire, if not utilized, between 2022 and 2024. Gain on the sale of a business relates to the disposition of SimpleTax in 2019 and the subsequent working capital adjustment in the third quarter of 2020. Non-capitalized debt issuance expenses relate to the expense recognized as a result of the Term Loan increase in the third quarter of 2020. For more information on our Term Loan, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 6.”
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 56
We believe that Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) and Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) per share provide meaningful supplemental information to management, investors, and analysts regarding our performance and the valuation of our business by excluding items in the statement of operations that we do not consider part of our ongoing operations or that have not been, or are not expected to be, settled in cash. Additionally, we believe that Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) and Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) per share are common measures used by investors and analysts to evaluate our performance and the valuation of our business. Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) and Non-GAAP Net income (Loss) per share should be evaluated in light of our financial results prepared in accordance with GAAP and should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, GAAP net income (loss) and GAAP net income (loss) per share. Other companies may calculate Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) and Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) per share differently, and, therefore, these measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
A reconciliation of GAAP net income (loss) and GAAP net income (loss) per share, which we believe to be the most comparable GAAP measures, to Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) and Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) per share, respectively, is presented below:
____________________________
(1)Any difference in the “per diluted share” amounts between this table and the consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) is due to using different diluted weighted average shares outstanding in the event that there is GAAP net loss but Non-GAAP Net Income and vice versa.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 57
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Our principal source of liquidity is our cash and cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $134.8 million. We generally invest our excess cash in money market funds that are made up of securities issued by agencies of the U.S. government. We may invest, from time-to-time, in other vehicles, such as debt instruments issued by the U.S. federal government and its agencies, international governments, municipalities, and publicly held corporations, as well as commercial paper and insured time deposits with commercial banks. Specific holdings can vary from period to period depending upon our cash requirements. Our financial instrument investments held at December 31, 2021 had minimal default risk and short-term maturities.
Our Avantax Wealth Management broker-dealer subsidiary operates in a highly regulated industry and is subject to various regulatory capital requirements. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have substantial monetary and non-monetary impacts on Avantax Wealth Management operations. As of December 31, 2021, Avantax Wealth Management met all capital adequacy requirements to which it was subject.
Historically, we have financed our operations primarily from cash provided by operating activities and access to credit markets. Our historical uses of cash have been funding our operations, servicing our debt obligations, capital expenditures, acquisitions that enhance our strategic position, financial professional loans, contingent consideration associated with our acquisitions, and share repurchases under share repurchase programs. For at least the next twelve months, we plan to finance these cash needs and our regulatory capital requirements at our broker-dealer subsidiary largely through our cash and cash equivalents on hand and cash provided by operating activities. We also expect to have up to $25.0 million of cash outlays in the next twelve months as we continue to execute on our growth strategy related to asset acquisitions in our Wealth Management business. However, the underlying levels of revenues and expenses that we project may not prove to be accurate, and, from time to time, we may make a determination to draw on the Revolver (as defined below) or increase the principal amount of the Term Loan (as defined below) to meet our capital requirements, subject to customary terms and conditions. Our future investments in our business through capital expenditures or acquisitions, or our return of capital to stockholders through stock repurchases, will be determined after considering the best interests of our stockholders.
Since our results of operations are sensitive to various factors, including, among others, the level of competition we face, regulatory and legal impacts, and political and economic conditions, such factors could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources. In addition, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced and may continue to experience near- to mid-term volatility in our results of operations that could further increase our liquidity needs. Due to this volatility, we have taken several measures to ensure proper liquidity levels and are maintaining flexibility in our cash flows. In July 2020, we increased the principal outstanding under our Term Loan to fund the acquisition of Avantax Planning Partners and have continued to retain a portion of these proceeds in order to provide additional working capital flexibility. In addition, in April 2021, we increased the amount available for borrowings under the Revolver from $65.0 million to $90.0 million. Overall, we believe these measures provide us with the capital flexibility to satisfy our obligations, fund our operations, and invest in our business.
For further discussion of the risks to our business related to liquidity, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors”.
Indebtedness
In May 2017, we entered into a credit agreement (as the same has been amended, the “Credit Agreement”) with a syndicate of lenders that provides for a term loan facility (the “Term Loan”) and a revolving line of credit (including a letter of credit sub-facility) (the “Revolver”) for working capital, capital expenditures, and general business purposes (as amended, the “Senior Secured Credit Facility”). The Revolver and the Term Loan mature on February 21, 2024 and May 22, 2024, respectively.
On April 26, 2021, to ensure adequate liquidity and flexibility to support growth, we entered into Amendment No. 5 to the Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement Amendment”). Pursuant to the Credit Agreement Amendment, the Credit Agreement was amended to, among other things, refinance the existing $65.0 million Revolver and add $25.0 million of additional revolving credit commitments, for an aggregate principal amount of $90.0 million in revolving credit commitments (the “New Revolver”). The New Revolver has a maturity date of February 21, 2024 (the “Maturity Date”).
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 58
As of December 31, 2021, we had $561.3 million principal amount outstanding under the Term Loan and no amounts outstanding under the Revolver. Based on aggregate loan commitments as of December 31, 2021, approximately $90.0 million was available for future borrowing under the Senior Secured Credit Facility, subject to customary terms and conditions. In addition, the Company is required to make principal amortization payments on the Term Loan quarterly on the last business day of each March, June, September, and December, in an amount equal to approximately $0.5 million (subject to reduction for prepayments), with the remaining principal amount of the Term Loan due on the maturity date of May 22, 2024.
The interest rate on the Term Loan is variable at the London Interbank Offered Rate, plus the applicable interest rate margin of 4.0% for Eurodollar Rate Loans (as defined in the Credit Agreement) and 3.0% for ABR Loans (as defined in the Credit Agreement). As of December 31, 2021, the applicable interest rate on the Term Loan was 5.0%. Depending on the Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement), the applicable interest rate margin on the New Revolver ranges from 2.0% to 2.5% for Eurodollar Rate Loans and 1.0% to 1.5% for ABR Loans. The Company is required to pay a commitment fee on the undrawn commitment under the New Revolver in a percentage that is dependent on the Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio that ranges from 0.35% to 0.4%. Interest is payable at the end of each interest period, typically quarterly.
By June 2023, all U.S. Dollar London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) tenors will cease to be published and floating rate instruments that used U.S. Dollar LIBOR will need to shift to a substitute base index. To minimize disruption arising from such transition, the market has begun to shift to alternative fallback rates, such as Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) as a replacement benchmark for floating rate LIBOR based loans. Unless (i) such LIBOR tenors cease to be provided at an earlier date or (ii) we and the administrative agent to the Credit Agreement make an “early opt-in election” to replace the rate prior to cessation of LIBOR in accordance with the Credit Agreement, we will continue to have the option under the Credit Agreement to make drawdowns using 1-Day, 1-Month, 3-Month, and 6-Month tenor U.S. Dollar LIBOR until June 2023. The Credit Agreement Amendment provides for a process for transition to a fallback rate consistent with industry practice and permits the administrative agent to the Credit Agreement to apply certain updates to the Credit Agreement to effectuate the fallback rate, including a spread adjustment based on the historical basis between LIBOR and the fallback rate.
Obligations under the Senior Secured Credit Facility are guaranteed by certain of the Company’s subsidiaries and secured by substantially all the assets of the Company and certain of its subsidiaries (including certain subsidiaries acquired in the acquisition of Avantax Planning Partners and certain other material subsidiaries). The Senior Secured Credit Facility includes financial and operating covenants (including a Consolidated Total Net Leverage Ratio), which are set forth in detail in the Credit Agreement.
Pursuant to the Credit Agreement Amendment, if the Company’s usage of the New Revolver exceeds 30% of the aggregate commitments under the New Revolver on the last day of any calendar quarter, the Company shall not permit the Consolidated Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) to exceed (i) 4.75 to 1.00 for the period beginning on April 1, 2021 and ending on December 31, 2021, (ii) 4.25 to 1.00 for the period beginning on January 1, 2022 and ending on September 30, 2022, (iii) 4.00 to 1.00 for the period beginning on October 1, 2022 and ending on December 31, 2022, and (iv) 3.50 to 1.00 for the period beginning on January 1, 2023 and ending on the Maturity Date.
Except as described above, the New Revolver has substantially the same terms as the previous Revolver, including certain covenants and events of default. The Company was in compliance with the debt covenants of the Senior Secured Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021.
For additional information on the Term Loan, Revolver, and the Credit Agreement, see, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 6.”
Stock Repurchase Plan
On March 19, 2019, we announced that our board of directors authorized a stock repurchase plan pursuant to which we may repurchase up to $100.0 million of our common stock. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased 1.3 million shares of our common stock under the stock repurchase plan for an aggregate purchase price of $28.3 million. On December 9, 2021, we announced that our board of directors authorized the Company to repurchase an additional $28.3 million of our common stock pursuant to the stock repurchase plan, bringing the total authorized repurchases under the stock repurchase plan back to $100.0 million.
Pursuant to the stock repurchase plan, share repurchases may be made through a variety of methods, including open market or privately negotiated transactions. The timing and number of shares repurchased will
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 59
depend on a variety of factors, including price, general business and market conditions, and alternative investment opportunities. Our repurchase program does not obligate us to repurchase any specific number of shares, may be suspended or discontinued at any time, and does not have a specified expiration date. Any repurchases of our stock pursuant to the stock repurchase plan may materially reduce the amount of cash we have available and may not materially enhance the long-term value of our business or our stock.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under the stock repurchase plan; however, between January 1, 2022 and February 23, 2022, we repurchased approximately 0.6 million shares of our common stock under the stock repurchase plan for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $11.0 million. The remaining authorized amount under the stock repurchase plan as of February 23, 2022 was approximately $89.0 million. We expect that a portion of our future capital requirements over the next twelve months will encompass share repurchases under this plan.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
On July 1, 2020, we closed the acquisition of Avantax Planning Partners, formerly “HKFS”, for an upfront cash purchase price of $104.4 million. The purchase price was subject to variable contingent consideration, or earn-out payments (the “HKFS Contingent Consideration”) totaling a maximum of $60.0 million.
The HKFS Contingent Consideration to be paid is determined based on advisory asset levels and the achievement of certain performance goals (i) for the period beginning July 1, 2020 and ending July 1, 2021 and (ii) for the period beginning July 1, 2021 and ending July 1, 2022. Pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of January 6, 2020, by and among the Company, HKFS, the selling stockholders named therein (the “Sellers”), and JRD Seller Representative, LLC, as the Sellers’ representative (as amended on April 7, 2020, June 30, 2020, and June 29, 2021) (the “HKFS Purchase Agreement”), the maximum aggregate amount that we would be required to pay for each earn-out period is $30.0 million. If the asset market values on the applicable measurement date fall below certain specified thresholds, no payment of consideration is owed to the Sellers for such period.
Based on advisory asset levels and the achievement of performance goals for the first earn-out period specified in the HKFS Purchase Agreement, we paid the full $30.0 million in the third quarter of 2021. The estimated fair value of the HKFS Contingent Consideration liability for the second earn-out period was $28.3 million as of December 31, 2021, and is included within “Accrued expenses and other current liabilities” on the consolidated balance sheets. We expect to pay the full $30.0 million earnout in the third quarter of 2022.
In addition, the Company has entered into several asset purchase agreements that are accounted for as asset acquisitions. These acquisitions typically include contingent consideration arrangements that encompass obligations to make future payments to sellers contingent upon the achievement of future financial targets. These contingent payments are not recognized until all contingencies are resolved and the consideration is paid. As of December 31, 2021, the maximum future contingent payments associated with these asset acquisitions was $14.8 million, with specified payment dates from 2022 through 2025.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows were comprised of the following:
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 60
Net cash from operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities consists of net income (loss), offset by certain non-cash adjustments, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which were as follows:
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 included $93.4 million of operating cash flows before changes in operating assets and liabilities and $56.5 million of changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash adjustments to net income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily related to depreciation and amortization costs of $43.4 million, stock-based compensation of $20.8 million, and changes in the fair value of the HKFS Contingent Consideration liability of $22.4 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions and disposals, primarily related to $21.6 million in payments made to financial professionals in support of ongoing growth programs, and settlement of contingencies associated with our acquisitions of 1st Global and Avantax Planning Partners. We settled the $16.9 million contingent liability assumed in the 1st Global Acquisition, of which $5.5 million is included within net income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021. Furthermore, we settled the first HKFS Contingent Consideration earn-out liability in the third quarter of 2021, of which $16.8 million of the total $30.0 million payment is included within net cash from operating activities. The remainder of the $30.0 million payment is included in net cash from financing activities.
Net cash from investing activities
Net cash used by investing activities consists of acquisitions, purchases of property, equipment, and software, net, and proceeds from the sale of a business in 2020, and were as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used by investing activities decreased $102.1 million, primarily due to $101.9 million of cash used for the acquisition of Avantax Planning Partners in the third quarter of 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid $8.3 million, including acquisition costs, to complete several asset acquisitions in our Wealth Management business as part of our strategic growth strategy. Capital expenditures declined in the current year due to incremental capital expenditures for our new corporate headquarters in 2020 that did not recur in 2021.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 61
Net cash from financing activities
Net cash from financing activities primarily consists of debt issuance and repayments, common stock and stock-based awards transactions, and acquisition-related contingent consideration payments. Financing cash flows were as follows:
_________________________
(1)The Company recognized $0.5 million of deferred financing costs in other long-term assets on the consolidated balance sheet that was paid in connection with the Credit Agreement Amendment in 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities decreased $175.1 million primarily due to net borrowing activity of $159.7 million associated with an amendment to our Credit Agreement in July 2020 which was primarily used to fund the acquisition of Avantax Planning Partners. In addition, we had $14.1 million of acquisition-related contingent consideration payments in 2021, primarily related to the HKFS Contingent Consideration liability.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the disclosures included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and disclosure of contingencies. In some cases, we could have reasonably used different accounting policies and estimates.
We have identified certain accounting estimates which involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate the estimates used. We base our estimates on historical experience, current conditions, and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances and, based on information available to us at that time, we make judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources, as well as identify and assess our accounting treatment with respect to commitments and contingencies. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions. The critical accounting estimates, as summarized below, which we believe to be the most critical in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements involve business combinations, goodwill impairment, and income taxes. We continually update and assess the facts, circumstances, and assumptions used in making both our critical accounting estimates and judgments related to our other significant accounting matters. These critical accounting estimates are also described in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2.”
Business combinations
We allocate the fair value of the purchase consideration for our business combinations to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, generally based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Purchase consideration includes assets transferred, liabilities assumed, and/or equity interests issued by us, all of which are measured at their fair value as of the date of acquisition. Our business combinations may be structured to include a combination of up-front, deferred, and contingent payments to be made at specified dates subsequent to the date of acquisition. Deferred and contingent payments determined to be purchase consideration are recorded at fair value
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 62
as of the acquisition date. Our contingent consideration arrangements are generally obligations to make future payments to sellers contingent upon the achievement of future financial targets and are remeasured to fair value at the end of each reporting period until the obligations are settled. The estimated fair value of the HKFS Contingent Consideration liability is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model in a risk neutral framework with the underlying simulated variable of advisory asset levels and the related achievement of certain advisory asset growth levels. The Monte Carlo simulation model utilizes Level 3 inputs, as discussed in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 9”. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $22.4 million and $8.3 million, respectively, related to changes in the estimated fair value of the HKFS Contingent Consideration liability.
The valuation of the net assets acquired as well as certain elements of purchase consideration requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to future expected cash flows, discount rates, growth and attrition rates, and estimated useful lives. Management’s assumptions and estimates of fair value are based on comparable market data and information obtained from the management of acquired entities. These assumptions and estimates are believed to be reasonable, but are inherently uncertain and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with a corresponding offset to goodwill. Subsequent changes to the fair value of contingent consideration are reflected in “Acquisition and integration” expense on the consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss). See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2” for further discussion of the methodology used in establishing business combinations.
Goodwill impairment
We test goodwill for impairment annually, as of November 30, or more frequently when events or circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. For purposes of goodwill impairment testing, our reporting units are consistent with our reporting segments.
We test goodwill for impairment either by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair values of our reporting units are less than their carrying amounts, or by performing a quantitative test. Qualitative factors include industry and market conditions, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and circumstances affecting each reporting unit. If we choose to perform a qualitative assessment and, after considering the totality of events or circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not the fair value(s) of our reporting unit(s) are less than their carrying amounts, then we perform a quantitative fair value test. Our quantitative test utilizes a weighted combination of a discounted cash flow model (known as the income approach) and a market approach which estimates a reporting unit’s fair value by applying income-based valuation multiples for a set of comparable companies to the reporting unit’s income. These approaches involve judgmental assumptions, including forecasted future cash flows expected to be generated by each reporting unit over an extended period of time, long-term growth rates, the identification of comparable companies, and each reporting unit’s weighted average cost of capital. The weighted average cost of capital factors in the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty of achieving projected cash flows. These assumptions are unobservable inputs and are considered Level 3 measurements. Impairment is recognized as the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount, including goodwill, over its fair value.
See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes 2” for further discussion of the methodology used in establishing goodwill.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards, and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the book and tax bases of assets and liabilities. We periodically evaluate the likelihood of the realization of deferred tax assets and reduce the carrying amount of the deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe it is more likely than not that a portion will not be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of the deferred tax assets, including expectations of future taxable income, recent cumulative earnings experience by taxing jurisdiction, and other relevant factors. There is a wide range of possible judgments relating to the valuation of our deferred tax assets.
We record liabilities to address uncertain tax positions that have been taken in previously filed tax returns or that are expected to be taken in a future tax return. The determination for required liabilities is based upon an analysis of each individual tax position, taking into consideration whether it is more likely than not that the tax position, based on technical merits, will be sustained upon examination. The tax benefit to be recognized in the
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 63
financial statements from such a position is measured as the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50% cumulative likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority. The difference between the amount recognized and the total tax position is recorded as a liability. The ultimate resolution of these tax positions may be greater or less than the liabilities recorded. See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes 2 and 15” for further discussion of the methodology used in establishing income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2” for more information on recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Blucora, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K 64