Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
particularly in “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a leading global provider of cloud-based services for video. We were incorporated in Delaware in August 2004. With our Emmy®
-winning technology and award-winning services, we help our customers realize
the potential of video to address business-critical challenges. Customers rely on our suite of products, services, and expertise to reduce the cost and complexity associated with publishing, distributing, measuring and monetizing video across devices.
We sell five core video products that help our customers use video to further their businesses in meaningful ways: (1) Video Cloud, our flagship product and the world’s leading online video platform, enables our customers to quickly and easily distribute high-quality video to Internet-connected devices; (2) Brightcove Live, our industry-leading solution for live streaming, delivers high-quality viewer experiences at scale; (3) Brightcove Beacon, a purpose-built application that enables companies to launch premium OTT video experiences quickly and cost effectively, across devices and with the flexibility of multiple monetization models; (4) Brightcove Player, an exceptionally fast, cloud-based technology for creating and managing video experiences; and (5) Zencoder, a powerful, cloud-based video encoding technology.
Customers can complement their use of our core products with modular technologies that provide enhanced capabilities such as (1) innovative ad insertion and video stitching through Brightcove SSAI; (2) efficient publication of videos to Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube through Brightcove Social; (3) an app for creating marketing campaigns with insightful data and industry benchmarks through Brightcove Campaign; and (4) create branded video experience by accessing templates with built-in
best practices through Brightcove Gallery.
We have also brought to market several video solutions, which are comprised of a suite of video technologies that address specific customer use-cases
and needs: (1) Virtual Events Experience helps brands to transform events into customized virtual experiences; (2) Brightcove Video Marketing Suite, enables marketers to use video to drive brand awareness, engagement and conversion; and (3) Brightcove Enterprise Video Suite, provides an enterprise-class platform for internal communications, employee training, live streaming, marketing and ecommerce videos; and (4) Brightcove CorpTV
™
,
provides a new way to deliver marketing videos, product announcements, training programs, and other live and on-demand content in a branded experience for companies.
Our philosophy for the next few years will continue to be to invest in our product strategy and development, sales, and go-to-market activities
to support our long-term revenue growth. We believe these investments will help us address some of the challenges facing our business such as demand for our products by existing and potential customers, rapid technological change in our industry, increased competition and resulting price sensitivity. These investments include support for the expansion of our infrastructure within our hosting facilities, the hiring of additional technical and sales personnel, the innovation of new features for existing products and the development of new products. We believe this strategy will help us retain our existing customers, increase our average annual subscription revenue per premium customer and lead to the acquisition of new customers. Additionally, we believe customer growth will enable us to achieve economies of scale which will reduce our cost of goods sold, research and development and general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenue.
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020 we had 687 and 623 employees, respectively.
We generate revenue by offering our products to customers on a subscription-based, software as a service, or SaaS, model. Our revenue grew from $197.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $211.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to an increase in revenue from our subscription-based SaaS. Our consolidated net income was $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and our consolidated net loss was $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Included in consolidated net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was merger-related expense, stock-based compensation expense and amortization of acquired intangible assets of $300,000, $10.0 million and $3.1 million, respectively. Included in consolidated net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was merger-related expenses, stock-based compensation expense and amortization of acquired intangible assets of $5.8 million, $8.8 million, and $3.4 million, respectively.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our revenue derived from customers located outside North America was 44% and 45%, respectively. We expect the percentage of total net revenue derived from outside North America to increase in future periods as we continue to expand our international operations.
Key Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions.
The following table includes our key metrics for the periods presented:
•
Number of Customers
. We define our number of customers at the end of a particular quarter as the number of customers generating subscription revenue at the end of the quarter. We believe the number of customers is a key indicator of our market penetration, the productivity of our sales organization and the value that our products bring to our customers. We classify our customers by including them in either premium or volume offerings. Our premium offerings include our premium Video Cloud customers (Enterprise and Pro editions), our Zencoder customers (other than Zencoder customers on month-to-month
contracts and pay-as-you-go
contracts), our SSAI customers, our Player customers, our OTT Flow customers (OTT Flow is our partner-based OTT platform, which preceded Brightcove Beacon), our Virtual Event Experience customers, our Video Marketing Suite customers, our Enterprise Video Suite customers, our Brightcove Beacon customers, our Brightcove Engage customers, our Brightcove CorpTV™
customers, and our Brightcove Campaign customers. Our volume offerings include our Video Cloud Express customers and our Zencoder customers on month-to-month
contracts and pay-as-you-go
contracts.
Our go-to-market
focus and growth strategy is to expand our premium customer base, as we believe our premium customers represent a greater opportunity for our solutions. Premium customers decreased compared to the prior period due to some customers deciding to switch to in-house
solutions or other third-party solutions and some customers acquired in the Ooyala acquisition deciding not to switch to our solution. Volume customers decreased in recent periods primarily due to our discontinuation of the promotional Video Cloud Express offering. As a result, we have experienced attrition of this base level offering without a corresponding addition of customers. We expect customers using our volume offerings to continue to decrease in 2021 and beyond as we continue to focus on the market for our premium solutions.
•
Net Revenue Retention Rate
. We assess our ability to retain and expand customers using a metric we refer to as our net revenue retention rate. We calculate the net revenue retention rate by dividing: (a) the current annualized recurring revenue for premium customers that existed twelve months prior by (b) the annualized recurring revenue for all premium customers that existed twelve months prior. We define annualized recurring revenue for premium customers as the aggregate annualized contract value from our premium customer base, measured as of the end of a given period. We typically
calculate our net revenue retention rate on a quarterly basis. For annual periods, we report net revenue retention rate as the average of the net revenue retention rate for all fiscal quarters included in the period. By dividing the retained recurring revenue by the base recurring revenue, we measure our success in retaining and growing installed revenue from the specific cohort of customers we served at the beginning of the period. The recurring dollar retention rate focuses on contracts up for renewal in a given quarter and only captures expansion/upsells at time of renewal, and is more susceptible to swings than the net revenue retention rate. Accordingly, and as previously disclosed, we plan to continue to report the net revenue retention rate and discontinue reporting recurring dollar retention rate after this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•
Recurring Dollar Retention Rate
. We assess our ability to retain customers using a metric we refer to as our recurring dollar retention rate. We calculate the recurring dollar retention rate by dividing the retained recurring value of subscription revenue for a period by the previous recurring value of subscription revenue for the same period. We define retained recurring value of subscription revenue as the committed subscription fees for all contracts that renew in a given period, including any increase or decrease in contract value. We define previous recurring value of subscription revenue as the recurring value from committed subscription fees for all contracts that expire in that same period. We typically calculate our recurring dollar retention rate on a monthly basis. Recurring dollar retention rate provides visibility into our ongoing revenue.
•
Average Annual Subscription Revenue Per Premium Customer
. We define average annual subscription revenue per premium customer as the total subscription revenue from premium customers for an annual period, excluding professional services revenue, divided by the average number of premium customers for that period. We believe that this metric is important in understanding subscription revenue for our premium offerings in addition to the relative size of premium customer arrangements. As our Starter edition has a price point of $199 or $499 per month, we disclose the average annual subscription revenue per premium customer separately for Starter edition customers and all other premium customers.
•
Backlog
. We define backlog as the aggregate amount of transaction price that is allocated to performance obligations that have not yet been satisfied, excluding professional service engagements. We believe that this metric is important in understanding future business performance.
COVID-19
Update
While the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic
remain uncertain, we plan to continue to make investments to support business growth. We believe that the growth of our business is dependent on many factors, including our ability to expand our customer base, increase adoption of our product offerings within existing customers, develop new products and applications to extend the functionality of our products and provide a high level of customer service. We expect to invest in sales and marketing to support customer growth. We also expect to invest in research and development as we continue to introduce new products and applications to extend the functionality of our products. We intend to maintain a high level of customer service and support which we consider critical for our continued success. We also expect to continue to incur general and administrative expenses to support our business and to maintain the infrastructure required to be a public company. We expect to use our cash flow from operations and, if necessary, our credit facility to fund operations.
See the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Item 1A for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on our business.
Components of Consolidated Statements of Operations
Revenue
Subscription and Support Revenue
- We generate subscription and support revenue from the sale of our products.
Video Cloud is offered in two product lines. The first product line is comprised of our premium product editions. All premium editions include functionality to publish and distribute video to Internet-connected devices, with higher levels of premium editions providing additional features and functionality. Customer arrangements are typically one-year
contracts, which include a subscription to Video Cloud, basic support and a pre-determined
amount of video streams, bandwidth, transcoding and storage. We also offer gold, platinum and platinum plus support to our premium customers for an additional fee. The pricing for our premium editions is based on the value of our software, as well as the number of users, accounts and usage, which is comprised of video streams, bandwidth, transcoding and storage. Should a customer’s usage exceed the contractual entitlements, the contract will provide the rate at which the customer must pay for actual usage above the contractual entitlements. The second product line is comprised of our volume product edition. Our volume editions target small and medium-sized businesses, or
SMBs. The volume editions provide customers with the same basic functionality that is offered in our premium product editions but have been designed for customers who have lower usage requirements and do not typically require advanced features and functionality. We discontinued the lower level pricing options for the Express edition of our volume offering and expect the total number of customers using the Express edition to continue to decrease. Customers who purchase the volume editions generally enter into month-to-month agreements.
Volume customers are generally billed on a monthly basis and pay via a credit card.
Virtual Events Experience, Brightcove Live and Brightcove Player are offered to customers on a subscription basis. Customer arrangements are typically one-year contracts,
which include a subscription to Virtual Events Experience, Brightcove Live or the Brightcove Player, basic support and a pre-determined amount
of video streams, bandwidth, transcoding, and storage and only video streams for Brightcove Player. We also offer gold, platinum, and platinum plus support to our Virtual Events Experience, Brightcove Live and Brightcove Player customers for an additional fee. The pricing for these products is based on the value of our software, as well as, the number of users, accounts and usage. Should a customer’s usage exceed the contractual entitlements, the contract will provide the rate at which the customer must pay for actual usage above the contractual entitlements.
Zencoder is offered to customers on a subscription basis, with either committed contracts or pay-as-you-go
contracts. The pricing is based on usage, which is comprised of minutes of video processed. The committed contracts include a fixed number of minutes of video processed. Should a customer’s usage exceed the contractual entitlements, the contract will provide the rate at which the customer must pay for actual usage above the contractual entitlements. Zencoder customers are considered premium customers other than Zencoder customers on month-to-month contracts
or pay-as-you-go contracts,
which are considered volume customers.
Brightcove Beacon and Brightcove Campaign are each offered to customers on a subscription basis, with varying levels of functionality, usage entitlements and support based on the size and complexity of a customer’s needs. Customer arrangements are typically one-year
contracts.
Video Marketing Suite and Enterprise Video Suite are offered to customers on a subscription basis in Starter, Pro and Enterprise editions. The Pro and Enterprise customer arrangements are typically one-year
contracts, which typically include a subscription to Video Cloud, Gallery, Brightcove Social (for Video Marketing Suite customers) or Brightcove Live (for Enterprise Video Suite customers), basic support and a pre-determined
amount of video streams or plays (for Video Marketing Suite customers), viewers (for Enterprise Video Suite customers), bandwidth and storage or videos. We also generally offer gold support or platinum support to these customers for an additional fee, which includes extended phone support. The pricing for our Pro and Enterprise editions is based on the number of users, accounts and usage, which is comprised of video streams or plays, viewers, bandwidth and storage or videos. Should a customer’s usage exceed the contractual entitlements, the contract will provide the rate at which the customer must pay for actual usage above the contractual entitlements, or will require the customer to upgrade its package upon renewal. The Starter edition provides customers with the same basic functionality that is offered in our Pro and Enterprise editions but has been designed for customers who have lower usage requirements and do not typically seek advanced features and
functionality. Customers who purchase the Starter edition may enter into one-year
agreements or month-to-month
agreements. Starter customers with month-to-month
agreements are generally billed on a monthly basis and pay via a credit card.
All Brightcove Beacon, Brightcove CorpTV™
, OTT Flow, Brightcove Campaign, Brightcove Live, SSAI, Player, Virtual Events Experience, Video Marketing Suite,
and Enterprise Video Suite customers are considered premium customers.
Professional Services and Other Revenue
- Professional services and other revenue consists of services such as implementation, software customizations and project management for customers who subscribe to our premium editions. These arrangements are priced either on a fixed fee basis with a portion due upon contract signing and the remainder due when the related services have been completed, or on a time and materials basis.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of subscription, support and professional services revenue primarily consists of costs related to supporting and hosting our product offerings and delivering our professional services. These costs include salaries, benefits, incentive compensation and stock-based compensation expense related to the management of our data centers, our customer support team and our professional services staff. In addition to these expenses, we incur third-party service provider costs such as data center and content delivery network, or CDN, expenses, allocated overhead, depreciation expense and amortization of capitalized internal-use
software development costs and acquired intangible assets. We allocate overhead costs such as rent, utilities and supplies to all departments based on relative headcount. As such, general overhead expenses are reflected in cost of revenue in addition to each operating expense category. The costs associated with providing professional services are significantly higher as a percentage of related revenue than the costs associated with delivering our subscription and support services due to the labor costs of providing professional services.
Cost of revenue decreased in absolute dollars from 2020 to 2021. In future periods we expect our cost of revenue will increase in absolute dollars as our revenue increases. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue could fluctuate from period to period depending on the number of our professional services engagements and any associated costs relating to the delivery of subscription services and the timing of significant expenditures. To the extent that our customer base grows, we intend to continue to invest additional resources in expanding the delivery capability of our products and other services. The timing of these additional expenses could affect our cost of revenue, both in terms of absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue, in any particular quarterly or annual period.
Operating Expenses
We classify our operating expenses as follows:
Research and Development
. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our research and development staff, including salaries, benefits, incentive compensation and stock-based compensation, in addition to the costs associated with contractors and allocated overhead. We have focused our research and development efforts on expanding the functionality and scalability of our products and enhancing their ease of use, as well as creating new product offerings. We expect research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we intend to continue to periodically release new features and functionality, expand our product offerings, continue the localization of our products in various languages, upgrade and extend our service offerings, and develop new technologies. Over the long term, we believe that research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue will decrease, but will vary depending upon the mix of revenue from new and existing products, features and functionality, as well as changes in the technology that our products must support, such as new operating systems or new Internet-connected devices.
Sales and Marketing
. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our sales and marketing staff, including salaries, benefits, incentive compensation, commissions, stock-based
compensation and travel costs, amortization of acquired intangible assets, in addition to costs associated with marketing and promotional events, corporate communications, advertising, other brand building and product marketing expenses and allocated overhead. Our sales and marketing expenses have increased in absolute dollars in each of the last three years. We intend to continue to invest in sales and marketing and expand the sale of our product offerings within our existing customer base, build brand awareness and sponsor additional marketing events. Accordingly, we expect sales and marketing expense to continue to be our most significant operating expense in future periods. Over the long term, we believe that sales and marketing expense as a percentage of revenue will decrease, but will vary depending upon the mix of revenue from new and existing customers and from small, medium-sized and enterprise customers,
as well as changes in the productivity of our sales and marketing programs.
General and Administrative
. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for executive, legal, finance, information technology and human resources functions, including salaries, benefits, incentive compensation and stock-based compensation. General and administrative expenses also include the costs associated with professional fees, insurance premiums, other corporate expenses and allocated overhead. Over the long term, we believe that general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue will decrease.
Merger-related
. Merger-related costs consist of expenses related to mergers and acquisitions, integration costs and general corporate development activities.
Other Expense
Other expense consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, foreign exchange gains and losses.
Income Taxes
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. We account for income taxes in accordance with the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using statutory rates. In addition, this method requires a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have provided a valuation allowance against our existing U.S. net deferred tax assets and deferred tax assets of certain foreign subsidiaries at December 31, 2021. We maintain net deferred tax liabilities for temporary differences related to our Japanese and Portuguese subsidiaries.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Our cost of revenue, research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses include stock-based compensation expense. Stock-based compensation expense represents the fair value of outstanding stock options and restricted stock awards, which is recognized as expense over the respective stock option and restricted stock award service periods. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recorded stock-based compensation expense of $10.0 million, $8.8 million, and $9.3 million, respectively. We expect stock-based compensation expense to increase in absolute dollars in future periods.
Foreign Currency Translation
With regard to our international operations, we frequently enter into transactions in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. As a result, our revenue, expenses and cash flows are subject to fluctuations due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, particularly changes in the euro, British pound, Australian dollar, and Japanese yen. In periods when the U.S. dollar declines in value as compared to the foreign currencies in which we conduct
business, our foreign currency-based revenue and expenses generally increase in value when translated into U.S. dollars. We expect the percentage of total net revenue derived from outside North America to increase in future periods as we continue to expand our international operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following significant accounting policies, which are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We primarily derive revenue from the sale of our online video platform, which enables our customers to publish and distribute video to Internet-connected devices quickly, easily and in a cost-effective and high-quality manner. Revenue is derived from three primary sources: (1) the subscription to our technology and related support; (2) hosting, bandwidth and encoding services; and (3) professional services, which include customization services.
Under ASC 606, when the transaction price includes a variable amount of consideration, an entity is required to estimate the consideration that is expected to be received for a particular customer arrangement. We evaluate variable consideration for usage-based fees at contract inception and re-evaluate quarterly over
the course of the contract. Specifically, we estimate the revenue pertaining to a customer’s usage that is expected to exceed the annual entitlement allowance and allocate such revenue to the distinct service within the related contract that gives rise to the variable payment. Estimates of variable consideration include analyzing customer usage against the applicable entitlement limit at the end of each reporting period and estimating the amount and timing of additional amounts to be invoiced in connection with projected usage. Estimates of variable consideration relating to customer usage do not include amounts for which it is probable that a significant reversal will occur. Determining the amount of variable consideration to recognize as revenue involves significant judgment on the part of management and it is possible that actual revenue will deviate from estimates over the course of a customer’s committed contract term.
We periodically enter into multiple-element service arrangements that include platform subscription fees, support fees, and, in certain cases, other professional services. These contracts include multiple promises that we evaluate to determine if the promises are separate performance obligations. Performance obligations are identified based on services to be transferred to a customer that are both capable of being distinct and are distinct within the context of the contract. Once we determine the performance obligations, we determine the transaction price, which includes estimating the amount of variable consideration to be included in the transaction price, if any. We then allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract based on a relative stand-alone selling price method. The transaction price post allocation is recognized as revenue as the related performance obligation is satisfied.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and international jurisdictions, and we use estimates in determining our provision for income taxes. We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method for accounting and reporting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax basis of assets and liabilities using statutory rates. This process requires us to project our current tax liability and estimate our deferred tax assets and liabilities, including net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we considered our recent operating results, future taxable income projections and feasible tax planning strategies. We have provided a valuation allowance against substantially all of our net U.S. deferred tax assets and deferred tax assets of certain foreign subsidiaries at December 31, 2021. We recognized a deferred tax liability in the U.S. for a portion of our indefinite lived intangibles and other deferred tax liabilities that would not be offset against deferred tax assets. We maintain net deferred tax liabilities for temporary differences related to our Japanese and Portuguese subsidiaries. Due to the evolving nature and complexity of tax regulations combined with the number of jurisdictions in which we operate, it is possible that our estimates of our tax liability could change in the future, which may result in additional tax liabilities and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no material unrecognized tax benefits.
Business Combinations
We record tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations under the purchase method of accounting. Amounts paid for each acquisition are allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their fair values at the date of acquisition. We then allocate the purchase price in excess of net tangible assets acquired to identifiable intangible assets based on detailed valuations that use information and assumptions provided by management. We allocate any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed to goodwill.
Significant management judgments and assumptions are required in determining the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities, particularly acquired intangible assets. The valuation of purchased intangible assets is based upon estimates of the future performance and cash flows from the acquired business. Each asset is measured at fair value from the perspective of a market participant. Critical estimates in valuing purchased technology and customer lists include future cash flows that we expect to generate from the acquired assets. If the subsequent actual results and updated projections of the underlying business activity change compared with the assumptions and projections used to develop these values, we could experience impairment charges which could be material. In addition, we have estimated the economic lives of certain acquired assets and these lives are used to calculate depreciation and amortization expense. If our estimates of the economic lives change, depreciation or amortization expenses could be accelerated or slowed.
If different assumptions are used, it could materially impact the purchase price allocation and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented.
Overview of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Total revenue increased by 7%, or $13.7 million, in 2021 compared to 2020 due to an increase in subscription and support revenue of 6%, or $11.6 million, primarily related to the continued growth of our customer base for our premium offerings including sales to both new and existing customers. The increase in professional services and other revenue of 21%, or $2.2 million, was primarily related to the size and number of professional services engagements in 2021 compared to 2020. Professional services and other revenue will vary from period to period depending on the number of implementations and other projects that are in process. In addition, our revenue from premium offerings grew by $14.5 million, or 7%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Our ability to continue to provide the product functionality and performance that our customers require will be a major factor in our ability to continue to increase revenue.
Our gross profit increased by $16.8 million, or 14%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a decrease in the cost of subscription and support revenue and our transition of acquired Ooyala customers to our technology during 2020. Our ability to continue to maintain our overall gross profit will depend primarily on our ability to continue controlling our costs of delivery.
Income from operations was $7.6 million in 2021 compared to a loss from operations of $5.3 million in 2020. Our ability to continue experiencing operating income will depend primarily on greater revenue from both new and existing customers and from improved efficiencies.
Revenue
During 2021, revenue increased by $13.7 million, or 7%, compared to 2020, primarily due to an increase in revenue from our premium offerings, which consist of subscription and support revenue, as well as professional services and other revenue. The increase in premium revenue of $14.5 million, or 7%, is primarily the result of a 5% increase in average revenue per premium customer. During 2021, volume revenue decreased by $748,000, or 20%, compared to 2020, driven by a decrease in customers as we continue to focus on the market for our premium solutions.
During 2021, subscription and support revenue increased by $11.6 million, or 6%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily related to a 5% increase in average revenue per premium customer during the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, professional services and other revenue increased by $2.2 million, or 21%, compared to the prior year. Professional services and other revenue will vary from period to period depending on the number of implementations and other projects that are in process.
For purposes of this section, we designate revenue by geographic regions based upon the locations of our customers. North America is comprised of revenue from the United States, Canada and Mexico. International is comprised of revenue from locations outside of North America. Depending on the timing of new customer contracts, revenue mix from a geographic region can vary from period to period.
During 2021, total revenue for North America increased $11.4 million, or 11%, compared to 2020. During 2021, total revenue outside of North America increased $2.3 million, or 3%, compared to 2020. The increase in revenue from international regions is primarily related to increases in revenue in Europe. This increase is primarily due to an increase in average revenue per premium customer as discussed above.
Cost of Revenue
During 2021, cost of subscription and support revenue decreased $4.4 million, or 6%, compared to 2020. This decrease corresponds to a decrease in our content delivery network, third-party software integration, and partner commissions expenses of $3.1 million, $841,000 and $437,000, respectively. Our transition of acquired Ooyala customers to our technology during 2020 also resulted in reduced costs in the current year.
During 2021, cost of professional services and other revenue increased $1.3 million, or 14%, compared to 2020. This increase corresponds to increases in contractor expenses of $1.2 million due to higher levels of implementation and professional services provided, as well as increases in employee-related costs of $300,000. These increases were offset in part by decreases in computer and maintenance support expenses of $166,000.
Gross Profit
The overall gross profit percentage was 65% and 61% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Subscription and support gross profit increased $15.9 million, or 13%, compared to 2020. In addition, professional services and other gross profit increased $870,000, or 84%, compared to 2020. It is likely that gross profit, as a percentage of revenue, will fluctuate quarter by quarter due to the timing and mix of subscription and support revenue and professional services and other revenue, and the type, timing and duration of service required in delivering certain projects.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
.
During 2021, research and development expense decreased by $2.3 million, or 7%, compared to 2020. This decrease was primarily due to decreases in employee-related, rent, contractor, and travel expenses of $1.7 million, $1.1 million, $156,000, and $196,000, respectively. These decreases were offset by increases in stock-based compensation expense and amortization of capitalized internal use software of $599,000 and $335,000, respectively. We expect our research and development expense, as percentage of revenue, to remain relatively unchanged in future periods.
Sales and Marketing
.
During 2021, sales and marketing expense increased by $11.4 million, or 19%, compared to 2020 primarily due to increases in employee-related, commissions, and marketing program expenses of $5.1 million, $4.5 million, and $4.1 million, respectively. These increases were partially offset by decreases in rent, contractor, and intangible amortization expenses of $1.2 million, $701,000, and $256,000, respectively. We expect that our sales and marketing expense will increase in absolute dollars along with our revenue, as we continue to expand sales coverage and build brand awareness through what we believe are cost-effective channels.
General and Administrative
.
During 2021, general and administrative expense increased by $2.2 million, or 8%, compared to 2020 primarily due to increases in outside accounting and legal fee, employee-related, and stock-based compensation expenses of $1.2 million, $873,000, and $643,000, respectively. These increases were offset by decreases in rent expenses of $266,000. In future periods, we expect general and administrative expense, as a percentage of revenue, to remain relatively unchanged.
Merger-Related
.
During 2021, merger-related expense decreased by $5.5 million, or 95%, compared to 2020 primarily due to costs incurred in connection with general merger and related activities in 2020 which did not recur in the current period.
Other (benefit) expense.
On March 27, 2020, in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, the U.S. government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, which was amended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act in December of 2020 (the “CARES Act”). The CARES Act provides numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures, including the creation of certain employee retention credits. In the first quarter of 2021, we recognized a benefit of $2.0 million from the CARES Act related to employee retention credits. The benefit was recorded as Other (benefit) expense.
Overview of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Please see our Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2020 for an overview of results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and cash equivalents.
Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 were held for working capital purposes and were invested primarily in money market funds. We do not enter into investments for trading or speculative purposes. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $13.8 million and $17.1 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents held by subsidiaries in international locations, including subsidiaries located in Japan and the United Kingdom. As a result of changes in tax law, these earnings can be repatriated to the United States tax-free
but could still be subject to foreign withholding taxes. On November 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of video interactivity technology assets that were provided by a 3rd
party partner for $2.0 million in cash. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months.
Accounts receivable, net.
Our accounts receivable balance fluctuates from period to period, which affects our cash flow from operating activities. The fluctuations vary depending on the timing of our billing activity, cash collections, and changes to our allowance for doubtful accounts. In many instances we receive cash payment from a customer prior to the time we are able to recognize revenue on a transaction. We record these payments as deferred revenue, which has a positive effect on our accounts receivable balances.
Cash flows provided by operating activities.
Cash provided by operating activities consists primarily of net income adjusted for certain non-cash
items including depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, the provision for bad debts and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities. Cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $19.6 million. The cash flow provided by operating activities primarily resulted from net non-cash charges
of $18.4 million and net income of $5.4 million, partially offset by changes in our
operating assets and liabilities of $4.3 million. Net non-cash expenses
consisted of $10.0 million for stock-based compensation, $8.3 million for depreciation and amortization, and $159,000 for provision for reserves on accounts receivable. Cash outflows from changes in our operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of a decrease in accrued expenses of $5.2 million, an increase in other assets of $1.4 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $846,000, and a decrease in accounts payable of $683,000. These outflows were offset in part by a decrease in deferred revenue of $3.2 million.
Cash flows used in investing activities.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $10.8 million, consisting primarily of $6.6 million for the capitalization of internal-use
software costs, $2.2 million in capital expenditures to support the business, and $2.0 million for the purchase of a technology asset of a company on November 1, 2021.
Cash flows provided by financing activities.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $702,000, consisting of proceeds received on the exercise of common stock options of $2.8 million, offset by other activity of $2.1 million.
Credit facility.
On December 28, 2020, the Company entered into an amended and restated loan and security agreement with a lender (the “Loan Agreement”) providing for up to a $30.0 million asset-based line of credit (the “Line of Credit”). Borrowings under the Line of Credit are secured by substantially all of our assets, excluding our intellectual property. We were in compliance with all covenants under the Line of Credit as of December 31, 2021. As we have not drawn on the Line of Credit, there are no amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
We assessed the effect we believe COVID-19 might
have on our liquidity and believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and the capital available under our credit facility will be sufficient to meet our anticipated working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months. On March 25, 2020, we borrowed $10.0 million on our line of credit in anticipation of any operating cash needs in light of COVID-19. The
$10 million borrowed was fully repaid by December 31, 2020. The effective interest rate for the amounts borrowed during 2020 was 4%.
Net operating loss carryforwards.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had federal net operating losses of approximately $199.4 million, of which $161.8 million are available to offset future taxable income, if any, through 2037 and $37.6 million which are available to offset future taxable income indefinitely. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had state net operating losses of approximately $92.3 million, of which $89.2 million are available to offset future taxable income, if any, through 2041 and $3.1 million which are available to offset future taxable income indefinitely. The Company also had federal and state research and development tax credits of $9.0 million and $5.5 million, respectively, which expire in various amounts through 2041. The net operating loss and tax credit amounts are subject to annual limitations under Section 382 change of ownership rules under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
In assessing our ability to utilize our net deferred tax assets, we considered whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of our net deferred tax assets will not be realized. Based upon the level of our historical U.S. losses and future projections over the period in which the net deferred tax assets are deductible, at this time, we believe it is more likely than not that we will not realize the benefits of these deductible differences. Accordingly, we have provided a valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal commitments consist primarily of obligations under our leases for our office space and contractual commitments for content delivery network services, hosting and other support services. As of December 31, 2021, we had operating lease obligations of $25,401, with $2,425 payable within 12 months. As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding purchase obligations of $16,006, with $15,775 payable within 12 months. Other than these lease obligations and contractual commitments, we do not have commercial commitments under lines of credit, standby repurchase obligations or other such debt arrangements. The following table summarizes these contractual obligations at December 31, 2021:
Anticipated Cash Flows
We expect to incur significant operating costs, particularly related to services delivery costs, sales and marketing and research and development, for the foreseeable future in order to execute our business plan. We anticipate that such operating costs, as well as planned capital expenditures will constitute a material use of our cash resources. As a result, our net cash flows will depend heavily on the level of future sales, changes in deferred revenue and our ability to manage infrastructure costs.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. Our future working capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the rate of our revenue growth, our introduction of new products and enhancements, and our expansion of sales and marketing and product development activities. To the extent that our cash and cash equivalents, and cash flow from operating activities are insufficient to fund our future activities, we may need to raise additional funds through bank credit arrangements or public or private equity or debt financings. We also may need to raise additional funds in the event we determine in the future to acquire businesses, technologies and products that will complement our existing operations. In the event funding is required, we may not be able to obtain bank credit arrangements or equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to us or at all.
Other
On February 9, 2022, we announced that the Board of Directors appointed Marc DeBevoise as Chief Executive Officer of the Company and a Class II director of the Board of Directors, effective as of Mr. DeBevoise’s employment start date, expected to be on March 28, 2022. Mr. DeBevoise will fill the vacancy created by Mr. Ray’s resignation on the Board, effective as of Mr. DeBevoise’s employment start date. The term of the Company’s Class II directors, including Mr. DeBevoise, expires at the annual meeting of stockholders to be held in 2023 or upon the election and qualification of successor directors. Mr. DeBevoise, has served as Vice Chairman of the Board and President of Argus Capital Corporation, a tech-driven-media focused special purpose acquisition corporation (ARGU), as Chief Executive Officer and President of ViacomCBS Digital (previously known as CBS Interactive) and as Chief Digital Officer of ViacomCBS, and as President and Chief Operating Officer of CBS Interactive. Mr. DeBevoise has also served as a member of the board of directors at Limelight Networks (LLNW), a provider of edge cloud, content delivery and security computing services. Mr. DeBevoise earned his B.A. in Economics and Computer Science from Tufts University and earned his M.B.A. with distinction in Entertainment, Media & Technology and Finance from NYU’s Stern School of Business. Mr. DeBevoise was selected to serve on our Board of Directors due to the perspective and experience he brings as the appointed Chief Executive Officer and his prior experience as an executive in media, technology and digital and
streaming industries. Mr. DeBevoise’s employment agreement with the Company can be found in Exhibit 99.1 to the our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 9, 2022.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recent accounting pronouncements, see Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards in the notes to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.