ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited financial statements and the accompanying notes to the financial statements and other disclosures included in this report (including the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this report and the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this report).
Overview
We are a commercial-stage biotechnology company that discovers novel, oral, small-molecule medicines. We focus on oral treatments for rare diseases in which significant unmet medical needs exist and an enzyme plays the key role in the biological pathway of the disease. We integrate the disciplines of biology, crystallography, medicinal chemistry, and computer modeling to discover and develop small molecule pharmaceuticals through the process known as structure-guided drug design. In addition to these discovery and development efforts, our business strategy includes the efficient commercialization of these drugs in the U.S. and certain other regions upon regulatory approval. By focusing on rare disease markets, we believe that we can more effectively control the costs of, and our strategic allocation of financial resources toward, post-approval commercialization.
Our marketed products include oral, once-daily ORLADEYO® for the prevention of hereditary angioedema (“HAE”) attacks and RAPIVAB® (peramivir injection) for the treatment of acute uncomplicated influenza in the United States. ORLADEYO received regulatory approval in the United States in December 2020. During 2021, ORLADEYO received regulatory approvals in the European Union, Japan, the United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom. We are commercializing ORLADEYO in each of these territories directly or through distributors, except in Japan where Torii, our collaborative partner, has the exclusive right to commercialize ORLADEYO for the prevention of HAE attacks in exchange for certain milestone and royalty payments to us. In addition to its approval in the United States, peramivir injection has received regulatory approvals in Canada, Australia, Japan, Taiwan and Korea.
Our revenues are difficult to predict and depend on several factors, including those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this report. For example, our revenues depend, in part, on regulatory approval decisions for our products and product candidates, the effectiveness of our and our collaborative partners’ commercialization efforts, market acceptance of our products, particularly ORLADEYO, the resources dedicated to our products by us and our collaborative partners, and ongoing discussions with government agencies regarding contract awards for development and procurement, as well as entering into, or modifying, licensing agreements for our product candidates. Furthermore, revenues related to our collaborative development activities are dependent upon the progress toward and the achievement of developmental milestones by us or our collaborative partners.
Our operating expenses are also difficult to predict and depend on several factors, including research and development expenses (and whether these expenses are reimbursable under government contracts), drug manufacturing, and clinical research activities, the ongoing requirements of our development programs, the costs of commercialization, the availability of capital and direction from regulatory agencies, which are difficult to predict, and the factors discussed in the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this report. Management may be able to control the timing and level of research and development and selling, general and administrative expenses, but many of these expenditures will occur irrespective of our actions due to contractually committed activities and/or payments.
As a result of these factors, we believe that period-to-period comparisons are not necessarily meaningful, and you should not rely on them as an indication of future performance. Due to the foregoing factors, it is possible that our operating results will be below the expectations of market analysts and investors. In such event, the prevailing market price of our common stock could be materially adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The accompanying discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements and the related disclosures, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates, judgments and the policies underlying these estimates on a periodic basis, as situations change, and regularly discuss financial events, policies, and issues with members of our audit committee and our independent registered public accounting firm. In particular, we routinely evaluate our estimates and policies regarding revenue recognition, administration, inventory and manufacturing, taxes, stock-based compensation, research and development, consulting and other expenses and any associated liabilities. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of our estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. See “Critical Accounting Policies” at the end of this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” for a description of accounting policies that we believe are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and that affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Recent Corporate Highlights
COVID-19
The outbreak of COVID-19 has severely impacted global economic activity and caused significant volatility in financial markets. To date, our financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity have not been materially impacted by the direct effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Please refer to “Risk Factors⸻Risks Relating to Our Business⸻Risks Relating to COVID-19” in Part I, Item 1A of this report for a discussion of COVID-19 risks as they relate to our business. We are continuing to monitor developments with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic and to make adjustments as needed to assist in protecting the safety of our employees and communities while continuing our business activities. Our remote working arrangements continue to be flexible where it is both practical and possible for the business. Business-related travel has increased, and we will continue to monitor developments with respect to COVID-19 going forward. To date, implementation of specific COVID-19 measures has not required material expenditures or significantly impacted our ability to operate our business or our internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. We continue to monitor the potential impacts of COVID-19 on our operations and those of our partners, suppliers, customers, and regulators.
ORLADEYO (berotralstat)
ORLADEYO is an oral, once-daily therapy discovered and developed by us for the prevention of HAE attacks. Approved first by the FDA in the U.S. in December 2020, ORLADEYO is also approved in the European Union, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United Arab Emirates for the prevention of HAE attacks in adults and pediatric patients 12 years and older.
On January 10, 2022, we announced that ORLADEYO is now covered by all major payors and national and regional pharmacy benefit managers in the U.S.
We built out our U.S. commercial infrastructure in 2020 to support the launch of ORLADEYO in the U.S. and are continuing to build our commercial infrastructure to support launches in Europe and elsewhere. Based on proprietary analyses of HAE prevalence and market research studies with HAE patients, physicians, and payors in the U.S. and Europe, and our first full year of experience with the ORLADEYO launch in 2021, we anticipate the commercial market for ORLADEYO has the potential to reach a global peak of more than $1 billion in annual sales. We expect at least 70 to 80 percent of our revenue at peak to come from the U.S. These expectations are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different. There can be no assurance that our commercialization methods and strategies will succeed, or that the market for ORLADEYO will develop in line with our current expectations. See “Risk Factors⸻Risks Relating to Our Business⸻Risks Relating to Drug Development and Commercialization⸻There can be no assurance that our commercialization efforts, methods, and strategies for our products or technologies will succeed, and our future revenue generation is uncertain” in Part I, Item 1A of this report for further discussion of these risks.
Revenue from sales of ORLADEYO in 2021, which was our first full year of ORLADEYO sales, is discussed under “Results of Operations.” Revenue from sales of ORLADEYO in future periods is subject to uncertainties and will depend on several factors, including the success of our and our partners’ commercialization efforts in the U.S. and elsewhere, the number of new patients switching to ORLADEYO, patient retention and demand, the number of physicians prescribing ORLADEYO, the rate of monthly prescriptions, reimbursement from third-party and government payors, the conversion of patients from our clinical trials and early access programs to commercial customers, and market trends. We are continuing to monitor and analyze this data as we continue to commercialize ORLADEYO.
Complement-Mediated Diseases
BCX9930 is a novel, oral, potent, and selective small molecule inhibitor of Factor D discovered by the Company and currently in clinical development for the treatment of complement-mediated diseases. Based on the safety and proof-of-concept (“PoC”) data generated to date in patients with PNH, the program has advanced to pivotal studies of oral BCX9930 (500 mg twice-daily) in PNH and to a proof-of-concept trial of oral BCX9930 (500 mg twice-daily) in renal complement-mediated diseases. We are working closely with key opinion leaders in hematology and nephrology to map the advanced development strategy across a broad set of indications. Our goal is to develop BCX9930 as a monotherapy for complement-mediated diseases.
On November 29, 2021, we announced the enrollment of the first patient in the REDEEM-2 pivotal trial with BCX9930 in patients with PNH. REDEEM-2 is a randomized, placebo-controlled trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of BCX9930 (500 mg twice-daily) as monotherapy versus placebo in PNH patients not currently receiving complement inhibitor therapy. In part 1 of this trial, patients will be randomized 2:1 to receive BCX9930 or placebo under double-blind conditions for 12 weeks. All patients will receive BCX9930 in part 2 (weeks 13-52) to assess the long-term safety, tolerability, and effectiveness of BCX9930, with patients randomized to placebo in part 1 switching to BCX9930 at the week 12 visit. The primary endpoint of REDEEM-2 is change from baseline in hemoglobin, as assessed at week 12.
On January 7, 2022, we announced the enrollment of the first patient in the REDEEM-1 pivotal trial with BCX9930 in patients with PNH. REDEEM-1 is a randomized, open-label, active comparator-controlled comparison of the efficacy and safety of BCX9930 (500 mg twice-daily) monotherapy in PNH patients with an inadequate response to a C5 inhibitor. In part 1 of this trial, patients who have not had an adequate response to a C5 inhibitor will be randomized 2:1 to discontinue their C5 inhibitor and receive BCX9930 as monotherapy or to continue receiving their C5 inhibitor for 24 weeks. All patients will receive BCX9930 in part 2 (weeks 25-52) to assess the long-term safety, tolerability, and effectiveness of BCX9930. Patients who are randomized to C5 inhibitor therapy in part 1 will discontinue that therapy at the week 24 visit and start BCX9930 for part 2. The primary endpoint of REDEEM-1 is change from baseline in hemoglobin, as assessed at weeks 12 to 24.
On February 22, 2022, we announced the enrollment of the first patient in the RENEW proof-of-concept basket study with BCX9930 in patients with C3 glomerulopathy (C3G), IgA nephropathy (IgAN), and primary membranous nephropathy (PMN). RENEW is an open-label, multicenter, proof-of-concept study designed to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and therapeutic potential of BCX9930 (twice-daily) administered for 24 weeks in patients with either C3G, IgAN, or PMN. All patients will be enrolled into one of three parallel study cohorts, based on confirmation of diagnosis and disease activity in a recent kidney biopsy, and will receive BCX9930 for the 24-week treatment period. The primary endpoint of RENEW is percent change from baseline in 24-hour urine protein-to-creatinine ratio (uPCR), as assessed at week 24.
Financing Transactions
Royalty Monetizations. On November 19, 2021, we entered into (i) the 2021 RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which we sold to RPI the right to receive certain royalty payments from the Company for a purchase price of $150 million in cash; and (ii) the OMERS Royalty Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which we sold to OMERS the right to receive certain royalty payments from the Company for a purchase price of an additional $150 million in cash. Under the Royalty Purchase Agreements, RPI and OMERS are entitled to receive tiered, sales-based royalties on net product sales of ORLADEYO in the Key Territories and on other Direct Sales. In addition, RPI and OMERS are entitled to receive a tiered revenue share on amounts generally received by us on account of ORLADEYO sublicense revenue or net sales by licensees outside of the Key Territories. Under the 2021 RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, RPI will also be entitled to receive tiered, sales-based royalties on net product sales, if any, of BCX9930 and another earlier stage Factor D inhibitor, as well as tiered, profit share amounts of up to 3.0% from certain other permitted sales in certain other markets. See “Note 8⸻Royalty Monetizations⸻ORLADEYO and Factor D Inhibitors” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information about our obligations under the Royalty Purchase Agreements.
Sales of Common Stock. On November 19, 2021, concurrent with the 2021 RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, we entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”) with RPI, pursuant to which we issued to RPI 3,846,154 shares of our common stock for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $50 million, at a price of $13.00 per share, calculated based on the 20-day volume weighted average price. These shares were offered and sold without registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), in reliance on the exemptions provided by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act as transactions not involving a public offering and Rule 506 promulgated under the Securities Act as sales to an accredited investor.
Amendment to Credit Agreement. On November 19, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our Credit Agreement with Athyrium Opportunities III Co-Invest 1 LP (“Athyrium” and such agreement, as amended, the “Credit Agreement”), as lender and as administrative agent for the lenders. BioCryst Ireland Limited and BioCryst US Sales Co., LLC, each of which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of ours, and BioCryst UK Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of BioCryst Ireland Limited, are guarantors to the Credit Agreement. The amendment amended the original Credit Agreement (i) to permit the Company to enter into the 2021 RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, the OMERS Royalty Purchase Agreement, and the other definitive documentation related thereto and to perform its obligations thereunder; (ii) to require the Company to pay to Athyrium, for the account of the lenders, a make-whole premium plus certain fees set forth in the Credit Agreement in the event that the Company does not draw the Term B Loan or the Term C Loan available under the Credit Agreement, as applicable, by the end of the applicable period available to draw the Term B Loan or the Term C Loan, subject to certain exceptions set forth in the Credit Agreement; and (iii) to require the Company to pay to Athyrium, for the account of the lenders, a make-whole premium plus certain fees set forth in the Credit Agreement in the event that the Company either (x) terminates the commitments in respect of the Term B Loan or the Term C Loan, as applicable, on or prior to the end of the applicable period available to draw the Term B Loan or the Term C Loan, or (y) prepays or repays, or is required to prepay or repay, voluntarily or pursuant to a mandatory prepayment obligation under the Credit Agreement (e.g., with the proceeds of certain asset sales, certain ORLADEYO out-licensing or royalty monetization transactions (excluding the Royalty Sales), extraordinary receipts, debt issuances, or upon a change of control of the Company and specified other events, subject to certain exceptions), all of the then-outstanding Term Loans under the Credit Agreement, in each case, subject to certain exceptions set forth in the Credit Agreement. See “Note 9⸻Debt⸻Credit Agreement” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information about our obligations under the Credit Agreement.
Results of Operations
The discussion below presents a summary of our results of operations for fiscal years 2021 and 2020. See Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations⸻Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 1, 2021, for a summary of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total revenues were $157.2 million as compared to $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $139.4 million was primarily due to an increase of $122.5 million of ORLADEYO net revenue following our commercial launch in December 2020. Additionally, RAPIVAB revenues, primarily from sales to HHS, increased by $6.7 million and peramivir product revenue from inventory sales to our partners increased by $4.6 million. The Company also recognized a $15.0 million milestone payment related to the NHI approval of ORLADEYO in Japan. These increases in revenue were partially offset by a reduction in royalty revenue (excluding those associated with ORLADEYO sales) of $4.2 million, a reduction in contract revenue of $3.3 million and the recognition of $1.9 million of deferred revenue in the prior year period compared to none in the current year period. The decrease in royalty revenue was due to peramivir product replacement under Green Cross’s supply agreement with the Korean government.
Cost of product sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $7.2 million and $1.6 million, respectively, and was primarily associated with the peramivir product sales to our partners in 2021.
R&D expenses increased to $208.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $123.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased investment in the development of our Factor D program, including BCX9930, as well as other research, preclinical and development costs, which were partially offset by a reduction in spend on the ORLADEYO program following our commercial launch in December 2020.
The following table summarizes our R&D expenses for the periods indicated (amounts are in thousands). Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified for consistency with the current year presentation. These reclassifications had no effect on the total R&D expenses.
R&D expenses include all direct and indirect expenses and are allocated to specific programs at the point of development of a lead product candidate. Direct expenses are charged directly to the program to which they relate, and indirect expenses are allocated based upon internal direct labor hours dedicated to each respective program. Direct expenses consist of compensation for R&D personnel and costs of outside parties to conduct laboratory studies, develop manufacturing processes, manufacture the product candidates, conduct and manage clinical trials, as well as other costs related to our clinical and preclinical studies. Indirect R&D expenses consist of lab supplies and services, facility expenses, depreciation of development equipment and other overhead of our research and development efforts. R&D expenses vary according to the number of programs in clinical development and the stage of development of our clinical programs. Later stage clinical programs tend to cost more than earlier stage programs due to the longer length of time of the clinical trials and the higher number of patients enrolled in these clinical trials.
SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $118.8 million compared to $67.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased investment to support the commercial launch of ORLADEYO in the U.S. and elsewhere and our expanded international operations, particularly in the EU. Additionally, SG&A expenses for 2021 included non-cash stock compensation charges of $8.9 million on the accelerated vesting of certain outstanding stock options and severance costs of $1.1 million.
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $59.3 million as compared to $14.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily associated with the royalty financing obligations and the $125.0 million Term A Loan under the Credit Agreement. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 included $37.7 million of non-cash interest expense due to the amortization of interest associated with the royalty financing obligations and $15.5 million of interest expense, net of deferred financing amortization, associated with the Term A Loan under the Credit Agreement. Additionally, we recognized $6.1 million in interest expense on the non-recourse PhaRMA Notes issued in March 2011. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $6.6 million associated with the non-recourse PhaRMA Notes and $4.9 million associated with the borrowings under our secured credit facility with MidCap, which terminated in December 2020 when we repaid the outstanding indebtedness under the facility. Additionally, 2020 interest expense included $2.1 million of non-cash interest expense due to the amortization of interest associated with the royalty financing obligation and $0.9 million of interest expense, net of deferred financing amortization, associated with the Term A Loan under the Credit Agreement.
A gain of $55.8 million on extinguishment of debt was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the write-off of the non-recourse PhaRMA Notes and related accrued interest payable. See “Note 8⸻Royalty Monetizations⸻RAPIACTA⸻ Non-Recourse Notes Payable - Debt Extinguishment ” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information. This gain compares to a loss on extinguishment of debt of $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is comprised of the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and original issue discount of $1.2 million and a prepayment fee of $0.8 million associated with the repayment of the outstanding indebtedness under our secured credit facility with MidCap in December 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other expense of $0.6 million was primarily related to foreign currency losses as compared to other income of $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other income in 2020 consisted of $8.9 million related to recognition of income from the partial arbitration award related to our Seqirus arbitration proceedings and $0.5 million of interest income, partially offset by foreign currency losses of $1.0 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a tax expense of $2.3 million, primarily related to U.S. state taxes. This liability was driven predominantly by the recognition as upfront taxable income of $300.0 million received from the RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement and the OMERS Royalty Purchase Agreement, increased sales of ORLADEYO and increased nexus in multiple states where historically we had none.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our operations have principally been funded through public offerings and private placements of equity securities; cash from collaborative and other research and development agreements, including U.S. Government contracts for RAPIVAB and galidesivir; to a lesser extent, the PhaRMA Notes financing and our credit facilities; and more recently, the Royalty Sales. To date, we have been awarded a BARDA/HHS RAPIVAB development contract totaling $234.8 million, which expired on June 30, 2014, a NIAID/HHS galidesivir development contract totaling $47.3 million, which is in the process of being closed out, a second NIAID/HHS galidesivir development contract with a potential value totaling $43.9 million, which is ongoing, and a BARDA/HHS galidesivir development contract totaling $39.1 million, which is also ongoing. The total amount of funding obligated under awarded options under the active NIAID/HHS and BARDA/HHS galidesivir contracts is $53.6 million and $20.6 million, respectively. In addition to the above, we have previously received funding from other sources, including other collaborative and other research and development agreements, government grants, equipment lease financing, facility leases, research grants, and interest income on our investments.
On November 19, 2021, we entered into the 2021 RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, the OMERS Royalty Purchase Agreement, and the Stock Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which we received $350.0 million in new funding for the Company, with all funds immediately available at closing. See “Note 8⸻Royalty Monetizations⸻ORLADEYO and Factor D Inhibitors” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information about these financing transactions.
Our Credit Agreement with Athyrium provides for three term loans. We received the proceeds from the $125.0 million Term A Loan in December 2020. We have committed to draw the two additional term loans available under the Credit Agreement, in the respective principal amounts of $25.0 million for the Term B Loan and $50.0 million for the Term C Loan. The maturity date of the Credit Agreement is December 7, 2025. See “Note 9⸻Debt⸻Credit Agreement” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information about the Credit Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had net working capital of $462.4 million, an increase of approximately $244.3 million from $218.1 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital was primarily the result of the $300.0 million of new funding associated with the royalty monetization transactions and the related $50.0 million from the sale of common stock in the fourth quarter of 2021. Working capital was also impacted by the write-off of the non-recourse PhaRMA Notes including associated accrued interest payable, which were previously recorded in current liabilities. Our principal sources of liquidity at December 31, 2021 were approximately $504.4 million in cash and cash equivalents and approximately $10.0 million in investments considered available-for-sale.
We intend to contain costs and cash flow requirements by closely managing our third-party costs and headcount, leasing scientific equipment and facilities, contracting with other parties to conduct certain research and development projects, and using consultants. We expect to incur additional expenses, potentially resulting in significant losses, as we continue to pursue our research and development activities, commercialize ORLADEYO, and hire additional personnel. We may incur additional expenses related to the filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense, and enforcement of patent and other intellectual property claims and additional regulatory costs as our clinical programs advance through later stages of development. The objective of our investment policy is to ensure the safety and preservation of invested funds, as well as to maintain liquidity sufficient to meet cash flow requirements. We place our excess cash with high credit quality financial institutions, commercial companies, and government agencies in order to limit the amount of our credit exposure. We have not realized any significant losses on our investments.
We plan to finance our needs principally from the following:
●
lease, royalty, or loan financing and future public or private equity and/or debt financing;
●
our existing capital resources and interest earned on that capital;
●
revenues from product sales;
●
payments under existing, and executing new, contracts with the U.S. Government; and
●
payments under current or future collaborative and licensing agreements with corporate partners.
As our commercialization activities and research and development programs continue to advance, our costs will increase. Our current and planned clinical trials, plus the related development, manufacturing, regulatory approval process requirements, and additional personnel resources and testing required for the continuing development of our product candidates and the commercialization of our products will consume significant capital resources and will increase our expenses.
Our expenses, revenues and cash utilization rate could vary significantly depending on many factors, including our ability to raise additional capital, the development progress of our collaborative agreements for our product candidates, the amount and timing of funding we receive from existing U.S. Government contracts for galidesivir, the amount of funding or assistance, if any, we receive from new U.S. Government contracts or other new partnerships with third parties for the development and/or commercialization of our products and product candidates, the progress and results of our current and proposed clinical trials for our most advanced product candidates, the progress made in the manufacturing of our lead product candidates, the success of our commercialization efforts for, and market acceptance of, our products, and the overall progression of our other programs. The impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on one or more of the foregoing factors could negatively affect our expenses, revenues, and cash utilization rate.
Based on our expectations for revenue, operating expenses and the additional $75 million available to us under the Credit Agreement, we believe our financial resources will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. However, we have sustained operating losses for the majority of our corporate history and expect that our 2022 expenses will exceed our 2022 revenues. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows until revenues reach a level sufficient to support ongoing operations. Our liquidity needs will be largely determined by the success of operations in regard to the successful commercialization of our products and the future progression of our product candidates. We regularly evaluate other opportunities to fund future operations, including: (1) securing or increasing U.S. Government funding of our programs, including obtaining procurement contracts; (2) out-licensing rights to certain of our products or product candidates, pursuant to which we would receive cash milestone payments; (3) raising additional capital through equity or debt financings or from other sources, including royalty or other monetization transactions; (4) obtaining additional product candidate regulatory approvals, which would generate revenue, milestone payments and cash flow; (5) reducing spending on one or more research and development programs, including by discontinuing development; and/or (6) restructuring operations to change our overhead structure. We may issue securities, including common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares, purchase contracts, warrants, debt securities, and units, through private placement transactions or registered public offerings. Our future liquidity needs, and our ability to address those needs, will largely be determined by the success of our products and product candidates; the timing, scope, and magnitude of our commercial expenses; and key development and regulatory events and our decisions in the future.
Our long-term capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend upon many factors, including:
●
market acceptance of approved products and successful commercialization of such products by either us or our partners;
●
our ability to perform under our government contracts and to receive reimbursement and stockpiling procurement contracts;
●
the magnitude of work under our government contracts;
●
the progress and magnitude of our research, drug discovery and development programs;
●
changes in existing collaborative relationships or government contracts;
●
our ability to establish additional collaborative relationships with academic institutions, biotechnology or pharmaceutical companies and governmental agencies or other third parties;
●
the extent to which our partners, including governmental agencies, will share in the costs associated with the development of our programs or run the development programs themselves;
●
our ability to negotiate favorable development and marketing strategic alliances for certain products and product candidates;
●
any decision to build or expand internal development and commercial capabilities;
●
the scope and results of preclinical studies and clinical trials to identify and develop product candidates;
●
our ability to engage sites and enroll subjects in our clinical trials;
●
the scope of manufacturing of our products to support our commercial operations and of our product candidates to support our preclinical research and clinical trials;
●
increases in personnel and related costs to support the development and commercialization of our products and product candidates;
●
the scope of manufacturing of our drug substance and product candidates required for future NDA filings;
●
competitive and technological advances;
●
the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approvals;
●
post-approval commitments for ORLADEYO, RAPIVAB, and other products that receive regulatory approval; and
●
the costs involved in all aspects of intellectual property strategy and protection, including the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending, and enforcing patent claims.
We expect that we will be required to raise additional capital to complete the development and commercialization of our current products and product candidates, and we may seek to raise capital in the future, including to take advantage of favorable opportunities in the capital markets. Additional funding, whether through additional sales of equity or debt securities, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate partners or from other sources, including governmental agencies in general and existing government contracts specifically, may not be available when needed or on terms acceptable to us. The issuance of preferred or common stock or convertible securities, with terms and prices significantly more favorable than those of the currently outstanding common stock, could have the effect of diluting or adversely affecting the holdings or rights of our existing stockholders. In addition, collaborative arrangements may require us to transfer certain material rights to such corporate partners. Insufficient funds may require us to delay, scale back or eliminate certain of our research and development programs. Our future working capital requirements, including the need for additional working capital, will be largely determined by the advancement of our portfolio of product candidates and the commercialization of ORLADEYO, as well as the rate of reimbursement by U.S. Government agencies of our galidesivir expenses and any future decisions regarding the future of the RAPIVAB and galidesivir programs, including those relating to stockpiling procurement. More specifically, our working capital requirements will be dependent on the number, magnitude, scope and timing of our development programs; regulatory approval of our product candidates; obtaining funding from collaborative partners; the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory reviews, regulatory investigations, and changes in regulatory requirements; the costs of obtaining patent protection for our product candidates; the timing and terms of business development activities; the rate of technological advances relevant to our operations; the efficiency of manufacturing processes developed on our behalf by third parties; the timing, scope and magnitude of commercial spending, and the level of required administrative support for our daily operations.
The restrictive covenants contained in our Credit Agreement could cause us to be unable to pursue business opportunities that we or our stockholders may consider beneficial without the lender’s permission or without repaying all obligations outstanding under the Credit Agreement. These covenants limit our ability to, among other things, grant certain types of liens on our assets; make certain investments; incur or assume certain debt, including accessing additional tranches of debt under the Credit Agreement; engage in certain mergers, acquisitions, and similar transactions; dispose of assets; license certain property; distribute dividends; make certain restricted payments; change the nature of our business; engage in transactions with affiliates and insiders; prepay other indebtedness; or engage in sale and leaseback transactions. A breach of any of these covenants could result in an event of default under the Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Financial Outlook for 2022
Based on the strength of the ORLADEYO launch, and continued growth from new patient demand anticipated throughout the year, we expect full year 2022 net ORLADEYO revenue to be no less than $250 million. We expect operating expenses for full year 2022, not including non-cash stock compensation, to be in the range of $440 million to $480 million, with the year-over-year increase predominantly driven by additional investment in advancing our Factor D program across multiple indications. Based on our expectations for revenue, operating expenses, and the additional $75 million available under our existing credit facility, we believe our current cash funds our planned operations for at least the next 12 months.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have established various accounting policies that govern the application of U.S. GAAP, which were utilized in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management that have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities. Management considers such accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The judgments and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the nature of the judgments and assumptions made by management, actual results could differ from these judgments and estimates, which could have a material impact on the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the results of operations.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in “Note 1−Significant Accounting Policies and Concentrations of Risk” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, we recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, Topic 606 includes provisions within a five step model that includes (i) identifying the contract with a customer, (ii) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determining the transaction price, (iv) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (v) recognizing revenue when, or as, an entity satisfies a performance obligation.
At contract inception, we identify the goods or services promised within each contract, assess whether each promised good or service is distinct, and determine those that are performance obligations. We recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied.
Product Sales, Net
Our principal sources of product sales are sales of ORLADEYO, which we began shipping to patients in December 2020, sales of peramivir to our licensing partners and sales of RAPIVAB to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services under our procurement contract. In the United States, we ship ORLADEYO directly to patients through a single specialty pharmacy, which is considered our customer. In the European Union, United Kingdom and elsewhere, we sell ORLADEYO to specialty distributors as well as hospitals and pharmacies, which collectively are considered our customers.
We recognize revenue for sales when our customers obtain control of the product, which generally occurs upon delivery. For ORLADEYO, we classify payments to our specialty pharmacy customer for certain services provided by our customer as selling, general and administrative expenses to the extent such services provided are determined to be distinct from the sale of our product.
Net revenue from sales of ORLADEYO is recorded at net selling price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established for (i) estimated government rebates, such as Medicaid and Medicare Part D reimbursements, and estimated managed care rebates, (ii) estimated chargebacks, (iii) estimated costs of co-payment assistance programs and (iv) product returns. These reserves are based on the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable or as a current liability. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which it is entitled based on the terms of the applicable contract. The amount of variable consideration included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from estimates, we adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Government and Managed Care Rebates. We contract with government agencies and managed care organizations or, collectively, third-party payors, so that ORLADEYO will be eligible for purchase by, or partial or full reimbursement from, such third-party payors. We estimate the rebates we will provide to third-party payors and deduct these estimated amounts from total gross product revenues at the time the revenues are recognized. We estimate the rebates that we will provide to third-party payors based upon (i) our contracts with these third-party payors, (ii) the government mandated discounts applicable to government-funded programs, (iii) a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for the estimated payor mix, and (iv) product distribution information obtained from our specialty pharmacy.
Chargebacks. Chargebacks are discounts that occur when certain contracted customers, pharmacy benefit managers, insurance companies and government programs purchase directly from our specialty pharmacy. These customers purchase our products under contracts negotiated between them and our specialty pharmacy. The specialty pharmacy, in turn, charges back to us the difference between the price the specialty pharmacy paid and the negotiated price paid by the contracted customers, which may be higher or lower than the specialty pharmacy purchase price with us. We estimate chargebacks and adjust gross product revenues and accounts receivable based on the estimates at the time revenues are recognized.
Co-payment assistance and patient assistance programs. Patients who have commercial insurance and meet certain eligibility requirements may receive co-payment assistance. Based upon the terms of the program and co-payment assistance utilization reports received from the specialty pharmacy, we are able to estimate the co-payment assistance amounts, which are recorded in the same period in which the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue. We also offer a patient assistance program that provides free drug product, for a limited period of time, to allow a patient’s insurance coverage to be established. Based on patient assistance program utilization reports provided by the specialty pharmacy, we record gross revenue of the product provided and a full reduction of the revenue amount for the free drug discount.
Product returns. We do not provide contractual return rights to our customer, except in instances where the product is damaged or defective. Non-acceptance by the patient of shipped drug product by the specialty pharmacy is reflected as a reversal of sales in the period in which the sales were originally recorded. Reserves for estimated non-acceptances by patients are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period that the related revenue is recognized, as well as a reduction to accounts receivable. Estimates of non-acceptance are based on quantitative information provided by the specialty pharmacy.
Collaborative and Other Research and Development Arrangements and Royalties
We recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring promised goods or services to a customer. Revenue is measured at the transaction price that is based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to the customer. The transaction price includes estimates of variable consideration to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue recognized will not occur.
We have collaboration and license agreements with a number of third parties as well as research and development agreements with certain government entities.
Our primary sources of revenue from these collaborative and other research and development arrangements are license, service and royalty revenues.
Revenue from license fees, royalty payments, milestone payments, and research and development fees are recognized as revenue when the earnings process is complete and we have no further continuing performance obligations or we have completed the performance obligations under the terms of the agreement.
Arrangements that involve the delivery of more than one performance obligation are initially evaluated as to whether the intellectual property licenses granted by us represent distinct performance obligations. If they are determined to be distinct, the value of the intellectual property licenses would be recognized up-front while the research and development service fees would be recognized as the performance obligations are satisfied. For performance obligations based on services performed, we measure progress using an input method based on the effort we expend or costs we incur toward the satisfaction of the performance obligation in relation to the total estimated effort or costs. Variable consideration is assessed at each reporting period as to whether it is not subject to significant future reversal and, therefore, should be included in the transaction price at the inception of the contract. If a contract includes a fixed or minimum amount of research and development support, this also would be included in the transaction price. Changes to collaborations, such as the extensions of the research term or increasing the number of targets or technology covered under an existing agreement, are assessed for whether they represent a modification or should be accounted for as a new contract. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are based on observable prices at which we separately sell the products or services. If a standalone selling price is not directly observable, then we estimate the standalone selling price using either an adjusted market assessment approach or an expected cost plus margin approach, representing the amount that we believe the market is willing to pay for the product or service. Analyzing the arrangement to identify performance obligations requires the use of judgment, and each may be an obligation to deliver services, a right or license to use an asset, or another performance obligation.
Milestone payments are recognized as licensing revenue upon the achievement of specified milestones if (i) the milestone is substantive in nature and the achievement of the milestone was not probable at the inception of the agreement; and (ii) we have a right to payment. Any milestone payments received prior to satisfying these revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue.
Reimbursements received for direct out-of-pocket expenses related to research and development costs are recorded as revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss rather than as a reduction in expenses. Under our contracts with BARDA/HHS and NIAID/HHS, revenue is recognized as reimbursable direct and indirect costs are incurred.
Under certain of our license agreements, we receive royalty payments based upon our licensees’ net sales of covered products. Royalties are recognized at the later of when (i) the subsequent sale or usage occurs; or (ii) the performance obligation to which some or all of the sales-based or usage-based royalty has been satisfied.
Inventory
Our inventories primarily relate to ORLADEYO. Additionally, our inventory includes RAPIVAB and peramivir, which are manufactured for the Company’s partners.
We value our inventories at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value. We determine the cost of our inventories, which includes amounts related to materials, labor, manufacturing overhead and shipping and handling costs on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. Raw materials and work-in-process includes all inventory costs prior to packaging and labeling, including raw material, active product ingredient, and drug product. Finished goods include packaged and labeled products.
Our inventories are subject to expiration dating. We regularly evaluate the carrying value of our inventories and provide valuation reserves for any estimated obsolete, short-dated or unmarketable inventories. In addition, we may experience spoilage of our raw materials and supplies. Our determination that a valuation reserve might be required, in addition to the quantification of such reserve, requires us to utilize significant judgment.
We expense costs related to the production of inventories as research and development expenses in the period incurred until such time it is believed that future economic benefit is expected to be recognized, which generally is upon receipt of regulatory approval. Upon regulatory approval, we capitalize subsequent costs related to the production of inventories.
Accrued Expenses
We enter into contractual agreements with third-party vendors who provide research and development, manufacturing, distribution, and other services in the ordinary course of business. Some of these contracts are subject to milestone-based invoicing, and services are completed over an extended period of time. We record liabilities under these contractual commitments when we determine an obligation has been incurred. This accrual process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to us. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued expenses include (i) fees paid to clinical research organizations (“CROs”) in connection with preclinical and toxicology studies and clinical trials; (ii) fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical trials; (iii) fees paid to contract manufacturers in connection with the production of our raw materials, drug substance, drug products, and product candidates; and (iv) professional fees.
We base our expenses related to clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of these costs, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
Contract Balances
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable, unbilled receivables (contract assets) and deferred revenue and billings in excess of revenue recognized (contract liabilities) on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contract assets. Our long-term contracts are billed as work progresses in accordance with the contract terms and conditions, either at periodic intervals or upon achievement of certain milestones. Often this results in billing occurring subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. Contract assets are generally classified as current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contract liabilities. We often receive cash payments from customers in advance of our performance, resulting in contract liabilities. These contract liabilities are classified as either current or long-term in the Consolidated Balance Sheets based on the timing of when we expect to recognize the revenue.
Contract Costs
We may incur direct and indirect costs associated with obtaining a contract. Incremental contract costs that we expect to recover are capitalized and amortized over the expected term of the contract. Non-incremental contract costs and costs that we expect to recover are expensed as incurred.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development costs are charged to expense when incurred. Advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. Such amounts are recognized as expense when the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed. Research and development expenses include, among other items, personnel costs, including salaries and benefits, manufacturing costs, clinical, regulatory, and toxicology services performed by CROs, materials and supplies, and overhead allocations consisting of various administrative and facilities related costs. Most of our manufacturing and clinical and preclinical studies are performed by third-party CROs. Costs for studies performed by CROs are accrued by us over the service periods specified in the contracts and estimates are adjusted, if required, based upon our ongoing review of the level of services actually performed.
Additionally, we have license agreements with third parties, such as Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University (“AECOM”), Industrial Research, Ltd. (“IRL”), and the University of Alabama (“UAB”), which require fees related to sublicense agreements or maintenance fees. We expense sublicense payments as incurred unless they are related to revenues that have been deferred, in which case the expenses are deferred and recognized over the related revenue recognition period. We expense maintenance payments as incurred.
Deferred collaboration expenses represent sub-license payments paid to our academic partners upon receipt of consideration from various commercial partners, and other consideration to our academic partners for modification to existing license agreements. These deferred expenses would not have been incurred without receipt of such payments or modifications from our commercial partners and are being expensed in proportion to the related revenue being recognized. We believe that this accounting treatment appropriately matches expenses with the associated revenue.
We group our R&D expenses into two major categories: direct external expenses and indirect expenses. Direct expenses consist of compensation for R&D personnel and costs of outside parties to conduct laboratory studies, develop manufacturing processes and manufacture the product candidate, conduct and manage clinical trials, as well as other costs related to our clinical and preclinical studies. These costs are accumulated and tracked by active program. Indirect expenses consist of lab supplies and services, facility expenses, depreciation of development equipment and other overhead of our research and development efforts. These costs apply to work on non-active product candidates and our discovery research efforts.
Stock-Based Compensation
All share-based payments, including grants of stock option awards and restricted stock unit awards, are recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss based on their fair values. Stock-based compensation cost is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. Determining the appropriate fair value model and the related assumptions for the model requires judgment, including estimating the life of an award, the stock price volatility, and the expected term. We utilize the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value our awards and recognize compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting periods. The estimation of share-based payment awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from our current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. In addition, we have outstanding performance-based stock options for which no compensation expense is recognized until “performance” has occurred. Significant management judgment is also required in determining estimates of future stock price volatility and forfeitures to be used in the valuation of the options. Actual results, and future changes in estimates, may differ substantially from our current estimates.
Interest Expense and Royalty Financing Obligations
The royalty financing obligations are eligible to be repaid based on royalties from net sales of ORLADEYO, BCX9930, and another earlier stage Factor D inhibitor. Interest expense is accrued using the effective interest rate method over the estimated period each of the related liabilities will be paid. This requires us to estimate the total amount of future royalty payments to be generated from product sales over the life of the agreement. We impute interest on the carrying value of each of the royalty financing obligations and record interest expense using an imputed effective interest rate. We reassess the expected royalty payments each reporting period and account for any changes through an adjustment to the effective interest rate on a prospective basis. The assumptions used in determining the expected repayment term of the debt and amortization period of the issuance costs requires that we make estimates that could impact the carrying value of each of the liabilities, as well as the periods over which associated issuance costs will be amortized. A significant increase or decrease in forecasted net sales could materially impact each of the liability balances, interest expense and the time periods for repayment.
Foreign Currency Hedge
In connection with our issuance of the PhaRMA Notes, we entered into a foreign Currency Hedge Agreement to hedge certain risks associated with changes in the value of the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar. The final tranche of the options under the Currency Hedge Agreement expired in November 2020. The Currency Hedge Agreement did not qualify for hedge accounting treatment and therefore mark-to-market adjustments were recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss.
Tax
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. We have recorded a valuation allowance against substantially all potential tax assets, due to uncertainties in our ability to utilize deferred tax assets, primarily consisting of certain net operating losses carried forward, before they expire. The valuation allowance is based on estimates of taxable income in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate and the period over which our deferred tax assets will be recoverable.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
“Note 1⸻Significant Accounting Policies and Concentrations of Risk” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report discusses accounting pronouncements recently issued or proposed but not yet required to be adopted.