Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a global supplier of specialty networking solutions built around two global businesses - Enterprise Solutions and Industrial Solutions. Our comprehensive portfolio of signal transmission solutions provides industry leading secure and reliable transmission of data, sound, and video for mission critical applications.
We strive to create shareholder value by:
•Delivering highly engineered signal transmission solutions for mission-critical applications in a diverse set of global markets;
•Maintaining a balanced product portfolio across end markets, applications, and geographies that allows for a disciplined approach to growth;
•Capturing additional market share by using our Market Delivery System to improve channel and end-user relationships and to concentrate sales efforts on customers in higher growth geographies and vertical end-markets;
•Managing our product portfolio to provide innovative and complete end-to-end solutions for our customers in applications for which we have operational expertise and can drive customer loyalty;
•Acquiring leading companies with innovative product portfolios and opportunities for synergies which fit within our strategic framework;
•Continuously improving our processes and systems through scalable, flexible, and sustainable business systems for talent management, Lean enterprise, and acquisition cultivation and integration; and
•Protecting and enhancing the value of the Belden brands.
We believe our business system, balance across markets and geographies, systematic go-to-market approach, extensive portfolio of innovative solutions, commitment to Lean principles, and improving margin profile present a unique value proposition for our shareholders.
We consider adjusted revenue growth on a constant currency basis, adjusted EBITDA margin, free cash flow, and return on invested capital to be our key operating performance indicators. Our current business goals are to:
•Grow adjusted revenues on a constant currency basis by 5-7% per year, from a combination of end market growth, market share capture, and contributions from acquisitions;
•Achieve adjusted EBITDA margins in the range of 20-22%;
•Achieve free cash flow growth in the range of 13-15%; and
•Realize return on invested capital of 13-15%.
Significant Trends and Events in 2021
The following trends and events during 2021 had varying effects on our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) a pandemic. Since the beginning of the pandemic, our foremost focus has been on the health and safety of our employees and customers. In response to the outbreak, to protect the health and safety of our employees, we modified practices at our manufacturing locations and offices to adhere to guidance from the WHO, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other local health and governmental authorities with respect to social distancing, physical separation, personal protective equipment and sanitization. In light of variant mutations of the virus, even as vaccinations become more prevalent and more employees return to our offices, many of these safeguards will continue.
Our suppliers, distributors, and other partners have similarly had their operations disrupted, and in regions of the world where infection rates have remained high, human suffering and market disruptions have persisted. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by local or foreign governmental authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and customers.
Foreign currency
Our exposure to currency rate fluctuations primarily relates to exchange rate movements between the U.S. dollar and the euro, Canadian dollar, Hong Kong dollar, Chinese yuan, Mexican peso, Australian dollar, British pound, and Indian rupee. Generally, as the U.S. dollar strengthens against these foreign currencies, our revenues and earnings are negatively impacted as our foreign denominated revenues and earnings are translated into U.S. dollars at a lower rate. Conversely, as the U.S. dollar weakens against foreign currencies, our revenues and earnings are positively impacted. Because all of our senior subordinated notes are denominated in euros, interest expense on the notes is affected by exchange rate movements between the U.S. dollar and the euro.
In addition to the translation impact described above, currency rate fluctuations have an economic impact on our financial results. As the U.S. dollar strengthens or weakens against foreign currencies, it results in a relative price increase or decrease for certain of our products that are priced in U.S. dollars in a foreign location.
Commodity Prices
Our operating results can be affected by changes in prices of commodities, primarily copper and compounds, which are components in some of the products we sell. Generally, as the costs of inventory purchases increase due to higher commodity prices, we raise selling prices to customers to cover the increase in costs, resulting in higher sales revenue but a lower gross profit percentage. Conversely, a decrease in commodity prices would result in lower sales revenue but a higher gross profit percentage. Selling prices of our products are affected by many factors, including end market demand, capacity utilization, overall economic conditions, and commodity prices. Importantly, however, there is no exact measure of the effect of changing commodity prices, as there are thousands of transactions in any given quarter, each of which has various factors involved in the individual pricing decisions. Therefore, all references to the effect of copper prices or other commodity prices are estimates.
Channel Inventory
Our operating results also can be affected by the levels of Belden products purchased and held as inventory by our channel partners and customers. Our channel partners and customers purchase and hold our products in their inventory in order to meet the service and on-time delivery requirements of their customers. Generally, as our channel partners and customers change the level of Belden products owned and held in their inventory, it impacts our revenues. Comparisons of our results between periods can be impacted by changes in the levels of channel inventory. We are dependent upon our channel partners to provide us with information regarding the amount of our products that they own and hold in their inventory. As such, all references to the effect of channel inventory changes are estimates.
Market Growth and Market Share
The markets in which we operate can generally be characterized as highly competitive and highly fragmented, with many players. Based on available data for our served markets, we estimate that our market share across our segments is significant, ranging from approximately 5% - 20%. A substantial acquisition in one of our served markets would be necessary to meaningfully change our estimated market share percentage. We monitor available data regarding market growth, including independent market research reports, publicly available indices, and the financial results of our direct and indirect peer companies, in order to estimate the extent to which our served markets grew or contracted during a particular period. We generally expect that our unit sales volume will increase or decrease consistently with the market growth rate. Our strategic goal is to utilize our Market Delivery System to target faster growing geographies, applications, and trends within our end markets, in order to achieve growth that is higher than the general market growth rate. To the extent that we exceed the market growth rates, we consider it to be the result of capturing market share.
Amended Revolving Credit Agreement
During the second quarter of 2021, we entered into an amended and restated Revolving Credit Agreement that provides a $300.0 million multi-currency asset-based revolving credit facility (the Revolver). The maturity date of the Revolver is June 2, 2026. The borrowing base under the Revolver includes eligible accounts receivable; inventory; and property, plant and equipment of certain of our subsidiaries in the United States, Canada, Germany, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. Interest on outstanding borrowings is variable, based upon LIBOR or other similar indices in foreign jurisdictions, plus a spread that ranges from 1.25% - 1.75%, depending upon our leverage position. We paid approximately $2.3 million of fees associated with the amended Revolver, which are being amortized over its term using the effective interest method. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding on the Revolver, and our available borrowing capacity was $$274.2 million. See Note 16.
Debt Refinancing
During the third quarter of 2021, we completed an offering for €300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.375% senior subordinated notes due 2031. With the proceeds from this offering and cash on hand, we repurchased all of the €300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.875% senior subordinated notes previously due 2025. We recognized a $5.7 million loss on debt extinguishment for the premiums paid to the bond holders to retire the 2025 Notes and for the unamortized debt issuance costs on the 2025 Notes that we were required to write-off. See Note 16.
OTN Systems Acquisition
We acquired 100% of the shares of OTN Systems on January 29, 2021 for a purchase price, net of cash acquired, of $73.3 million. OTN Systems, based in Olen, Belgium, is a leading provider of easy to use and highly-reliable network solutions tailored for specific applications in harsh, mission-critical environments. The acquisition of OTN Systems supports one of our key strategic priorities related to the growing demand for industrial automation by adding proprietary technology and mission-critical hardware and software products for more complete end-to-end solutions. The results of OTN Systems have been included in our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements from January 29, 2021, and are reported within the Industrial Solutions segment. See Note 4.
Opterna Earn-Out
Our acquisition of Opterna in 2019 included potential earn-out consideration, which as of the acquisition date, had an estimated fair value of $5.8 million. As the financial targets tied to the earn-out were not achieved within the contractual timeframe, we reduced the earn-out liability to zero and recognized a $5.8 million benefit in Selling, General and Administrative Expenses during 2021. This benefit was excluded from Segment EBITDA of our Enterprise Solutions segment. See Note 4.
Sale of Note Receivable
During 2021, we sold the seller's note associated with the 2020 Grass Valley disposal for $62.0 million and recognized a gain on sale of approximately $27.0 million. See Note 5.
Sale-Leaseback
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we sold certain real estate in Germany as part of a sale and leaseback transaction for €24.5 million (approximately $27.8 million) and recognized a $0.6 million loss on the sale. The lease is for a term of 10 years and as of December 31, 2021, had a total right-of-use asset balance of $25.3 million. When the assets met the held for sale criteria during the third quarter of 2021, we performed a recoverability test and determined that the carrying values of the assets were not recoverable and as a result, recognized a $2.3 million impairment charge to write them down to fair value. The impairment charge was excluded from Segment EBITDA of our Industrial Solutions segment. See Note 11.
Definitive Agreement to Divest Tripwire
On February 7, 2022, we signed a definitive agreement to divest Tripwire for $350 million in cash. The transaction is expected to close in the first quarter of 2022. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge for the Tripwire reporting unit of $131.2 million, representing the reporting unit's excess carrying value over its present value of estimated future cash flows, which was based in part on the assumed proceeds from the divestiture.
Divestiture of Oil and Gas Cable Business in Brazil
During the second quarter of 2021, we completed the sale of our oil and gas cable business in Brazil for $10.9 million, net of cash delivered with the business. During the first quarter of 2021, we committed to a plan to sell the business and determined that we met all of the criteria to classify the assets and liabilities of this business as held for sale. At such time, the carrying value of the disposal group exceeded the fair value less costs to sell, which we determined based upon the expected sale price, by $3.4 million. Therefore, we recognized an impairment charge equal to this amount in the first quarter of 2021. The impairment charge was excluded from Segment EBITDA of our Industrial Solutions segment. See Note 5.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
During 2021, we performed a recoverability test on certain held and used long-lived assets in our Industrial Solutions segment. We determined that the carrying values of the assets were not recoverable and recognized a $3.6 million impairment charge to write them down to fair value. This impairment charge was excluded from Segment EBITDA of our Industrial Solutions segment. See Note 11.
Cost Reduction Program
We have executed a cost reduction program to streamline the organizational structure and invest in technology to drive productivity. We recognized $5.8 million of severance and other restructuring costs for this program during 2021. These costs were incurred by both the Enterprise Solutions and Industrial Solutions segments. The cost reduction program is substantially complete and has delivered a reduction in selling, general, and administrative expenses of approximately $60 million on an annual basis. We expect to recognize costs of approximately $3 million for this program in 2022. See Note 15.
Acquisition Integration Program
We are integrating our recent acquisitions such as OTN Systems, SPC, and Opterna with our existing businesses. The restructuring and integration activities are focused on achieving desired cost savings by consolidating existing and acquired facilities and other support functions. We recognized $12.6 million of severance and other restructuring costs for this program during 2021. These costs were incurred by both the Enterprise Solutions and Industrial Solutions segments. We do not expect to incur significant incremental costs for this program in 2022. See Note 15.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Income from Continuing Operations before Taxes
2021 Compared to 2020
Revenues increased $545.4 million from 2020 to 2021 due to the following factors:
•Higher sales volume from industrial automation, smart buildings, and broadband & 5G products resulted in a $373.1 million increase in revenues.
•Copper prices had a $117.2 million favorable impact on revenues.
•Currency translation had a $26.7 million favorable impact on revenues.
•Acquisitions contributed an estimated $37.7 million in revenues.
•Divestitures had a $9.3 million unfavorable impact on revenues.
Gross profit increased $191.1 million from 2020 to 2021 due to the increases in revenues discussed above while gross profit margins remained relatively flat. Excluding the impact of higher copper pass through pricing and changes in foreign currency rates, gross profit margins increased more than 200 basis points.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $60.1 million from 2020 to 2021. Strategic investments to enhance our solution selling capabilities, including customer innovation centers; higher incentive compensation; acquisitions; and increases in restructuring and integration costs contributed $27.1 million, $22.5 million, $10.8 million, and $1.0 million to the increase in selling, general and administrative expenses, respectively. These increases were partially offset by the impact of divestitures which contributed a $1.3 million decline in selling, general and administrative expenses year over year.
Research and development expenses increased $17.4 million from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to increased investments in R&D projects as we continue our commitment to growth initiatives.
Amortization of intangibles decreased $26.0 million from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to a significant technology intangible asset becoming fully amortized.
Asset impairments increased $140.5 million from 2020 to 2021 as a result of the Tripwire carrying value exceeding its fair value by $131.2 million in our annual impairment test, impairment charges of $3.6 million to write down certain held and used long-lived assets in our Industrial Solutions segment to fair value, impairment charges of $3.4 million for our former oil and gas business in Brazil sold during 2021, and impairment charges of $2.3 million to write down certain real estate in Neckartenzlingen, Germany sold as part of a sale and leaseback transaction during 2021 to its fair value. See Notes 13, 11 and 5, respectively.
Operating income remained relatively flat year over year primarily as a result of the increase in gross profit and decrease in amortization expense, partially offset by the increase in selling, general and administrative expenses; research and development expenses; and asset impairments discussed above.
Net interest expense increased $3.8 million from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to currency translation. See Note 16.
Gain on sale of note receivable increased $27.0 million from 2020 to 2021 as a result of the sale of the Seller’s Note in 2021 related to the 2020 divestiture of Grass Valley.
Loss on debt extinguishment increased $5.7 million from 2020 to 2021 due to the debt refinancing that took place during 2021. The $5.7 million loss on debt extinguishment represents the premium paid to the bond holders to retire the 2025 Notes and for the unamortized debt issuance costs on the 2025 Notes that we were required to write-off. See Note 16.
Income from continuing operations before taxes increased $116.0 million from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to the increase in operating income discussed above.
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenues decreased $268.6 million from 2019 to 2020 due to the following factors:
•Lower sales volume, including the impact of COVID-19 and changes in channel inventory, contributed $302.7 million to the decrease in revenues.
•Currency translation had a $1.9 million unfavorable impact on revenues.
•Acquisitions increased revenues by $34.3 million.
•Copper prices had a $1.7 million favorable impact on revenues.
Gross profit decreased $130.2 million from 2019 to 2020 due to the decreases in revenues discussed above as well as unfavorable mix; partially offset by the impact of acquisitions.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $51.1 million from 2019 to 2020. Benefits realized from our Cost Reduction Program coupled with productivity improvement initiatives contributed an estimated $43.1 million decline in selling, general and administrative expenses. A decrease in severance, restructuring and acquisition integration costs; decreases in commission costs; and currency translation contributed an estimated $11.6 million; $3.5 million; and $0.5 million decline in selling, general and administrative expenses, respectively. These decreases were partially offset by a $7.6 million increase from acquisitions.
Research and development expenses increased $12.9 million from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to increased investments in R&D projects as we continue our commitment to growth initiatives.
Amortization of intangibles decreased $10.2 million from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to certain intangible assets becoming fully amortized.
Operating income decreased $81.8 million from 2019 to 2020 primarily as a result of the decline in gross profit discussed above.
Net interest expense increased $3.1 million from 2019 to 2020. The increase is primarily the result of interest accrued on the Revolver borrowings during 2020 coupled with currency translation. During 2020, we borrowed $190.0 million on our Revolver, which we fully repaid by December 31, 2020. See Note 16.
Income from continuing operations before taxes decreased $86.3 million from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to the decline in operating income discussed above.
Income Taxes
We recognized income tax expense of $25.2 million in 2021, representing an effective tax rate of 28.8%. The effective tax rate was primarily impacted by a change in the deferred tax asset valuation allowance due to the release of a valuation allowance against the foreign tax credits in the U.S. and a pension deferred tax asset in a foreign jurisdiction. In addition, we recognized a total income tax expense from domestic permanent differences and tax credits of $39.8 million in 2021 primarily associated with a goodwill impairment in the U.S. and our foreign income inclusions. See Note 18.
We recognized income tax expense of $11.7 million in 2020, representing an effective tax rate of 17.7%. The effective tax rate was impacted by foreign tax rate differences, which resulted in an income tax benefit of $25.3 million in 2020. Additionally, in 2020, our income tax expense was reduced by $4.0 million due to a tax holiday for our operations in St. Kitts. The tax holiday in St. Kitts is scheduled to expire in 2023. Partially offsetting these benefits, we recognized income tax expense of $22.4 million in 2020 from domestic permanent differences and tax credits primarily associated with our foreign income inclusions.
We recognized income tax expense of $42.5 million in 2019, representing an effective tax rate of 27.9%. The effective tax rate was primarily impacted by a change in valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets and foreign tax rate differences. During the fourth quarter of 2019, the United States Treasury issued final and proposed regulations with respect to certain aspects related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Act”). Additional guidance provided in these regulations resulted in a tax adjustment in the fourth quarter of 2019. Our income tax expense was also impacted by foreign tax rate differences, which reduced our income tax expense by approximately $13.1 million in 2019.
As of December 31, 2019, we maintained a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets of $50.4 million. Of this amount, approximately $43.0 million relates to deferred tax assets for certain U.S foreign tax credits and U.S. state net operating losses and tax credits. The $33.9 million valuation allowance on the foreign tax credits is a direct result of the regulations issued by the United States Treasury in the fourth quarter of 2019, the Act and the impact of classifying a business as discontinued operations. The remaining $9.1 million valuation allowance primarily relates to state net operating losses and tax credits. While we have positive evidence in the form of projected sources of income, we determined that these state carryforward assets were not realizable as of December 31, 2019 due to a history of net operating losses and tax credits expiring without being utilized in certain states and because the current forecast of income is not sufficient to utilize all of these state net operating losses and tax credits prior to expiration.
Our income tax expense and effective tax rate in future periods may be impacted by many factors, including our geographic mix of income and changes in tax laws.
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA
(1)See Note 15, Severance, Restructuring, and Acquisition Integration Activities, for details.
(2)In 2021, we collected $2.2 million of receivables associated with the sale of Grass Valley and acquisition of SPC that were previously written off, reduced the Opterna earn-out liability by $5.8 million, recognized cost of sales of $2.3 million related to purchase accounting adjustments of acquired inventory to fair value for the OTN Systems acquisition, and recognized a $0.6 million loss on the sale of tangible assets. In 2020 and 2019, we collectively recognized $0.1 million and $0.6 million, respectively, of cost of sales related to acquisition accounting adjustments of acquired inventory to fair value for both our SPC and Opterna acquisitions.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Information
Adjusted Revenues, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, and free cash flow are non-GAAP financial measures. In addition to reporting financial results in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, we provide non-GAAP operating results adjusted for certain items, including: asset impairments; accelerated depreciation expense due to plant consolidation activities; purchase accounting effects related to acquisitions, such as the adjustment of acquired inventory to fair value, and transaction costs; severance, restructuring, and acquisition integration costs; gains (losses) recognized on the disposal of businesses and tangible assets; amortization of intangible assets; gains (losses) on debt extinguishment; certain revenues and gains (losses) from patent settlements; discontinued operations; and other costs. We adjust for the items listed above in all periods presented, unless the impact is clearly immaterial to our financial statements. When we calculate the tax effect of the adjustments, we include all current and deferred income tax expense commensurate with the adjusted measure of pre-tax profitability.
We utilize the adjusted results to review our ongoing operations without the effect of these adjustments and for comparison to budgeted operating results. We believe the adjusted results are useful to investors because they help them compare our results to previous periods and provide important insights into underlying trends in the business and how management oversees our business operations on a day-to-day basis. As an example, we adjust for acquisition-related expenses, such as amortization of intangibles and impacts of fair value adjustments because they generally are not related to the acquired businesses' core business performance. As an additional example, we exclude the costs of restructuring programs, which can occur from time to time for our current businesses and/or recently acquired businesses. We exclude the costs in calculating adjusted results to allow us and investors to evaluate the performance of the business based upon its expected ongoing operating structure. We believe the adjusted measures, accompanied by the disclosure of the costs of these programs, provides valuable insight. Adjusted results should be considered only in conjunction with results reported according to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
2021 Compared to 2020
Revenues increased $545.4 million from 2020 to 2021 due to the following factors:
•Higher sales volume from industrial automation, smart buildings, and broadband & 5G products resulted in a $373.1 million increase in revenues.
•Copper prices had a $117.2 million favorable impact on revenues.
•Currency translation had a $26.7 million favorable impact on revenues.
•Acquisitions contributed an estimated $37.7 million in revenues.
•Divestitures had a $9.3 million unfavorable impact on revenues.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $126.3 million in 2021 from 2020 primarily due to the leverage on higher sales volume, as discussed above. Accordingly, Adjusted EBITDA margins expanded to 15.6% from 13.4% in the year ago period.
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenues decreased $268.6 million from 2019 to 2020 due to the following factors:
•Lower sales volume, including the impact of COVID-19 and changes in channel inventory, contributed $302.7 million to the decrease in revenues.
•Currency translation had a $1.9 million unfavorable impact on revenues.
•Acquisitions increased revenues by $34.3 million.
•Copper prices had a $1.7 million favorable impact on revenues.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $101.7 million in 2020 from 2019 primarily due to the decrease in revenues discussed above, partially offset by the benefits realized from our Cost Reduction Program.
Segment Results of Operations
For additional information regarding our segment measures, see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Enterprise Solutions
2021 Compared to 2020
Enterprise revenues increased $202.0 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. Increases in volume, higher copper prices, and favorable currency translation contributed $143.6 million, $50.4 million, and $8.0 million, respectively, to the increase in revenues year over year.
Enterprise EBITDA increased $43.9 million in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to the leverage on higher sales volume, as discussed above. Accordingly, Adjusted EBITDA margins expanded to 13.3% from 11.4% in the year ago period.
2020 Compared to 2019
Enterprise revenues decreased $73.6 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. Decreases in volume, including the impact of COVID-19 and changes in channel inventory, and unfavorable currency translation contributed $108.1 million and $0.3 million, respectively, to the decline in revenues; partially offset by acquisitions and higher copper prices which grew revenues by $34.3 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Enterprise EBITDA decreased $27.6 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to the decreases in revenues discussed above, partially offset by the benefits realized from our Cost Reduction Program.
Industrial Solutions
2021 Compared to 2020
Industrial revenues increased $343.4 million in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to increases in volume; higher copper prices; acquisitions, net of disposals; and favorable currency translation of $229.5 million, $66.8 million, $28.4 million, and $18.7 million, respectively.
Industrial EBITDA increased $80.3 million in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily as a result of the increase in revenues discussed above, partially offset by an increase in incentive compensation and investments in R&D projects as we continue our commitment to growth initiatives. Accordingly, Adjusted EBITDA margins expanded to 17.1% from 14.9% in the year ago period.
2020 Compared to 2019
Industrial revenues decreased $194.9 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to decreases in volume, including the impact of COVID-19 and changes in channel inventory, and unfavorable currency translation, which contributed $194.5 million and $1.6 million, respectively, to the decrease in revenues; partially offset by increases in copper prices, which grew revenues $1.2 million.
Industrial EBITDA decreased $78.5 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily as a result of the decline in revenues discussed above and increased investments in R&D projects as we continue our commitment to growth initiatives, partially offset by the benefits realized from our Cost Reduction Program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Significant factors affecting our cash liquidity include (1) cash provided by operating activities, (2) disposals of businesses and tangible assets, (3) cash used for acquisitions, restructuring actions, capital expenditures, share repurchases, dividends, and senior subordinated note repurchases, and (4) our available credit facilities and other borrowing arrangements. We expect our operating activities to generate cash in 2022 and believe our sources of liquidity are sufficient to fund current working capital requirements, capital expenditures, contributions to our retirement plans, share repurchases, senior subordinated note repurchases, quarterly dividend payments, and our short-term operating strategies. However, we may require external financing were we to complete a significant acquisition. Our ability to continue to fund our future needs from business operations could be affected by many factors, including, but not limited to: economic conditions worldwide, customer demand, competitive market forces, customer acceptance of our product offerings, and commodities pricing.
The following table is derived from our Consolidated Cash Flow Statements and includes the results and cash flow activity of discontinued operations up to the July 2, 2020 disposal date consistent with the Consolidated Cash Flow Statements:
Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $272.1 million for 2021 compared to $173.4 million for 2020. The increase is primarily due to the increase in earnings. In 2021, changes in operating assets and liabilities included unfavorable changes in receivables and inventories partially offset by favorable changes in accounts payable and accrued liabilities. Receivables were a use of cash of $119.0 million compared to a source of cash of $70.7 million in the prior year. Inventories were a use of cash of $93.0 million compared to $8.5 million in the prior year. Receivables and inventories increased in 2021 due to the increase in revenues. Operating working capital turns improved to 11.2x at the end of 2021 compared to 10.3x at the end of 2020.
Net cash used for investing activities totaled $92.0 million for 2021 compared to $31.6 million for 2020. Investing activities for 2021 included capital expenditures of $91.0 million, payments primarily for the acquisition of OTN Systems of $73.3 million, purchases of intangible assets of $3.6 million, cash receipts for the carrying value of the seller's note and sale of the oil and gas cable business in Brazil of $45.7 million, and cash receipts for the sale of real estate in Germany of $30.2 million. Investing activities for 2020 included capital expenditures of $90.2 million and proceeds of $54.8 million, $3.2 million, and $0.6 million from the sale of the Grass Valley disposal group, the sale of tangible property, and a working capital adjustment related to the SPC acquisition, respectively.
Net cash flows used for financing activities totaled $32.9 million for 2021 compared to $74.9 million for 2020. Financing activities for 2021 included repayments of debt obligations of $360.3 million, cash dividend payments of $9.0 million, debt issuance costs of $8.2 million, net payments related to share based compensation activities of $5.6 million, financing lease payments of $3.1 million, payments to noncontrolling interests of $2.7 million, and borrowings under credit arrangements of $356.0 million. During 2021, we completed an offering for €300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.375% senior subordinated notes due 2031, repurchased the €300.0 million 2025 Notes, and refinanced the Revolver - see Note 16. Financing activities for 2020 included payments under our share repurchase program of $35.0 million, acquisition earnout consideration payments of $29.3 million, cash dividend payments of $9.0 million, and net payments related to share based compensation activities of $1.4 million.
Our cash and cash equivalents balance was $643.8 million as of December 31, 2021. Of this amount, $233.9 million was held outside of the U.S. in our foreign operations. Substantially all of the foreign cash and cash equivalents are readily convertible into U.S. dollars or other foreign currencies. Our strategic plan does not require the repatriation of foreign cash in order to fund our operations in the U.S., and it is our current intention to permanently reinvest the foreign cash and cash equivalents outside of the U.S. If we were to repatriate the foreign cash to the U.S., we may be required to accrue and pay U.S. taxes in accordance with applicable U.S. tax rules and regulations as a result of the repatriation. See Note 18, Income Taxes in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Our outstanding debt obligations as of December 31, 2021 consisted of $1.5 billion of senior subordinated notes. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding on the Revolver, and our available borrowing capacity was $274.2 million. Additional discussion regarding our various borrowing arrangements is included in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
At December 31, 2021, the following contractual obligations and commercial commitments were outstanding:
a.Principal payments on long-term debt of $1.5 billion, none of which is due in 2022 (see Note 16). Depending on the conditions in the credit markets, we may refinance this debt, or we may use cash from operations, including temporarily accessing our Revolving Credit Agreement, to repay this debt.
b.Interest payments on long-term debt of $353.7 million, of which $53.5 million is due in 2022.
c.Operating lease obligations of $99.9 million, of which $22.8 million is due in 2022 (see Note 12).
d.Pension and other postemployment obligations of $87.7 million, of which $13.6 million is due in 2022 (see Note 19).
e.Obligations of $5.8 million to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us. All of these obligations are due in 2022.
f.Standby financial letters of credit, bank guarantees, and surety bonds totaling $28.1 million, of which $25.1 million are scheduled to expire or mature in 2022. These commitments are generally issued to secure obligations we have for a variety of commercial reasons such as workers compensation self-insurance programs in several states and the importation and exportation of product. We expect to replace most of these when they expire or mature.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows that are or would be considered material to investors.
Current-Year Adoption of Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Discussion regarding our adoption of accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (GAAP). In connection with the preparation of our financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events, and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates, and judgments on historical experience, current trends, and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates, and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 of our Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue consistent with the principles as outlined in the following five step model: (1) identify the contract with the customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied. See Note 3.
At the time of sale, we establish an estimated reserve for trade, promotion, and other special price reductions such as contract pricing, discounts to meet competitor pricing, and on-time payment discounts. We also reserve for, among other things, correction of billing errors, incorrect shipments, and settlement of customer disputes. Customers are allowed to return inventory if and when certain conditions regarding the functionality of the inventory and our approval of the return are met. Certain distribution customers are allowed to return inventory at original cost, in an amount not to exceed three percent of the prior year’s purchases, in exchange for an order of equal or greater value. Until we can process these reductions, corrections, and returns (together, the Changes) through individual customer records, we estimate the amount of outstanding Changes and recognize them by reducing revenues. We determine our estimate based on our historical Changes as a percentage of revenues and the average time period between the original sale and the issuance of the Changes. We adjust other current assets and cost of sales for the estimated level of returns.
We base these estimates on historical and anticipated sales demand, trends in product pricing, and historical and anticipated Changes patterns. We make revisions to these estimates in the period in which the facts that give rise to each revision become known. Future market conditions and product transitions might require us to take actions to further reduce prices and increase customer return authorizations. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to measure the Changes. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. A 10% change in our sales reserve for such Changes as of December 31, 2021 would have affected net income by approximately $2 million in 2021.
At times, we enter into arrangements that involve the delivery of multiple promised goods or services. For these arrangements, when the promised goods or services can be separated, the revenue is allocated to each distinct good or service based on that performance obligation’s relative standalone selling price and recognized based upon transfer of control for each performance obligation. Generally, we determine standalone selling price using the adjusted market assessment approach. For software licenses with highly variable standalone selling prices sold with either support or professional services, we generally determine the standalone selling price of the software license using the residual approach.
Revenue allocated to support services under our support contracts is typically recognized ratably over the term of the service. Revenue allocated to distinct professional services is recognized when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied depending on the terms of the arrangement. When professional services are not distinct from goods, the professional services and goods are combined into one performance obligation, and revenue allocated to that performance obligation is recognized when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets resulting from tax credit carryforwards, net operating loss carryforwards, and deductible temporary differences between taxable income on our income tax returns and income before taxes under GAAP. Deferred tax assets generally represent future tax benefits to be received when these carryforwards can be applied against future taxable income or when expenses previously reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements become deductible for income tax purposes. A deferred tax asset valuation allowance is required when some portion or all of the deferred tax assets may not be realized. We are required to estimate taxable income in future years or develop tax strategies that would enable tax asset realization in each taxing jurisdiction and use judgment to determine whether to record a deferred tax asset valuation allowance for part or all of a deferred tax asset.
We consider the weight of all available evidence, both positive and negative, in assessing the realizability of the deferred tax assets associated with net operating losses. We consider the reversals of existing taxable temporary differences as well as projections of future taxable income. We consider the future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences to the extent they were of the same character as the temporary differences giving rise to the deferred tax assets. We also consider whether the future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences will occur in the same period and jurisdiction as the temporary differences giving rise to the deferred tax assets. The assumptions utilized to estimate our future taxable income are consistent with those assumptions utilized for purposes of testing goodwill for impairment, as well as with our budgeting and strategic planning processes.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions. We establish accruals for uncertain tax positions when we believe that the full amount of the associated tax benefit may not be realized. In the future, if we prevail in matters for which accruals have been established previously or pay amounts in excess of reserves, there could be a material effect on our income tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740) Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”) which removes certain exceptions for investments, intra-period allocations and interim tax calculations, and adds guidance to reduce the complexity in accounting for income taxes. The Company adopted ASU 2019-12 in the first quarter of 2021 and the adoption had no material impact to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
See Note 18, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding income taxes.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We test our goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets not subject to amortization for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or when indicators of impairment exist. We base our estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are not predictable with precision and therefore are inherently uncertain. Actual future results could differ from these estimates.
We test goodwill annually for impairment at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment, or a business unit one level below an operating segment if discrete financial information for that business is prepared and regularly reviewed by segment management. However, components within an operating segment are aggregated as a single reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics. We determined that each of our reportable segments (Enterprise Solutions and Industrial Solutions) represents an operating segment. Within those operating segments, we have identified reporting units based on whether there is discrete financial information prepared that is regularly reviewed by segment management. As a result of this evaluation, we have identified three reporting units within Enterprise Solutions and three reporting units within Industrial Solutions for purposes of goodwill impairment testing.
The accounting guidance related to goodwill impairment testing allows for the performance of an optional qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Such an evaluation is made based on the weight of all available evidence and the significance of all identified events and circumstances that may influence the fair value of a reporting unit. If it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying value, then a quantitative assessment is required for the reporting unit, as described in the paragraph below. In 2021, we did not perform a qualitative assessment over any of our reporting units.
When we evaluate goodwill for impairment using a quantitative assessment, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. We determine the fair value using an income approach. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows using growth rates and discount rates that are consistent with current market conditions in our industry. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets including goodwill assigned to that unit, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit’s net assets including goodwill exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we record an impairment charge based on that difference. In addition to the income approach, we calculate the fair value of our reporting units under a market approach. The market approach measures the fair value of a reporting unit through analysis of financial multiples of comparable businesses. Consideration is given to the financial conditions and operating performance of the reporting unit being valued relative to those publicly-traded companies operating in the same or similar lines of business.
For our annual impairment test in 2021, we performed a quantitative assessment for all six of our reporting units. We recorded an impairment for one reporting unit included in the Industrial Solutions segment. See Note 13. The excess of the fair values over the carrying values for the other five reporting units tested under a quantitative income approach ranged from 51% - 436%. The assumptions used to estimate fair values were based on the past performance of the reporting unit as well as the projections incorporated in our strategic plan. Significant assumptions included sales growth, profitability, and related cash flows, along with cash flows associated with taxes and capital spending. The discount rate used to estimate fair value was risk adjusted in consideration of the economic conditions in effect at the time of the impairment test. We also considered assumptions that market participants may use. In our quantitative assessments, the discount rates ranged from 11.3% to 13.7%, the 2022 to 2031 compounded annual revenue growth rates ranged from 3.8% to 9.7%, and the revenue growth rates beyond 2031 ranged from 2.0% to 3.0%. By their nature, these assumptions involve risks and uncertainties. There is inherent risk associated with using an income approach to estimate fair values. If actual results are significantly different from our estimates or assumptions, we may have to recognize additional impairment charges that could be material.
We also test our indefinite-lived intangible asset, a trademark, for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter. The accounting guidance related to impairment testing for such intangible assets allows for the performance of an optional qualitative assessment, similar to that described above for goodwill. We did not perform any qualitative assessments as part of our indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing for 2021. Rather, we performed a quantitative assessment for our indefinite-lived trademark in 2021. Under the quantitative assessments, we determined the fair value of the trademark using a relief from royalty methodology and compared the fair value to the carrying value. We determined that our trademark was not impaired during 2021. Significant assumptions to determine fair value included sales growth, royalty rates, and discount rates.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
Our pension and other postretirement benefit costs and obligations are dependent on the various actuarial assumptions used in calculating such amounts. These assumptions relate to discount rates, salary growth, long-term return on plan assets, health care cost trend rates, mortality tables, and other factors. We base the discount rate assumptions on current investment yields on high-quality corporate long-term bonds. The salary growth assumptions reflect our long-term actual experience and future or near-term outlook. Long-term return on plan assets is determined based on historical portfolio results and management’s expectation of the future economic environment. Our health care cost trend assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook, and an assessment of likely long-term trends. Our key assumptions are described in further detail in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Actual results that differ from our assumptions are accumulated and, if in excess of
the lesser of 10% of the projected benefit obligation or the fair market value of plan assets, amortized over the estimated future working life of the plan participants.
As a sensitivity measure, the effect of a 50 basis point decline in the assumed discount rate would have resulted in an increase in the 2021 net periodic benefit cost and projected benefit obligations as of December 31, 2021 of approximately $2.0 million and $38.0 million, respectively. A 50 basis point decline in the expected return on plan assets would have resulted in an increase in the 2021 net periodic benefit cost of approximately $1.8 million.
Conversely, the effect of a 50 basis point increase in the assumed discount rate would have resulted in a decrease in the 2021 net periodic benefit cost of approximately $1.6 million and a decrease in the projected benefit obligation of approximately $34.2 million as of December 31, 2021. A 50 basis point increase in the expected return on plan assets would have resulted in a decrease in the 2021 net periodic benefit cost of approximately $1.8 million.
Acquisition Accounting
We allocate the consideration of an acquired business to its identifiable assets and liabilities based on estimated fair values. The excess of the consideration over the amount allocated to the assets and liabilities, if any, is recorded to goodwill. We use all available information to estimate fair values. We typically engage third party valuation specialists to assist in the fair value determination of inventories, tangible long-lived assets, and intangible assets other than goodwill. The carrying values of acquired receivables and accounts payable have historically approximated their fair values as of the acquisition date. As necessary, we may engage third party specialists to assist in the estimation of fair value for certain liabilities. We adjust the preliminary acquisition accounting, as necessary, typically up to one year after the acquisition closing date as we obtain more information regarding asset valuations and liabilities assumed.
Our acquisition accounting methodology contains uncertainties because it requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities. Management estimates the fair value of assets and liabilities based upon quoted market prices, the carrying value of the acquired assets and widely accepted valuation techniques, including discounted cash flows and market multiple analyses. Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur which could affect the accuracy of our fair value estimates, including assumptions regarding industry economic factors and business strategies.
If actual results are materially different than the assumptions we used to determine fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired through a business combination, it is possible that adjustments to the carrying values of such assets and liabilities will have an impact on our net earnings. See Note 4.