Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(1) Caution Regarding Forward-Looking Information
Certain statements contained in this annual filing, including, without limitation, statements containing the words "believes", "anticipates", "expects" and words of similar import, constitute forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of the Company, or industry results, to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements.
Such factors include, among others, the following: international, national and local general economic and market conditions: demographic changes; the ability of the Company to sustain, manage or forecast its growth; the ability of the Company to successfully make and integrate acquisitions; existing government regulations and changes in, or the failure to comply with, government regulations; adverse publicity; competition; fluctuations and difficulty in forecasting operating results; changes in business strategy or development plans; business disruptions; the ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; and other factors referenced in this and previous filings.
Given these uncertainties, readers of this Form 10-K and investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. The Company disclaims any obligation to update any such factors or to publicly announce the result of any revisions to any of the forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect future events or developments.
(2) General
The Company’s History
BioAdaptives, Inc., ("BioAdaptives," the "Company," or "we" or "us") was incorporated in the State of Delaware on April 19, 2013, as APEX 8 Inc. From inception through October 21, 2013, the Company was in the developmental stage and conducted virtually no business operations, other than organizational activities and preparation of a registration statement on Form 10-12g (the "Registration Statement"), which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on May 3, 2013.
Following a change of control shortly thereafter, the Company commenced executing a plan involving the design, manufacture and marketing of nutraceutical contracts. As part of this plan, it 1) changed its name to BioAdaptives, Inc.; 2) acquired licenses for products and technologies in exchange for shares; and 3) filed a registration statement for these license shares on Form S-1.
On March 31, 2017, the Company filed a Form 15-15D with the SEC, terminating its status as an SEC-reporting company; it was current in its Continuous Disclosure obligations at that time. The Company continued to provide financial and other reports to shareholders and the public by means of the Alternative Reporting System operated by OTC Markets Group, Inc. Its shares continued to trade in the OTC market; it also continued to execute its business plan.
On May 10, 2019, the Company filed a Form 10-12g with the SEC, re-entering the Continuous Disclosure program and registering its common stock under Section 12(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. On August 1, 2019, the SEC staff informed the Company that it had no further comments on this filing.
On September 11, 2019, the Company appointed Robert Ellis as President and Ron Lambrecht as Chief Financial Officer.
On February 6, 2020, the Board of Directors exercised its authority under the Delaware General Corporations Law to establish its Series A Preferred Stock. The Series A has enhanced voting and conversion privileges and can be used by the Company to settle recorded debt or exchange for new product rights or techniques. On this same day, the Board of Directors authorized an increase in the Company’s authorized common stock from 100,000,000 to 200,000,000; holders of a majority of the Company’s common shares consented to the increase.
Effective May 31, 2021, Dr. Jacobs appointed Robert Ellis and Charles Townsend as directors of the Company and to serve as President and Chief Operating Officer respectively. Dr. Jacobs also appointed Ronald Lambrecht as the Company’s Chief Financial Officer. Effective December 31, 2021, Mr. Lambrecht resigned.
On January 26, 2022, the Board of Directors exercised its authority under the Delaware General Corporations Law to establish its Series B Preferred Stock. The Series B has enhanced voting and conversion privileges and can be used by the Company to acquire ownership of intellectual property rights and other assets. On this same day, the Board of Directors authorized an increase in the Company’s authorized common stock from 200,000,000 to 750,000,000; this holders of a majority of the Company’s common shares consented to the increase.
The Company’s Business
Overview
BioAdaptives’ core business is to investigate, market and distribute natural plant- and algal-based products and medical devices that improve health and wellness for humans and animals, with an emphasis on pain relief, anti-viral function, and anti-aging properties.
Effective November 15, 2021, the Company has also entered into a marketing agreement for an FDA-cleared Class II medical device, the Lung Flute™, and is exploring agreements with other medical device manufacturer; the owners of intellectual property relating to medical devices and processes; and marketing companies associated with these manufacturers and owners.
The Company’s current products include dietary supplements using natural ingredients and proprietary methods of optimizing the availability of nutrients in foods and beverages. The human products are designed to aid memory, cognition and focus; assist in sleep and fatigue reduction; provide pain relief and healing; and improve overall emotional and physical wellness. The science behind our human products has proven to be effective for performance enhancement and pain relief for horses and dogs as well as providing improvements in appearance.
Our current product line for humans includes PrimiCell®, PluriPain®, PrimiLungs™, PrimiLive® and PrimiSleep™. We also market the Lung Flute™ and PrimiLungs™ product in our Lung Armor™ packaging, emphasizing the anti-viral properties of the nutraceutical and general respiratory health benefits from use of the device. PrimiLive® is a nootropic formulation that enhances mental clarity and endurance; PrimiSleep™ is a natural soporific that aids relaxation and sleep quality. We acquired the licenses for these products during 2021, and we have begun a marketing campaign for these products.
Our animal products include Canine Regen® and Equine Regen® for dogs and horses, along with versions of the base formulations, including an Equine All-in-One® formulation evolved from Equine Regen® to trainers, horse owners and boarding stables. Anecdotal and testimonial reports are that the equine products provide significant relief from exercise induced pulmonary hemorrhaging, as well as improved coat and mane appearance and hoof health.
Effective February 2, 2022, the Company acquired the exclusive option to purchase U.S. Patent No. 9,783,432B (the “Patent”), covering technology used in enhancing the capability of water to hold significantly larger amounts of oxygen. The Agreement furthermore allows the Company a two-year license to use the technology covered by the Patent, including for further development of oxygenated water products for consumers. The Agreement is more fully discussed in the Company’s Form 8-K filed on February 6, 2022. The Company intends to develop consumer products using the oxygenation technology, and has formed a wholly-owned subsidiary, MORO2, Inc. to conduct these activities.
While we continue to investigate and acquire nutraceutical products for humans and animals, all of our current activities are reliant on marketing and distributing products developed and owned by others. We do not own the formulations for our key products and manufacture and market them under an agreement with the developer that requires payment of a royalty and license agreement
We are reliant on direct and indirect sales of the Primi and Pluri lines for humans and the Regen and All-in-One animal products for revenues, along with Lung Armor™, none of which has produced any significant revenue yet. We have very limited experience in marketing and have yet to develop reliable sales expectations and forecasting.
(3) Results of Operations
The Company has recognized revenues for years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2021, of $16,327 and $19,776, respectively.
In conjunction with the Company’s business plan, as discussed in Item I of this document, the Company has expended considerable effort and financial resources to the implementation of its business plan. The Company has incurred operating expenses of $646,186, which required cash payments of $236,202, which was principally funded through convertible debt as disclosed in the accompanying financial statement footnotes and advances from shareholders. The balance of the operating expenses were for activities that did not require cash payments, including stock-based compensation and a discount for amortization of debt.
Earnings (Loss) per share for the respective years ended December 31,2020 and December 31, 2021, were $(0.04) and (0.03), respectively, based on the weighted-average shares issued and outstanding at the end of each respective period.
We anticipate that future expenditure levels will remain relatively consistent until such time that the Company fully implements its current business plan, at which time the Company’s expenses and working capital requirements may increase significantly. The Company does not expect to generate any meaningful revenue or incur operating expenses for purposes other than fulfilling the obligations of a reporting company under the Exchange Act unless and until such time that the Company begins meaningful operations.
(4) Plan of Business
Subject to financing and various regulatory approvals, the Company intends to 1) market its existing products as described herein; 2) continue conducting research and investigation activities to identify new products or markets and improve its existing products and marketing; and 3) seek strategic or complimentary acquisitions in its current market space or, if indicated, others. There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to successfully implement this business plan or that if implemented, said plan will be successful.
(5) Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively, the Company had working capital of approximately $(0) and $(0); inclusive of all related party accounts receivable, accrued expenses and line-of-credit notes payable.
It is the belief of management that our current finance partners, shareholders and the proceeds from our Reg. A+ offering will be able provide sufficient working capital necessary to support and preserve the integrity of the corporate entity. However, there is no legal obligation for either management or significant stockholders to provide additional future funding and we cannot be assured as to the success of our offering. Further, the Company is at the mercy of future economic trends and business operations. Consequently, there is substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
The Company's need for working capital may change dramatically as a result of any future business transaction.
There can be no assurance that the Company will identify or enter into any business transaction in the future. Further, there can be no assurance that the Company would be successful in consummating any acquisition on favorable terms or that it will be able to profitably manage the business, product, technology or company it acquires.
The Company has no current plans, proposals, arrangements or understandings with respect to the sale or issuance of additional securities prior to the location of a potential business transaction. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that sufficient funds will be available to the Company to allow it to cover the expenses related to such activities.
Regardless of whether the Company’s cash assets prove to be inadequate to meet the Company’s operational needs, the Company might seek to compensate providers of services by issuances of stock in lieu of cash.
(6) Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and related public financial information are based on the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). GAAP requires the use of estimates; assumptions, judgments and subjective interpretations of accounting principles that have an impact on the assets, liabilities, revenue and expense amounts reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information contained in our external disclosures including information regarding contingencies, risk and financial condition. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions adhere to GAAP and are consistently and conservatively applied. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 of our financial statements. While all these significant accounting policies impact our financial condition and results of operations, we view certain of these policies as critical. Policies determined to be critical are those policies that have the most significant impact on our financial statements and require management to use a greater degree of judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates. Our management believes that given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any other reasonable judgments or estimate methodologies would cause effect on our results of operations, financial position or liquidity for the periods presented in this report.