ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s historical results of operations and liquidity and capital resources should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of the Company and notes thereto appearing elsewhere herein. The following discussion and analysis also contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. See “Forward Looking Statements” that precedes Item 1 above.
Overview
The Company was incorporated in November 1988, under the laws of Delaware as GPS Acquisition Corp. for the purpose of acquiring the business of Blonder-Tongue Laboratories, Inc., a New Jersey corporation, which was founded in 1950 by Ben H. Tongue and Isaac S. Blonder to design, manufacture and supply a line of electronics and systems equipment principally for the private cable industry. Following the acquisition, the Company changed its name to Blonder Tongue Laboratories, Inc. The Company completed the initial public offering of its shares of common stock in December 1995.
Today, the Company is a technology-development and manufacturing company that delivers a wide range of products and services to the telecommunications, cable entertainment and media industry. For 70 years, Blonder Tongue/Drake products have been deployed in a long list of locations, including lodging/hospitality, multi-dwelling units/apartments, broadcast studios/networks, universities/schools, healthcare/hospitals, fitness centers, government facilities/offices, prisons, airports, sports stadiums/arenas, entertainment venues/casinos, retail stores, and small-medium businesses. These applications are variously described as small and medium sized businesses in commercial, institutional or enterprise environments, and will be referred to herein collectively as “SMB”. The customers we serve include business entities installing private video and data networks in these environments, whether they are the largest cable television operators, telco or satellite providers, integrators, architects, engineers or the next generation of Internet Protocol Television (“IPTV”) streaming video providers. The technology requirements of these markets change rapidly, and the Company’s research and development team is continually delivering high performance-lower cost solutions to meet customers’ needs.
The Company’s strategy is focused on providing a wide range of products to meet the needs of the SMB environments described above, including lodging/hospitality, multi-dwelling units/apartments, broadcast studios/networks, universities/schools, healthcare/hospitals, fitness centers, government facilities/offices, prisons, airports, sports stadiums/arenas, entertainment venues/casinos, retail stores, and small-medium businesses, and to provide offerings that are optimized for an operator’s existing infrastructure, as well as the operator’s future strategy. A key component of this growth strategy is to provide products that deliver the latest technologies (such as IPTV and digital 4K, UHD, HD and SD video content) and have a high performance-to-cost ratio.
In 2019, the Company initiated a consumer premise equipment (“CPE”) sales initiative. The products sold in 2019 comprise primarily Android-based IPTV set top boxes to the Tier 2 and Tier 3 cable and telecommunications service providers. Although this strategic initiative was designed to secure an in-home position with the Company’s product offerings, and direct relationships with a wide range of service providers, and increase sales of the Company’s Telecom and SMB products by the BT Premier Distributors to those same service providers, it was decided in 2021, to de-emphasize this strategy due to the low gross margin of this initiative and global semiconductor supply chain limitations. The CPE Product initiative achieved sales to over 75 different telco, municipal fiber and cable operators and accounted for approximately 7% and 25% of the Company’s 2021 and 2020 revenues, respectively, although its contribution to net income has not had a material impact on the Company’s performance.
Like many businesses throughout the United States and the world, the Company has been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Because there are daily, weekly and monthly developments regarding the outbreak, we are continually assessing the current and anticipated future effects on our business, including how these developments are impacting or may impact our customers, employees and business partners. In our core SMB business, we have experienced a noticeable decline in sales. From March 2020 through Q3 of 2021 many of our customers significantly reduced their business operations. In our CPE business we have experienced a more substantial reduction in sales, again as a result of our customers’ significant decrease in their business activities coupled with expected supply chain constraints. During and since Q3 2021, the Company has seen our customers, in general, begin to recover their business operations at the same time as the Company began to see global disruptions in semiconductor supply chain, which is a major raw material component of the products the Company designs, manufactures and sells. With uncertainties surrounding the extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak will affect the economy generally, and our customers and business partners in particular, it is impossible for us to predict when conditions will improve to the point that we can reasonably forecast when our sales and product shipments might return to historical levels. Since 2019, we have taken steps to reduce and are currently taking additional steps to significantly reduce our expenses, including adjustments in our staffing (in the form of furloughs) and reductions in manufacturing activities, which we believe will improve our ability to continue our operations at current levels and meet our obligations to our customers.
The Company’s manufacturing is allocated primarily between its facility in Old Bridge, New Jersey (“Old Bridge Facility”) and key contract manufacturing located in the People’s Republic of China (“PRC”) as well as South Korea, Taiwan and Ohio. The Company currently manufactures most of its digital products, including the NXG product line and latest encoder, transcoder and EdgeQAM collections at the Old Bridge Facility. Since 2007 the Company has transitioned and continues to manufacture certain high-volume, labor intensive products, including many of the Company’s analog and other products, in the PRC, pursuant to manufacturing agreements that govern the production of products that may from time to time be the subject of purchase orders submitted by (and in the discretion of) the Company. Although the Company does not currently anticipate the transfer of any additional products to the PRC or other countries for manufacture, the Company may do so if business and market conditions make it advantageous to do so. Manufacturing products both at the Company’s Old Bridge Facility as well as in the PRC, South Korea, Taiwan and Ohio enables the Company to realize cost reductions while maintaining a competitive position and time-to-market advantage.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with year ended December 31, 2020, discussion is included below.
The following table sets forth, for the fiscal periods indicated, certain consolidated statement of earnings data as a percentage of net sales.
Compared with 2020
Net Sales. Net sales decreased $625,000 or 3.8% to $15,754,000 in 2021 from $16,379,000 in 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in sales of CPE products, DOCSIS data products, analog modulation products and coax distribution products, offset in part by an increase in encoder/decoder products and NXG products. Sales of CPE products were $1,120,000 and $4,165,000, DOCSIS data products were $755,000 and $2,184,000, analog modulation products were $790,000 and $1,274,000, coax distribution products were $1,266,000 and $1,603,000, encoders/transcoders products were $7,863,000 and $4,245,000 and NXG products were $1,924,000 and $705,000 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company experienced a reduction in CPE products during 2021 due to the deemphasis of this product line, which the Company expects to continue into 2022. The Company experienced a reduction in DOCSIS data products due to reduced demand caused by the pandemic as these products are used primarily in the hospitality and assisted-living environments. The Company expects sales of these products may return to 2020 sales levels during 2022. The Company experienced a reduction in analog modulation products due to the continued market shifting away from analog modulation solutions. The Company experienced a reduction in coax distribution products due to the reduced demand for legacy products. The Company expects the sales of the analog modulation and coax distribution products to continue to decline in 2022. The Company experienced an increase in encoder/decoder products and NXG IP video signal processing products as these product lines represent newer products and newer technologies with higher demand from customers. The Company expects sales of these product lines to remain at these levels or increase in 2022. Although the Company does not expect overall sales to return to pre pandemic levels during 2022, the Company does expect overall sales to be higher during 2022, due to approximately $10,240,000 of sales backlog at December 31, 2021.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold decreased to $9,896,000 in 2021 from $13,361,000 in 2020 and decreased as a percentage of sales to 62.8% from 81.6%. The dollar decrease and the decrease as a percentage of sales was primarily attributable to reduced overhead costs. The reduced overhead costs were part of the Company’s cost reduction initiative. The Company expects cost of goods sold as a percentage of sales to remain at this level during 2022 due to product mix since both encoder/decoder and NXG sales have substantially lower and CPE have substantially higher costs as a percentage of sales.
Selling Expenses. Selling expenses increased to $2,459,000 in 2021 from $2,458,000 in 2020 and increased as a percentage of sales to 15.6% for 2021 from 15.0% for 2020. This $1,000 increase was primarily attributable to an increase in consulting expenses of $59,000, offset by a decrease in department supplies of $56,000 due to a decrease in products lent to customers for evaluation purposes. The decrease as a percentage of sales was primarily attributable to the sales decrease.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased to $3,767,000 in 2021 from $5,150,000 in 2020 and decreased as a percentage of sales to 23.9% for 2021 from 31.4% in 2020. This $1,383,000 decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in professional fees of $530,000, a decrease in bad debt expense of $283,000, a decrease in computer expense of $312,000, and a decrease in salaries and fringe benefits of $156,000 due to a combination of salary and headcount reductions. The decrease as a percentage of sales was attributable to the overall decrease.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expenses increased to $2,592,000 in 2021 from $2,524,000 in 2020 and increased as a percentage of sales to 16.5% in 2021 from 15.4% in 2020. This $68,000 increase was primarily attributable to an increase in salaries and fringe benefits of $79,000 due to an increase in head count. The increase as a percentage of sales was attributable to the overall decrease in net sales.
Operating loss. Operating loss of $2,960,000 for 2021 represents an improvement from the operating loss of $7,114,000 in 2020. Operating loss as a percentage of sales decreased to 18.8% in 2021 from 43.4% in 2020 for the reasons discussed above.
Gain on debt forgiveness. Gain on debt forgiveness was $1,769,000 in 2021 versus zero in 2020. The gain was due to the forgiveness of the PPP loan.
Other income. Other income increased to $1,804,000 in the 2021 from zero in the 2020. The increase was the result of the accrual of the payroll tax credit through the Employee Retention Tax Credit for the first, second and third quarters of 2021. At December 31, 2021, the Company is still owed $517,000 in ERTC funds which it expects to receive during the second quarter of 2022.
Interest expense net. Interest expense, net increased to $514,000 in 2021 from $345,000 in 2020. The increase was primarily the result of higher average borrowings, including an increase of $86,000 of PIK interest and $108,000 of amortization of the debt discount related to the Subordinated Loan Facility described below in Liquidity and Capital Resources.
Income Taxes. The provision for income taxes was $15,000 in both 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company records a full valuation allowance for net deferred tax assets that are no longer considered to be realizable. The significant negative evidence supporting the full valuation allowance includes an operating loss for the current year, a cumulative pre-tax loss for the three years ended December 31, 2021, the inability to carryback the net operating losses, limited future reversals of existing temporary differences and the limited availability of tax planning strategies. The Company expects to continue to provide a full valuation allowance until, or unless, it can sustain a level of profitability that demonstrates its ability to utilize these assets.
Inflation and Seasonality
Inflation and seasonality have not previously had a material impact on the results of operations of the Company. However, beginning in early 2022, the Company began to experience inflationary pressures related to the procurement of certain products used in its manufacturing process and expects these pressures to continue at least through the remainder of 2022. To date we have been successful in passing on cost increases to our customers and will continue to attempt to pass on increases to customers. However, there can be no assurances that the Company will continue to be able to do so. Fourth quarter sales in 2021 as compared to other quarters were slightly impacted by fewer production days. The Company expects sales each year in the fourth quarter to be impacted by fewer production days.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s working capital was $1,618,000 and $570,000 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company’s net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1,167,000, primarily due to an increase in inventories of $791,000, a decrease in lease liability of $787,000, an increase in prepaid and other current assets of $554,000 offset by an increase in accounts payable accrued expenses and accrued compensation of $456,000 and non-cash adjustments used in operating activities of $416,000, compared to net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $3,212,000, primarily due to the net loss of $7,474,000 and a decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and accrued compensation of $2,333,000, offset by a decrease in inventories of $4,421,000.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $86,000, which was attributable primarily to capital expenditures of $31,000 and the acquisition of licenses of $55,000. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $191,000, which was attributable primarily to capital expenditures of $165,000 and the acquisition of licenses of $26,000.
Cash provided by financing activities was $1,458,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, comprised primarily of borrowings under the subordinated convertible debt facility of $700,000, net borrowings of line of credit of $255,000, the net proceeds of stock issuances of $492,000, the proceeds of the exercise of stock options of $11,000 and the proceeds of the exercise of stock warrants of $61,000 offset by repayments of debt of $61,000. Cash provided by financing activities was $2,900,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, comprised primarily of borrowings of long-term debt of $1,769,000, borrowings from the Subordinated Loan Facility of $900,000, net proceeds from the private placement of common stock of $812,000 and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $13,000, offset by net repayments on the line of credit of $560,000 and repayments of debt of $34,000.
For a full description of the Company’s senior secured indebtedness under the MidCap Facility and its effect upon the Company’s consolidated financial position and results of operations, see Note 5 - Debt of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity have been its existing cash balances, cash generated from operations, amounts available under the MidCap Facility, amounts available under the Subordinated Loan Facility and cash generated from sales of its common stock, as well as funds made available to the Company through participation in several federal government financial assistance programs implemented pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, including the Paycheck Protection Program and the Employee Retention Tax Credit. On a going-forward basis, the Company expects its primary sources of liquidity will be its existing cash balances, cash generated from operations and amounts available under the MidCap Facility. The Company also may seek to raise additional capital through the issuance of shares of common stock or other securities convertible into, or exercisable for, shares of common stock, although the Company cannot provide any assurances that this type of additional financing will be available on reasonable terms, or at all. The Company had approximately $92,000 and approximately $144,000 availability for borrowing under the MidCap Facility, as of December 31, 2021 and March 18, 2022, respectively.
As discussed in Item 2 - Properties, on February 1, 2019, the Company completed the sale of the Old Bridge Facility to Jake Brown Road, LLC (the “Buyer”). In addition, in connection with the completion of the sale, the Company and the Buyer (as landlord) entered into a lease (the “Lease”), pursuant to which the Company will continue to occupy, and continue to conduct its manufacturing, engineering, sales and administrative functions in the Old Bridge Facility.
The Lease has an initial term of five years and allows the Company to extend the term for an additional five years following the initial term. The Company was obligated to pay base rent of approximately $837,000 for the first year of the Lease, with the amount of the base rent adjusted for each subsequent year to equal 102.5% of the preceding year’s base rent. Without regard to any reduction in the Company’s lease expense derived from its sublease to a third party of the Sublease Space (defined below), for the first year of the Lease, the base rent of approximately $837,000.00 would offset, in part, the anticipated annualized saving of interest and depreciation expense of approximately $469,000 and the cash debt service of approximately $562,000. The Lease further provides for an initial security deposit in an amount equal to eight months of base rent, which could be reduced to not lower than three months of base rent, upon certain benchmarks being met during the Lease term. It was determined in the first quarter 2020 that the applicable benchmark relevant to the six-month period ended August 1, 2019 was met and as a result the landlord released a portion of the security deposit equal to one month’s base rent to the Company, leaving an aggregate security deposit held by the landlord, in an amount equal to seven months of base rent. Subsequently, the Company determined in the third quarter 2020 that the applicable benchmark relevant to the six-month period ended August 1, 2020 was met and as a result, the Company notified the landlord in writing that it would offset rent otherwise due on August 1, 2020 against the reimbursement of a portion of the security deposit equal to one month’s base rent, leaving an aggregate security deposit held by the landlord, in an amount equal to six months of base rent. The landlord expressed its disagreement with the Company’s interpretation of the lease and requested the provision of financial information to support the Company’s contention or in the alternative payment of the offset amount. Subsequently, no further actions or communications regarding the offset were made by the landlord and the Company thereafter, beginning with September 2020, resumed timely payments of its rental obligations under the Lease. In early 2021, the Company undertook an analysis of the common area maintenance charges being assessed under the Lease in an effort to reconcile those payments with the specific terms of the Lease. The Lease provides that this reconciliation is to be accomplished by the landlord annually, however this has not occurred. The Company’s analysis indicates that it may have been overcharged for common area maintenance expenses since the inception of the Lease and submitted supporting data to the landlord, requesting that the landlord review the submission against its records. The Company has also requested that the landlord release from escrow and return to the Company, the unexpended balance of the Repair Escrow. The landlord and the Company anticipated resolving the reconciliation of the common area maintenance charges and Repair Escrow release request during the month of February 2021 and with the prior oral approval of the landlord, the Company refrained from paying February 2021 rent, expecting that the reconciliation would be completed prior to the end of that month. Inasmuch as the disputed amounts, in the opinion of the Company, exceed three months’ rent and common area maintenance expenses, the Company refrained from the payment of base rent and common area maintenance charges for the months of February 2021 and March 2021, it being the expectation of the parties that these amounts will be credited against the amount finally determined to be reimbursed to the Company. Without prejudice to the Company’s positions regarding these matters, and without creating any inference that the Company agrees with any of the landlord’s claims or waiving any rights available to the Company under the Lease or otherwise, on May 5, 2021, the Company made payment to the landlord of $139,550.62, representing all amounts that the landlord then claimed were due. Notwithstanding the continuing disagreements with the landlord’s monthly payment demands, the Company is meeting these demands on a current basis, but continues to reserve its rights regarding the same. The Company has not recently held discussions with the landlord regarding the foregoing areas of disagreement, however its position regarding amounts due back to the Company has not changed. At the appropriate time, the Company anticipates engaging in further discussion of these matters with the landlord in an attempt to negotiate a resolution of these disagreements. The Company, however, cannot assure you that these matters will be resolved in a manner that is favorable to the Company or that litigation might not result if a negotiated resolution not forthcoming.
The landlord may, once during the lease term or any renewal thereof, require the Company to relocate to another facility made available by the landlord that meets the Company’s specifications for a replacement facility within a defined geographical area, by providing notice which confirms that all of the Company’s specifications for a replacement facility will be met, that all costs relating to such relocation will be paid by the landlord, and that security for the repayment of those relocation costs has been established. The Company will also be provided a six-month overlap period (the “Overlap Period”) during which the Company may operate in the Old Bridge Facility with rent therein being abated, but with rent being paid at the replacement facility, to mitigate interruptions of the Company’s on-going business while the move occurs. If the Company declines to be relocated to the facility proposed by the landlord, the Lease will terminate 18 months from the date of the landlord’s notice, but the Company will continue to be entitled to receive the same benefits in terms of reimbursement of its relocation costs and an Overlap Period during which no rent will be due at the Old Bridge Facility, while the Company moves its operations to an alternative facility that it has identified.
On December 31, 2019, the Company entered into a two-year sublease to a third party for 32,500 square feet of the Old Bridge Facility (the “Sublease Space”) which commenced on March 1, 2020, the rental proceeds from which inure to the benefit of the Company. The sublease also provides for a one-year renewal option, which was exercised in January 2022. The sublease provides rental income approximately $284,000 in the first year, approximately $293,000 in the second year and approximately $301,000 in the third year of the sublease.
In connection with the fulfillment of certain of the Company’s purchase orders, the Company was financing expediting fees charged in connection with the purchase orders by delivering a promissory note (the “Note”) to the supplier of the goods, in the principal amount of approximately $630,000. The Note was unsecured and has an interest rate of 12% per annum. The Company was obligated to repay the principal balance of the note beginning in September 2021 and continuing thereafter for an additional five consecutive monthly installments on the 15th day of each successive calendar month, as follows: September 2021, $100,000, October 2021, $100,000, November 2021, $100,000, December 2021, $100,000, January 2022, $100,000 and February 2022, $140,000. Accrued interest was paid concurrently with each principal installment. The note was satisfied in March 2022.
During 2021, the Company continued to experience a decline in sales, a loss from operations and net cash used in operating activities, in conjunction with liquidity constraints. These factors raised substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Accordingly, there still exists substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern. During the first quarter of 2022, the Company continued to experience a decline in sales and a loss from operations in connection with the liquidity constraints described above which is expected to continue during 2022.
While management of the Company believes that the Company will be successful in its planned operating activities, there can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in generating sufficient revenues and reduced expenses to sustain the operations of the Company. If anticipated operating results are not achieved and/or the Company is unable to obtain additional financing, it may be required to take additional measures to reduce costs in order to conserve its cash in amounts sufficient to sustain operations and meet its obligations, which measures could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s ability to achieve its intended business objectives and may be insufficient to enable the Company to continue as a going concern for at least twelve months from the date these financial statements are made available to be issued.
Beginning in the middle of 2019, the Company experienced a significant decline in its net sales of core or legacy products, which while not recovering to historical norms, stabilized during the early part of the first quarter of 2020. Beginning in February 2020, however, as the prospects of an ever-worsening outbreak of COVID-19 took hold, the Company began to experience adverse impacts to revenues across all of its product lines. Sales of the Company’s products did not return to historical norms during 2021. The Company still does not anticipate that sales will recover to historical norms during 2022, due primarily to supply chain shortages related to COVID-19 impacting the Company’s ability to source raw materials used in the manufacturing process. In light of these developments and as detailed below, the Company has taken significant steps during the past year, implemented in several phases, in order to manage operations through what has been a period of diminished sales levels.
As part of its efforts to improve liquidity and provide operating capital, on April 7, 2020, the Company entered into a certain Consent and Amendment to Loan Agreement and Loan Documents with Midcap (the “MidCap First Amendment”), which amended the MidCap Facility to, among other things, remove the existing $400,000 availability block, subject to the same being re-imposed at the rate of approximately $7,000 per month commencing June 1, 2020. The operative provisions relating to the removal of the availability block under the MidCap First Amendment became effective on April 8, 2020, following the consummation by the Company of the transactions contemplated by the Subordinated Loan Facility (defined below).
On April 8, 2020, the Company, as borrower, together with Livewire Ventures, LLC (wholly owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, Edward R. Grauch), MidAtlantic IRA, LLC FBO Steven L. Shea IRA (an IRA account for the benefit of the Company’s Chairman of the Board, Steven Shea), Carol M. Pallé and Robert J. Pallé, Anthony J. Bruno, and Stephen K. Necessary, as lenders (collectively, the “Initial Lenders”) and Robert J. Pallé, as Agent for the Lenders (in such capacity, the “Agent”) entered into a certain Senior Subordinated Convertible Loan and Security Agreement (the “Subordinated Loan Agreement”), pursuant to which the lenders from time to time party thereto may provide up to $1,500,000 of loans to the Company (the “Subordinated Loan Facility”). Interest accrues on the outstanding amounts advanced under the Subordinated Loan Facility at the rate of 12% per annum, compounded and payable monthly, in-kind, by the automatic increase of the principal amount of the loan on each monthly interest payment date, by the amount of the accrued interest payable at that time (“PIK Interest”); provided, however, that at the option of the Company, it may pay interest in cash on any interest payment date, in lieu of PIK Interest.
On April 8, 2020, the Initial Lenders agreed to provide the Company with a Tranche A term loan facility of $800,000, of which $600,000 was advanced to the Company on April 8, 2020, $100,000 was advanced to the Company on April 17, 2020 and $100,000 was advanced to the Company on January 12, 2021. The Initial Lenders participating in the Tranche A term loan facility have the option of converting the principal balance of the loan held by each of them, in whole (unless otherwise agreed by the Company), into shares of the Company’s common stock, at a conversion price equal to the volume weighted average price of the common stock as reported by the NYSE American, during the five trading days preceding April 8, 2020 (the “Tranche A Conversion Price”) which was calculated at $0.593. The conversion right was subject to stockholder approval as required by the rules of the NYSE American, and was obtained on June 11, 2020 at the Company’s annual meeting of stockholders.
On April 24, 2020, the Company, the Initial Lenders and Ronald V. Alterio (the Company’s Senior Vice President-Engineering, Chief Technology Officer) and certain additional unaffiliated investors (the “Additional Lenders,” and, together with the Initial Lenders, the “Lenders”) entered into the First Amendment to Senior Subordinated Convertible Loan and Security Agreement and Joinder (the “Amendment”). The Amendment provides for the funding of $200,000 of additional loans as a Tranche B term loan under the Subordinated Loan Facility established under the Subordinated Loan Agreement, with such loans being provided by the Additional Lenders. The Amendment also sets the conversion price of $0.55 (the “Tranche B Conversion Price”) with respect to the right of the Additional Lenders to convert the accreted principal balance of the loans held by each of them into shares of the Company’s common stock. The terms and conditions of the conversion rights applicable to the Initial Lenders and the Additional Lenders are otherwise identical in all material respects, including the terms restricting conversion to an aggregate amount of shares of common stock that would not result in the Company’s non-compliance with NYSE American rules requiring stockholder approval of issuances or potential issuances of shares in excess of the percentage limits specified therein or in an amount that may be deemed to constitute a change of control under such rules. These restrictions terminated as the requisite stockholder approval was obtained on June 11, 2020 at the Company’s annual meeting of stockholders.
On April 10, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds of approximately $1,769,000 (“PPP Loan”) under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP, established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), provided for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The PPP Loan and accrued interest are forgivable after twenty-four weeks (the “Covered Period”) as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness would be reduced if the borrower terminated employees or reduced salaries during the eight-week period.
The PPP Loan was evidenced by a promissory note, dated as of April 5, 2020 (the “Note”), between the Company, as Borrower, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Lender (the “Lender”). The interest rate on the Note was 0.98% per annum, with interest accruing on the unpaid principal balance computed on the basis of the actual number of days elapsed in a year of 360 days. No payments of principal or interest were due during the ten-month period beginning after the Covered Period (the “Deferral Period”).
On June 22, 2021, the Company applied to the SBA for full forgiveness of the PPP Loan. On June 30, 2021, the Company received notification that the forgiveness was granted. The Company recorded the $1,769,000 forgiveness as a gain on debt forgiveness during the year ended December 31, 2021.
On October 29, 2020, the unaffiliated Additional Investors as described in Note 6, submitted irrevocable notices of conversion under the Tranche B Term Loan. As a result, approximately $175,000 of original principal and $11,000 of PIK interest outstanding under the Tranche B Term Loan were converted into 338,272 shares of Company common stock in full satisfaction of the underlying indebtedness.
On December 14, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain accredited investors (the “Purchasers”) for the sale and issuance by the Company to the Purchasers of (i) an aggregate of 1,429,000 shares (the “Shares”) of the Company’s common stock and (ii) warrants (the “Purchaser Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of up to 714,000 shares of common stock (the “Purchaser Warrant Shares”), for aggregate gross proceeds to the Company of $1,000, before deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses payable by the Company. The Company also agreed to issue to the placement agents and certain persons affiliated with the placement agents, as additional compensation, (a) fully-vested warrants (the “Placement Agent Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of up to 100,000 shares (the “Placement Agent Warrant Shares”) of common stock and (b) contingent warrants (the “Placement Agent Contingent Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of up to an additional 50,000 shares (the “Placement Agent Contingent Warrant Shares”) of common stock. The transaction closed on December 15, 2020.
The Purchase Agreement also includes terms that give the Purchasers certain price protections, providing for adjustments of the number of shares of common stock held by them in the event of certain future dilutive securities issuances by the Company for a period not to exceed 18 months following the closing of the private placement, or such earlier date on which all of the Purchaser Warrants have been exercised. In addition, the Purchase Agreement provides the Purchasers with a right to participate in certain future Company financings, up to 30% of the amount of such financings, for a period of 24 months following the closing of the private placement. The Purchase Agreement also required the Company to register the resale of the Shares and the Purchaser Warrant Shares pursuant to the terms of a Registration Rights Agreement between the Company and the Purchasers, dated as of December 14, 2020, as further described below. The Company filed a registration statement with the SEC on January 14, 2021 to register the resale of the Shares and the Purchaser Warrant Shares, which registration statement was declared effective by the SEC on January 21, 2021.
The Purchaser Warrants have an exercise price of $1.25 per share, are exercisable beginning on December 15, 2020, and have a term of three years. The exercise price and the number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of each Purchaser Warrant is subject to appropriate adjustments in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications or similar events affecting the common stock. The fair value of the Purchaser Warrants is $643,000.
In certain circumstances, upon the occurrence of a fundamental transaction, a holder of Purchaser Warrants is entitled to receive, upon any subsequent exercise of the Purchaser Warrant, for each Purchaser Warrant Share that would have been issuable upon such exercise of the Purchaser Warrant immediately prior to the fundamental transaction, at the option of the holder, the number of shares of common stock of the successor or acquiring corporation or of the Company, if it is the surviving corporation, and any additional consideration receivable as a result of the fundamental transaction by a holder of the number of shares of common stock of the Company for which the Purchaser Warrant is exercisable immediately prior to the fundamental transaction. If holders of the Company’s common stock are given any choice as to the securities, cash or property to be received in a fundamental transaction, then the Holder shall be given the choice as to the additional consideration it receives upon any exercise of the Purchaser Warrant following the fundamental transaction.
The Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price of $0.70 per share, a term of five years from December 14, 2020, and became exercisable upon the Company obtaining the stockholder approval described above. The exercise price and the number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of each Placement Agent Warrant is subject to appropriate adjustments in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications or similar events affecting the common stock. The Placement Agent Warrants also provide the holders with certain “piggyback” registration rights, permitting the holders to request that the Company include the Placement Agent Warrant Shares for sale in certain registration statements filed by the Company. The fair value of the Placement Agent Warrants is $121,000. During June and July 2021, the Company received approximately $61,000 as 87,500 of Placement Agent Warrants were exercised.
The Placement Agent Contingent Warrants have an exercise price of $1.25 per share, a term of five years from December 14, 2020, and become exercisable if, and to the extent, holders of the Purchaser Warrants exercise such Purchaser Warrants. In no event, however, will the Placement Agent Contingent Warrants become exercisable unless and until Stockholder Approval has been obtained. The exercise price and the number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of each Placement Agent Contingent Warrant is subject to appropriate adjustments in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications or similar events affecting the common stock. The Placement Agent Contingent Warrants also provide the holders with certain “piggyback” registration rights, permitting the holders to request that the Company include the Placement Agent Contingent Warrant Shares for sale in certain registration statements filed by the Company. The fair value of the Placement Agent Contingent Warrants is $56,000.
On January 28, 2021, the Company entered into the Third Amendment to Senior Subordinated Convertible Loan and Security Agreement and Joinder (the “LSA Third Amendment”) with the Tranche A Parties, the Tranche B Parties (that had not previously converted the loans attributable to each of them into shares of common stock), the Agent and certain other investors (the “Tranche C Parties”). Pursuant to the LSA Third Amendment, the parties agreed to increase the aggregate loan limit under the Subordinated Loan Agreement from $1,500,000 to $1,600,000 and the Tranche C Parties agreed to provide the Company with a commitment for a $600,000 term loan facility, all of which was advanced to the Company on January 29, 2021 (the “Tranche C Loans”). As is the case with the loans provided by the Tranche A Parties and Tranche B Parties, interest on the Tranche C Loans accrues at 12% per annum and is payable monthly in-kind, by the automatic increase of the principal amount of the loans on each monthly interest payment date, by the amount of the accrued interest payable at that time. The Company, at its option, may pay any interest due on the Tranche C Loans in cash on any interest payment date in lieu of PIK Interest. The Tranche C Parties also have the option, following Stockholder Approval (defined below) of converting the accreted principal balance of the Tranche C Loans attributable to each of them into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $1.00.
Both the Purchase Agreement and the Subordinated Loan Agreement (as amended by the LSA Third Amendment) obligated the Company to call a special meeting of its stockholders to seek stockholder approval of the issuance of shares of its common stock issuable in connection with the transactions contemplated by the Securities Purchase Agreement and the LSA Third Amendment, in excess of 19.99% of the Company’s outstanding shares of common stock, in accordance with the requirements of Section 713(a) of the NYSE American Company Guide. Stockholder approval of the foregoing was obtained on March 4, 2021. As the stock price was $1.31 on March 4, 2021, the Company recorded a discount of $186,000 relating to the difference in stock price due to the beneficial conversion feature.
The obligations of the Company under the Subordinated Loan Agreement are guaranteed by Drake and are secured by substantially all of the Company’s and Drake’s assets. The Subordinated Loan Agreement has a maturity date three years from the date of closing, at which time the accreted principal balance of the loan (by virtue of the PIK Interest) plus any other accrued unpaid interest, would be due and payable in full. In connection with the Subordinated Loan Agreement, the Company, Drake, the Lenders and MidCap entered into a Subordination Agreement (the “Subordination Agreement”), pursuant to which the rights of the Lenders under the Subordinated Loan Agreement were subordinated to the rights of MidCap under the MidCap Agreement and related security documents. The Subordination Agreement precludes the Company from making cash payments of interest in lieu of PIK Interest, in the absence of the prior written consent of MidCap or unless the Company is able to meet certain predefined conditions precedent to the making of any such payments of interest (or principal), as more fully described in the Subordination Agreement.
On March 15, 2021, one of the Tranche C Parties submitted an irrevocable notice of conversion under the Tranche C Loans. As a result, $100,000 of original principal and $1,000 of PIK interest outstanding under the Tranche C Loans were converted into 100,987 shares of Company common stock in partial satisfaction of the indebtedness to that Tranche C Party.
On April 6, 2021, the same Tranche C Party submitted an irrevocable notice of conversion under the Tranche C Loans. As a result, $50,000 of original principal and $1,000 of PIK interest outstanding under the Tranche C Loans were converted into 51,260 shares of Company common stock in partial satisfaction of the indebtedness to that Tranche C Party.
On May 24, 2021, the same Tranche C Party submitted an irrevocable notice of conversion under the Tranche C Loans. As a result, $50,000 of original principal and $2,000 of PIK interest outstanding under the Tranche C Loans were converted into 52,277 shares of Company common stock in complete satisfaction of their indebtedness.
On January 21, 2022, one of the Tranche A Parties submitted an irrevocable notice of conversion under the Tranche A Loans. As a result, $50,000 of original principal and $12,000 of PIK interest outstanding under the Tranche A Loans were converted into 104,399 shares of Company common stock in complete satisfaction of their indebtedness.
On August 16, 2021, the Company entered into a Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Roth Capital Partners, LLC (the “Agent”). In accordance with the terms of the Sales Agreement, the Company may offer and sell from time to time through the Agent shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $400,000. From August 16, 2021 through September 30, 2021, the Company sold an aggregate of 38,388 shares under the Sales Agreement at prices ranging from $1.1053 to $1.1390 per share, for aggregate proceeds, net of sales commissions, of approximately $41,000.
On August 23, 2021, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with an institutional investor providing for the sale by the Company to the investor of 200,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at a purchase price of $1.08 per share, resulting in aggregate proceeds to the Company of $216,000. The shares were offered and sold pursuant to the Company’s effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3. The Company’s sale of the Shares pursuant to the Purchase Agreement will have the effect of reducing the amount of shares that may be sold pursuant to the Sales Agreement from $400,000 to $184,000. Taking into account sales of common stock pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement and sales of common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement to date, the amount available to be sold under the Sales Agreement is currently $143,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company accrued payroll tax credits of $1,804,000 through the Employee Retention Tax Credit program (“ERTC”). The amount was recorded as other income and included in prepaid and other current assets as of the applicable quarter end date. The Company received $577,000 of the first quarter of 2021 ERTC in April, $115,000 towards Q2 in July, $181,000 towards Q3 in August, $219,000 towards Q3 in October and $195,000 towards Q3 in November. The ERTC was initially established as part of the CARES Act of 2020 and subsequently amended by the Consolidated Appropriation Act (“CAA”) of 2021 and the American Rescue Plan Act (“ARPA”) of 2021. The CAA and ARPA amendments to the ERTC program provide eligible employers with a tax credit in an amount equal to 70% of qualified wages (including certain health care expenses) that eligible employers pay their employees after January 1, 2021 through September 30, 2021. The maximum amount of qualified wages taken into account with respect to each employee for each calendar quarter is $10,000, so that the maximum credit that an eligible employer may claim for qualified wages paid to any employee is $7,000 per quarter. For purposes of the amended ERTC, an eligible employer is defined as having experienced a significant (20% or more) decline in gross receipts during each 2021 calendar quarter when compared with the same quarter in 2019. The credit is taken against the Company’s share of Social Security Tax when the Company’s payroll provider files the applicable quarterly tax filings on Form 941. At December 31, 2021, the Company is still owed $517,000 in ERTC funds which it expects to receive during the second quarter of 2022.
In other efforts to alleviate the liquidity pressures and reposition the Company to generate positive cash flow at a lower level of net sales, since August 2019, the Company has implemented a multi-phase cost-reduction program which reduced cash expenses during 2019 by approximately $200,000 per month and which provided annualized cash savings of approximately $2,400,000 during 2020, with another reduction in 2021 of approximately $110,000 per month and which provided annualized savings of approximately $1,314,000 compared to the Company’s costs as they existed prior to the commencement of the cost reduction program. Although the Company believes it has made and will continue to make progress under these programs and the funding provided under the Subordinated Loan Agreement and available as a result of the release of the availability block under the MidCap Facility, the Company operates in a rapidly evolving and often unpredictable business environment that may change the timing or amount of expected future cash receipts and expenditures. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that our planned improvements will be successful.
In addition, the COVID-19 outbreak has affected the supply chain for many types of products and materials, particularly those being manufactured in China and other countries where the outbreak has resulted in significant disruptions to ongoing business activities. Beginning in the second quarter of 2021 and continuing into the first quarter of 2022, we experienced a material disruption in our supply chain as it relates to the procurement of certain sole source and other multiple source components utilized in a material portion of several product lines. We believe this disruption may continue beyond 2022. If these or any similar types of supply disruptions continue, it is possible that we will be unable to complete sales of any affected products to our customers on requested schedules.
The Company has reacted to these unprecedented circumstances, as many enterprises have had to do over the course of the pandemic, with a range of actions designed to compensate for anticipated temporary revenue shortfalls, manage the Company’s working capital and minimize the overall financial impact of this disruption, including implementation of exceptional short-term operating expense reductions, such as temporary manufacturing shut-downs and employee furloughs.
The Company expects to use cash generated from operations to meet its long-term debt obligations. The Company also expects to make financed and unfinanced long-term capital expenditures from time to time in the ordinary course of business, which capital expenditures were $31,000 and $165,000 in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company expects to use cash generated from operations, amounts available under the MidCap Facility, amounts available under the Subordinated Loan Facility, and purchase-money financing to meet any anticipated long-term capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company prepares its financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Preparing financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The following paragraphs include a discussion of some critical areas where estimates are required. You should also review Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of significant accounting policies.
Inventory and Obsolescence
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined by the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method, or net realizable value.
The Company periodically analyzes anticipated product sales based on historical results, current backlog and marketing plans. Based on these analyses, the Company anticipates that certain products will not be sold during the next twelve months. Inventories that are not anticipated to be sold in the next twelve months, have been classified as non-current.
The Company continually analyzes its slow-moving and excess inventories. Based on historical and projected sales volumes and anticipated selling prices, the Company establishes reserves. Inventory that is in excess of current and projected use is reduced by an allowance to a level that approximates its estimate of future demand. Products that are determined to be obsolete are written down to net realizable value.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal trade terms. The Company sells its products primarily to distributors and private cable operators. The Company performs continuing credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition and although the Company generally does not require collateral, letters of credit may be required from its customers in certain circumstances.
Senior management reviews accounts receivable on a monthly basis to determine if any receivables will potentially be uncollectible. The Company includes any accounts receivable balances that are determined to be uncollectible, along with a general reserve based on historical experience, in its overall allowance for doubtful accounts.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company continually monitors events and changes in circumstances that could indicate carrying amounts of the long-lived assets, including intangible assets may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, the Company assesses recoverability by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through the undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount of these assets, an impairment loss is recognized based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. The Company did not recognize any intangible asset impairment charges in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets
The Company accounts for income taxes under the provisions of the FASB ASC Topic 740 “Income Taxes”. Deferred income taxes are provided for temporary differences in the recognition of certain income and expenses for financial and tax reporting purposes. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.