Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our audited financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to historical financial information, this discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part II, Item 1A below. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ from those anticipated.
These statements are based upon information available to us as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and while we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of their date, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments. These statements are inherently uncertain, and investors are cautioned not to unduly rely upon these statements.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A), is provided to supplement the audited financial statements and the related notes in Part II - Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form10-K. We intend for this discussion to provide you with information that will assist you in understanding our financial statements, the changes in key items in those financial statements from year to year and the primary factors that accounted for those changes. Data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 has been derived from our audited financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading data-driven diagnostic solutions company leveraging state of the art technologies with our proprietary AI platform to discover, develop, and commercialize solutions for clinical unmet needs, with a primary focus in lung disease. By combining a technology multi-omic approach with a holistic view of the patient’s disease state, we believe our solutions provide physicians with greater insights to help personalize their patient’s care and meaningfully improve disease detection, evaluation, and treatment. Our unique approach to precision medicine provides timely and actionable clinical information, which we believe helps improve overall patient outcomes and lowers the overall healthcare cost by reducing the use of ineffective and unnecessary treatments and procedures. In addition to our diagnostic tests, we provide biopharmaceutical companies with services that include diagnostic research, clinical trial testing, and the discovery, development, and commercialization of companion diagnostics.
Our core belief is that no single technology will answer all clinical questions that we encounter. Therefore, we employ multiple technologies, including genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and radiomics, and leverage our proprietary AI-based Diagnostic Cortex® platform to discover innovative diagnostic tests for clinical use. The Diagnostic Cortex is an extensively validated deep learning platform optimized for the discovery of diagnostic tests, which we believe overcomes standard machine learning challenges faced in life sciences research. Our data-driven and multi-omic approach is designed to enable us to discover diagnostic tests that answer critical clinical questions faced by physicians, researchers, and biopharmaceutical companies.
We continuously incorporate new market insights and patient data to enhance our platform through a data-driven learning loop. We regularly engage with our customers, key opinion leaders, and scientific experts to stay ahead of the rapidly evolving diagnostic treatment landscape to identify additional clinical unmet needs where a diagnostic test could help improve patient care. Additionally, we incorporate clinical and molecular profiling data from our commercial clinical testing, research studies, clinical trials, and biopharmaceutical customers or academic partnerships, to continue to advance our platform. We have over 150,000 samples and data in our biobank, including tumor profiles and immune profiles, which are used for both internal and external research and development initiatives.
We have commercialized eight diagnostic tests which are currently available for use by physicians. Our Nodify XL2 and Nodify CDT tests, marketed as part of the Nodify Lung Nodule Risk Assessment testing strategy, assess the risk of lung cancer to help identify the most appropriate treatment pathway. We believe we are the only company to offer two commercial blood-based tests to help physicians reclassify risk of malignancy in patients with suspicious lung nodules. Our GeneStrat ddPCR, GeneStrat NGS, and VeriStrat tests, marketed as the IQLung testing strategy, are used following diagnosis of lung cancer to measure the presence of mutations in the tumor and the state of the patient’s immune system to establish the patient’s prognosis and help guide treatment decisions. The GeneStrat targeted tumor profiling test and the VeriStrat immune profiling test now have a less than 36-hour average turnaround time, down from the previous 72-hour average turnaround time, providing physicians with timely results to facilitate treatment decisions. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, through our partnership with Bio-Rad, we commercialized the Biodesix WorkSafe™ testing program. Our scientific diagnostic expertise, technologies, and existing commercial infrastructure enabled us to rapidly commercialize two FDA EUA authorized tests, a part of our customizable program. Both diagnostic tests are owned and were developed by Bio-Rad and Bio-Rad has granted us permission to utilize both tests for commercial diagnostic services. Then U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Azar
declared a public health emergency for COVID-19 in February 2020 which justified the authorization of emergency use of diagnostic tests for the detection and/or diagnosis of COVID-19. The Bio-Rad SARS-CoV-2 ddPCR test and the Platelia SARS-CoV-2 Total Ab test have been granted FDA EUA pursuant to the current emergency declaration. The Bio-Rad SARS-CoV-2 ddPCR test was FDA EUA authorized on May 1, 2020, authorizing performance of the test in laboratories certified under CLIA to perform high complexity tests. The second test is the Platelia SARS-CoV-2 Total Ab test, which is an antibody test intended for detecting a B-cell immune response to SARS-CoV-2, indicating recent or prior infection. The Platelia SARS-CoV-2 Total Ab test was FDA EUA authorized on April 29, 2020. Medical products that are granted an EUA are only permitted to commercialize their products under the terms and conditions provided in the authorization. The FDA may revoke an EUA where it is determined that the underlying health emergency no longer exists or warrants such authorization, if the conditions for the issuance of the EUA are no longer met, or if other circumstances make revocation appropriate to protect the public health or safety, and we cannot predict how long the EUAs for the SARS-CoV-2 tests will remain in place. In addition to the seven tests currently available to physicians, the Company launched the GeneStrat NGS™ (NGS) test, our 72-hour blood-based NGS test, in November 2021 to a select group of physicians, with broad US launch in the first quarter 2022.
Prior to using the Bio-Rad SARS-CoV-2 tests as part of our testing program, we performed feasibility, verification, and validation studies, including developing software for process automation, sample accessioning, data management and reporting, all required to demonstrate the test operated as claimed by the manufacturer and as required by our certifying regulatory agencies for high complexity laboratory testing. We secured independent reference specimens run with EUA tests to validate these tests as fit for diagnostic use in our laboratories. Post-launch development support for these tests have included improvements in on-boarding new personnel, logistics of sample collection, sample receipt and data reporting, all required to support our testing program. Additional releases of the laboratory data management software are ongoing and planned for the foreseeable future.
Beginning in the quarter ended June 30, 2021, we began partnering with GenScript Biotech Corporation to commercialize the blood-based cPass SARS-CoV-2 Neutralizing Antibody testing as a service. The test is the first surrogate neutralizing antibody test with FDA EUA and uses ELISA technology to qualitatively detect circulating neutralizing antibodies to the RBD in the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 that are produced in response to vaccination or previous SARS-CoV-2 infection.
These tests under the Biodesix WorkSafe testing program are utilized by healthcare providers, including hospitals and nursing homes, and are also offered to businesses and educational systems to assist in their back-to-work or back-to-school strategies. We have announced multiple partnerships for COVID-19 testing, and maintain an agreement with the State of Colorado to be one of the diagnostic companies to support widespread COVID-19 testing for the State. Additionally, we have overseen and managed onsite testing and validating testing for the Big Ten Conference athletic competitions through the term of our contract which expired on June 30, 2021.
In addition to the eight diagnostic tests currently on the market, we perform over 30 assays for research use as part of our laboratory services that have been used by over 50 biopharmaceutical companies and academic partners. All of our diagnostic testing is performed at one of our two accredited, high-complexity clinical laboratories in Boulder, Colorado and De Soto, Kansas.
Since our inception, we have performed over 500,000 tests and continue to generate a large and growing body of clinical evidence consisting of over 300 clinical and scientific peer-reviewed publications, presentations, and abstracts. Through ongoing study of each of our tests, we continue to grow our depth of understanding of disease biology and the broad utility of each of our tests. We believe we are poised for rapid growth by leveraging our scientific development and laboratory operations expertise along with our commercial infrastructure which includes sales, marketing, reimbursement, and regulatory affairs.
In the United States, we market our tests to clinical customers through our targeted sales organization, which includes sales representatives that are engaged in sales efforts and promotional activities primarily to pulmonologists, oncologists, cancer centers and nodule clinics. We market our tests and services to biopharmaceutical companies globally through our targeted business development team, which promotes the broad utility of our tests and testing capabilities throughout drug development and commercialization which is of value to pharmaceutical companies and their drug-development process.
We have funded our operations to date principally from net proceeds from the sales of our common stock through both an IPO and issuances from our Form S-3 shelf, the sale of convertible preferred stock, revenue from diagnostic testing and services, and the incurrence of indebtedness. We had cash and cash equivalents of $32.7 million and $62.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe there are several important factors that have impacted our operating performance and results of operations, including:
•Testing volume and customer mix. Our revenues and costs are affected by the volume of testing and mix of customers from period to period. We evaluate both the volume of our commercial tests, or the number of tests that we perform for patients on behalf of clinicians, as well as tests for biopharmaceutical companies. Our performance depends on our ability to retain and broaden adoption with existing customers, as well as attract new customers. We believe that the test volume we receive from clinicians and biopharmaceutical companies are indicators of growth in each of these customer verticals. Customer mix for our tests has the potential to significantly impact our results of operations, as the average selling price for biopharmaceutical
sample testing is currently significantly greater than our average selling price for clinical tests since we are not a contracted provider for, or our tests are not covered by all clinical patients’ insurance. We evaluate our average selling price for tests that are covered by Medicare, Medicare Advantage and commercial payers to understand the trends in reimbursement and apply those trends to our revenue recognition policies.
•Reimbursement for clinical diagnostic testing. Our revenue depends on achieving broad coverage and reimbursement for our tests from third-party payers, including both commercial and government payers. Payment from third-party payers differs depending on whether we have entered into a contract with the payers as a “participating provider” or do not have a contract and are considered a “non-participating provider.” Payers will often reimburse non-participating providers, if at all, at a lower rate than participating providers.
Historically, we have experienced situations where commercial payers proactively reduced the amounts they were willing to reimburse for our tests, and in other situations, commercial payers have determined that the amounts they previously paid were too high and have sought to recover those perceived excess payments by deducting such amounts from payments otherwise being made. When we contract to serve as a participating provider, reimbursements are made pursuant to a negotiated fee schedule and are limited to only covered indications. Becoming a participating provider generally results in higher reimbursement for covered indications and lack of reimbursement for non-covered indications. As a result, the impact of becoming a participating provider with a specific payer will vary. If we are not able to obtain or maintain coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party payers, we may not be able to effectively increase our testing volume and revenue as expected. Additionally, retrospective reimbursement adjustments can negatively impact our revenue and cause our financial results to fluctuate.
•Investment in clinical studies and product innovation to support growth. A significant aspect of our business is our investment in research and development, including the development of new products and our investments in clinical utility studies. We have invested heavily in clinical studies for our on market and pipeline products. Our studies focus primarily on the clinical utility of our tests including the ongoing INSIGHT study which seeks to enroll up to 5,000 patients to continue our clinical understanding of the predictive and prognostic value of the VeriStrat test. The ALTITUDE study, launched during the fourth quarter 2020, seeks to further demonstrate the efficacy of the Nodify XL2 and Nodify CDT tests. A secondary focus of our studies is understanding the economic impact of our tests in assisting with decisions related to patient management and the potential impact of our tests in reducing overall healthcare costs.
Our clinical research has resulted in approximately 90 peer-reviewed publications for our tests. In addition to clinical studies, we are collaborating with investigators from multiple academic cancer centers. We believe these studies are critical to gaining physician adoption and driving favorable coverage decisions by payers and expect our investments in research and development to increase. Further we also expect to increase our research and development expenses to fund further innovation and develop new clinically relevant tests.
•Ability to attract new biopharmaceutical customers and maintain and expand relationships with existing customers. Our business development team promotes the broad utility of our products for biopharmaceutical companies in the United States and internationally. Our revenue, business opportunities and growth depend in part on our ability to attract new biopharmaceutical customers and to maintain and expand relationships with existing biopharmaceutical customers. We expect to increase our sales and marketing expenses in furtherance of this as we continue to develop these relationships, we expect to support a growing number of investigations and clinical trials. If our relationships expand, we believe we may have opportunities to offer our platform for companion diagnostic development, novel target discovery and validation efforts, and to grow into other commercial opportunities. For example, we believe our multi-omic data including genomic and proteomic data, in combination with clinical outcomes or claims data, has revenue-generating potential, including for novel target identification and companion diagnostic discovery and development.
•Motivating and expanding our field sales force and customer support team. Our field sales force is the primary point of contact in the clinical setting. These representatives of the company must cover expansive geographic regions which limits their time for interaction and education of our products in the clinical setting. We plan to invest heavily in the field sales force to increase the total number of sales representatives and thereby reduce the geographic footprint each representative must cover. This investment will allow the larger sales force to maximize their education and selling efforts and achieve greater returns. Additionally, we plan to invest in the Boulder-based marketing and customer support teams to continue to provide the field team with the resources to be successful in the field.
While each of these areas present significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges that we must address. See Part II, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for more information.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted, and we expect will continue to disrupt, our lung diagnostic testing operations. To protect the health and well-being of our workforce, partners, vendors and customers, we provide voluntary COVID-19 testing for employees
working on-site, implemented social distance and building entry policies at work, restricted travel and facility visits, and followed the States of Colorado and Kansas’ public health orders and the guidance from the CDC. Employees who can perform their duties remotely are asked to work from home and those on site are asked to follow our social distance guidelines. Our sales, marketing and business development efforts have also been constrained by our operational response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to continue to adjust our operational norms to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the coming months, including complying with government directives and guidelines as they are modified and supplemented.
On September 9, 2021, President Biden signed two new Executive Orders that would require vaccinations for all federal workers and contractors. In addition, it was also announced that the Department of Labor’s Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the CMS would each be releasing emergency rules that would respectively require (i) employers with 100 or more employees and (ii) workers in health care setting that receive Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement to implement vaccination and testing protocols. In January 2022, the United States Supreme Court blocked the Biden administration from enforcing its sweeping vaccine-or-test requirements for large private companies, but allowed a vaccine mandate to stand for medical facilities that take Medicare or Medicaid payments. We are currently a party to several federal contracts and in order to remain compliant with President Biden’s Executive Orders, all Biodesix teammates were required to have received an effective dose of the COVID-19 vaccine no later than January 4, 2022. Exemptions were requested for qualifying medical reasons or sincerely held religious belief, subject to review and approval.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the surge associated with the Delta and Omicron variants have negatively affected, and we expect will continue to negatively affect, our lung diagnostic testing-related revenue and our clinical studies. For example, cancer patients may have more limited access to hospitals, healthcare providers and medical resources as they take steps to control the spread of COVID-19. Our biopharmaceutical customers are facing challenges in recruiting patients and in conducting clinical trials to advance their pipelines, for which our tests could be utilized. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in the latter half of March 2020, we saw a decline in business with existing and new biopharmaceutical customers. We began to see recovery during the fourth quarter 2020 as our delivered tests exceeded first quarter 2020 delivered tests and we expect to continue to see the recovery extending into 2022; however, the rate of growth experienced since we began to see recovery is below our expectations and has been impacted by ongoing surges, such as the surge in the Delta and Omicron variants, which have negatively impacted patients willingness or ability to gain access to healthcare providers and medical resources. Further, our clinical studies, such as our ongoing INSIGHT and ALTITUDE studies, as well as our arrangements including contracted clinical studies with our biopharmaceutical customers, are expected to take longer to complete than what we expected before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our biopharmaceutical services revenue grew by approximately 20% during 2021 as compared to 2020; however, we are continuing to experience delays in clinical trials from across the country and world due to COVID-19 restrictions. We expect further improvement in our biopharmaceutical activities during 2022 as compared to 2021.
Conversely, we experienced a significant increase in revenues related to an increase in the demand for our Biodesix WorkSafe testing program, our COVID-19 testing program, since the onset of the pandemic. COVID-19 diagnostic services contributed approximately $30.2 million and $28.3 million during fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. The first quarter 2021 was our high-water mark for COVID-19 testing revenue. We experienced a steady decline in subsequent quarters as immunizations in the U.S. accelerated. We do not anticipate the need for COVID testing to be commensurate with the peak demand experienced during the first quarter 2021 and instead expect the demand to moderate as new variants and infection occur. The reduction in demand for COVID-19 diagnostic testing will be a key indicator of continued recovery and is taken as a positive sign for both our Lung Diagnostic and Biopharmaceutical Services as we head into 2022. There is no assurance that our COVID-19 testing program will continue to be accepted by the market or that other diagnostic tests will become more accepted, produce quicker results or are more accurate. Further, the longevity and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain. If the pandemic were to dissipate, whether due to a significant decrease in new infections, due to acquiring herd immunity based on previous natural infection, and the availability and rapid distribution of vaccines, the evolution of variant strains that impact diagnostic test performance, or otherwise, the need for COVID-19 testing could decrease significantly and this could have an adverse effect on our results of operations and profitability. As a result, the increase in revenue due to any increase in demand for these diagnostic tests may not be indicative of our future revenue. See Part II., Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for a description of how the COVID-19 pandemic may adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2021 Financial and Operational Highlights
The Company generated record revenue in fiscal year 2021 of $54.5 million, representing an increase of 20% as compared to fiscal year 2020. The following were significant developments affecting our business, capital structure and liquidity during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 unless otherwise noted:
•Total revenue of $7.2 million and $54.5 million for the fourth quarter and fiscal year 2021, respectively, with continued lung diagnostic year over year growth despite COVID-19 variant surges;
•Core lung diagnostic revenue of $5.4 million and $18.7 million for the fourth quarter and fiscal year 2021, respectively, an increase of 48% and 49%. Nodify nodule management tests and sales force expansion continue to drive lung diagnostic growth;
•Biopharmaceutical Services revenue of $1.4 million and $5.6 million for the fourth quarter and fiscal year 2021, respectively, a decrease of 29% and increase 20%;
•COVID-19 testing revenue of $0.4 million and $30.2 million for the fourth quarter and fiscal year 2021, respectively, a decrease of 98% and increase 7%. The decline over the fourth quarter of 2020 is commensurate with the shift away from lab-based testing and towards point-of-care and at-home rapid antigen testing during much of the back half of 2021;
•Fourth quarter 2021 gross margin of $4.7 million or 65% as a percentage of revenue as compared to 46% primarily driven by the mix shift of sales to higher-margin core lung diagnostics and away from lower-margin COVID-19 testing;
•Operating expenses (excluding direct costs and expenses) of $16.4 million and $64.9 million for the fourth quarter and fiscal year 2021, an increase of 9% and 40% as the Company doubled the size of the lung focused direct and dedicated sales force in 2021;
•Net loss of $13.3 million and $43.2 million for the fourth quarter and fiscal year 2021, respectively, an increase of 193% and 38%;
•Cash and cash equivalents of $32.7 million, inclusive of a fourth quarter 2021 equity capital issuance of $15.7 million in net proceeds and the partial prepayment of $20 million of the 2021 Term Loan.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
We derive our revenue from two primary sources: (i) providing diagnostic testing in the clinical setting (Diagnostic Tests); and (ii) providing biopharmaceutical companies with services that include diagnostic research, clinical research, clinical trial testing, development and testing services generally provided outside the clinical setting and governed by individual contracts with third parties as well as development and commercialization of companion diagnostics (Services).
Diagnostic Tests
Diagnostic test revenue is generated from delivery of results from our diagnostic tests. In the United States, we performed tests as both an in-network and out-of-network service provider depending on the test performed and the contracted status of the insurer. We provide diagnostic tests in two primary categories: (i) core lung diagnostics testing and (ii) COVID-19 testing.
We consider diagnostic testing to be completed upon the delivery of test results to our customer, either the prescribing physician or third-party to which we contracted for services to be performed, which is considered the performance obligation. The fees for such services are billed either to a third party such as Medicare, medical facilities, commercial insurance payers, or to the patient. We determine the transaction price related to our contracts by considering the nature of the payer, the historical amount of time until payment by a payer and historical price concessions granted to groups of customers.
Services
Services revenue is generated from the delivery of our on-market tests, pipeline tests, custom diagnostic testing, and other scientific services for a purpose as defined by any individual customer. At times we collaborate with large biopharmaceutical companies in an attempt to discover biomarkers that would be helpful in their drug development or marketing. The performance obligations and related revenue for these sales is defined by a written agreement between us and our customer. These services are generally completed upon the delivery of testing results, or other contractually defined milestone(s), to the customer, which is considered the performance obligation. Customers for these services are typically large pharmaceutical companies where collectability is reasonably assured and therefore revenue is accrued upon completion of the performance obligations. Revenue derived from services is often unpredictable and can cause dramatic swings in our overall net revenue line from quarter to quarter.
Operating Expenses
Direct costs and expenses
Cost of diagnostic testing generally consists of cost of materials, direct labor, including bonus, employee benefits, equipment and infrastructure expenses associated with acquiring and processing test samples, including sample accessioning, test performance, quality control analyses, charges to collect and transport samples; curation of test results for physicians; and in some cases, license or royalty fees due to third parties. Costs associated with performing our tests are recorded as the tests are processed regardless of whether revenue was recognized with respect to the tests. Infrastructure expenses include depreciation of laboratory equipment, rent costs, amortization of leasehold improvements and information technology costs. Royalties for licensed technology are calculated as a percentage of revenues generated using the associated technology and recorded as expense at the time the related revenue is recognized. One-time royalty payments related to signing of license agreements or other milestones, such as issuance of new patents, are amortized to expense over the expected useful life of the patents. While we do not believe the technologies underlying these licenses are necessary to permit us to provide our tests, we do believe these technologies are potentially valuable and of possible strategic importance to us or our
competitors. Under these license agreements, we are obligated to pay aggregate royalties ranging from 1% to 8% of sales in which the patents or know-how are used in the product or service sold, sometimes subject to minimum annual royalties or fees in certain agreements.
We expect the aggregate cost of diagnostic testing to increase in line with the increase in the number of tests we perform, but the cost per test to decrease modestly over time due to the efficiencies we may gain as test volume increases, and from automation and other cost reductions. Cost of services includes costs incurred for the performance of development services requested by our customers. Costs of development services will vary depending on the nature, timing and scope of customer projects.
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred to develop technology and include salaries and benefits, reagents and supplies used in research and development laboratory work, infrastructure expenses, including allocated facility occupancy and information technology costs, contract services, clinical studies, other outside costs and costs to develop our technology capabilities. Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses and consist primarily of external and internal costs incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates.
External expenses include: (i) payments to third parties in connection with the clinical development of our product candidates, including contract research organizations and consultants; (ii) the cost of manufacturing products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, including payments to contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) and consultants; (iii) scientific development services, consulting research fees and for sponsored research arrangements with third parties; (iv) laboratory supplies; and (v) allocated facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct or allocated expenses for IT, rent and maintenance of facilities. External expenses are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our service providers or our estimate of the level of service that has been performed at each reporting date. We track external costs by the stage of program, clinical or preclinical.
Internal expenses include employee-related costs, including salaries and related benefits for employees engaged in research and development functions. We do not track internal costs by product candidate because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are deferred and recognized as expense in the period in which the related goods are received or services are rendered. Costs to develop our technology capabilities are recorded as research and development.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase as we continue to innovate and develop additional products and expand our data management resources. As our services revenue grows, an increasing portion of research and development dollars are expected to be allocated to cost of goods for biopharmaceutical service contracts. This expense, though expected to increase in dollars, is expected to decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term, though it may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenues from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Sales, marketing, general and administrative
Our sales and marketing expenses are expensed as incurred and include costs associated with our sales organization, including our direct sales force and sales management, client services, marketing and reimbursement, as well as business development personnel who are focused on our biopharmaceutical customers. These expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, bonuses, employee benefits, and travel, as well as marketing and educational activities and allocated overhead expenses. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in dollars as we expand our sales force, increase our presence within the United States, and increase our marketing activities to drive further awareness and adoption of our tests and our future products. These expenses, though expected to increase in dollars, are expected to decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term, though they may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenues from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Our general and administrative expenses include costs for our executive, accounting, finance, legal and human resources functions. These expenses consist principally of salaries, bonuses, employee benefits, and travel, as well as professional services fees such as consulting, audit, tax and legal fees, and general corporate costs and allocated overhead expenses. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in dollars, primarily due to increased headcount and costs associated with operating as a public company, including expenses related to legal, accounting, regulatory, maintaining compliance with exchange listing and requirements of the SEC, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations. These expenses, though expected to increase in dollars, are expected to decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term, though they may fluctuate as a percentage from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
In connection with the purchase transaction of Indi, we recorded contingent consideration pertaining to the amounts potentially payable to Indi shareholder pursuant to the terms of the asset purchase agreement. The fair value of contingent consideration was assessed at each balance sheet date and changes, if any, to the fair value are recognized as operating expenses within the statement of operations.
The Company met the gross margin target of $2.0 million for three consecutive months during the three months ended June 30, 2021. Subsequent changes to the contingent consideration following the achievement of the gross margin target are recorded as ‘Interest expense’ in the statements of operations resulting from the passage of time and fixed payment schedule. The significant unobservable inputs used in the measurement of fair value included the probability of successful achievement of the specified product gross margin targets, the period in which the targets were expected to be achieved, and discount rates which ranged from 11% to 13.5%. As a result of the achievement of the gross margin target, the only significant unobservable input used in the measurement of fair value includes the discount rate since all other inputs became fixed and determinable.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest Expense and Interest Income
Interest expense consists of cash and non-cash interest from our 2021 Term Loan, the 2018 Notes, Paycheck Protection Program loan, convertible debt and changes in the value of our contingent consideration associated with the passage of time subsequent to the achievement of the contingency in the second quarter 2021. Our convertible debt, along with the related accrued interest, was automatically converted to 1,848,280 shares of our common stock upon completion of our IPO in October 2020. Interest income, which is included in ‘Other income, net’ in the statements of operations consists of income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations for the periods presented (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenues
We generate revenue from our diagnostic tests and services that we provide. Our revenues for the periods indicated were as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
Total revenue increased $8.9 million or 20% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Diagnostic test revenue increased $8.0 million or 20% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary driver of the increase in revenue for diagnostic testing was attributable to the success in our targeted strategy of growth in our core lung diagnostic testing. Lung diagnostic revenue grew by $6.1 million or 49% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 driven primarily from an increase in Nodify XL2 and Nodify CDT tests delivered. We began to see recovery during the fourth quarter 2020 in lung diagnostic testing as our delivered tests exceeded first quarter 2020 delivered tests as healthcare practitioners, including pulmonologists, increasingly returned to pre-pandemic related care. The increase in Diagnostic test revenue was also attributable to the expansion of the sales organization during fiscal year 2021. However, the Company’s sales efforts continued to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the surge associated with the Delta and Omicron variants which have
negatively affected, and we expect may continue to negatively affect, the growth rate of our lung diagnostic testing-related revenue and our clinical studies.
In addition to lung diagnostic testing revenue, our COVID-19 testing revenue increased by $1.9 million, or 7% from $28.3 million in fiscal year 2020 to $30.2 million in 2021 due primarily to the delivery of our COVID-19 tests that were delivered in the first half of 2021. The first quarter 2021 was our peak for COVID-19 testing revenue but we have experienced a substantial decline in COVID-19 testing revenue subsequently as a result of the expiration of our contract with the Big Ten during the second quarter 2021 and as immunizations in the U.S. accelerated. The longevity and extent of COVID-19 revenue is uncertain and may not be indicative of our future revenue and we expect it to vary based on new variants and rates of infection.
Services revenue increased $0.9 million or 20% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to the recovery in testing volumes from clinical studies and services.
Operating Expenses
Direct costs and expenses
Direct costs and expenses related to revenue increased $8.5 million or 39% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in direct costs and expenses is primarily driven by the increase in lung diagnostic tests delivered during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 and an increase in cost per COVID-19 test.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $2.0 million or 18% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost was due primarily to increased employee compensation and benefits costs associated with non-cash stock-based compensation as a result of the transition from a private to a public company and increased headcount of our research and development personnel, partially offset by decreased spending on clinical trials.
The following table summarizes our external and internal costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages):
Sales, Marketing, General and Administrative
Sales, marketing, general and administrative expenses increased $15.7 million or 45% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by increases in employee compensation and benefits associated with expansion of the Company’s workforce and increased non-cash share-based compensation expense. This increase is also the result of increases in non-employee costs associated with legal and other fees as a result of the transition from a private to a public company.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration increased $0.8 million or 98% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is a result of the change in fair value to reflect the passage of time, changes in discount rate, as well as estimates regarding the period in which targets that trigger the payment of contingent consideration will be achieved and subsequently paid. The gross margin target was met during the three months ended June 30, 2021. The net change to contingent consideration through the date the gross margin target was met is recorded as operating expenses in the statements of operations. Subsequent changes to the contingent consideration following the achievement of the gross margin target are recorded as ‘Interest expense’ in the statements of operations resulting from the passage of time and fixed payment schedule.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $3.1 million or 41% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decline was due to a decrease of interest expense related to convertible notes, which were converted to common stock upon the completion of our IPO in October 2020, and a decrease resulting from the refinancing of our term loan, reducing near-term interest costs. Partially offsetting this decline is the increase to contingent consideration recorded as ‘Interest expense’ resulting from the passage of time and fixed payment schedule during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $2.2 million.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a charge for the change in estimated fair value of our warrant liability related to warrants issued in connection with our Series G preferred stock of $1.3 million. Effective with the closing of our initial public offering in October 2020, the warrants to purchase Series G preferred stock were automatically converted to warrants to acquire common stock and the carrying value of the warrants of $1.6 million were reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
Gain on Debt Extinguishment, net
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a $2.3 million net gain on debt extinguishment. The Company recorded a gain on debt extinguishment of $3.1 million related to the legal release and forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program Loan in full. The gain was partially offset by losses on debt extinguishment of $0.7 million and $0.1 million resulting from the repayment and termination of our 2018 secured promissory note with Innovatus and the write-off of debt issuance costs associated with a $20 million prepayment of our 2021 Term Loan, respectively.
Other (expense) income, net
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily attributable to a loss on disposal of property and equipment. Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to sublease income from two subleases that expired in the second and third quarter of 2020 and a gain on disposal of property and equipment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We are an emerging growth company and, as such, have yet to generate positive cash flows from operations. We have funded our operating activities primarily through financing activities, which include both debt and equity offerings. In October 2020, we completed an IPO, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $63.8 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions.
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19). As a result of the pandemic, the Company diversified its diagnostic testing beyond lung diagnostic testing to include the critical service of COVID-19 diagnostic testing. Beginning in the third quarter 2020, the Company’s COVID-19 testing services began to experience rapid growth with a peak in the first quarter 2021; however, subsequent to this peak, we have experienced a rapid decline in COVID-19 testing revenue primarily as a result of a few significant contracts that have expired as well as the ongoing increase in COVID-19 vaccination rates across the U.S. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic negatively affected, and we expect may continue to negatively affect, our lung diagnostic testing-related revenue and our clinical studies. We began to see recovery beginning in the fourth quarter 2020 as our core lung diagnostics delivered tests exceeded first quarter 2020 delivered tests and have experienced continued recovery during 2021 as lung diagnostic revenue grew 49% during 2021 as compared to 2020. However, given the continuation of the pandemic through COVID-19 variants, including the associated hospitalization surges and the impact on the medical ecosystem, which include clinical studies and pulmonary practices, the demand for our lung diagnostic testing and biopharmaceutical services has not recovered in line with our expectation from the time of our IPO. While the full outcome of the COVID-19 pandemic is unknown, it continues to negatively impact our ability to grow and scale our business in line with our expectations and disclosures at the time of our IPO. As a result, the items identified above have had an adverse effect on our revenue, results of operations and cash flows.
In March 2021, we completed the closing of our 2021 Term Loan for a principal amount of $30 million and extinguished our prior 2018 term loan for $25.9 million. The 2021 Term Loan contains customary affirmative covenants, including covenants regarding compliance with applicable laws and regulation, payment of taxes, insurance coverage, notice of certain events, and reporting requirements. Further, the 2021 Term Loan contains customary negative covenants limiting the ability to, among other things, incur future debt, transfer assets except for the ordinary course of business, make acquisitions, make certain restricted payments, and sell assets, subject to certain exceptions. The 2021 Term Loan requires the Company to comply with a minimum liquidity ratio covenant (as defined in the 2021 Term Loan) of not less than 0.95 to 1.00, and has a trailing six-month rolling revenue requirement of not less than 70% of the Company’s projected revenue performed at the end each reporting period.
During the second quarter 2021, the Company determined that it would apply for forgiveness under the SBA’s Loan Forgiveness program, a change from its previous intent to repay. Subsequently, in July 2021 the Company applied for loan forgiveness and on August 17, 2021, the Company received legal release and formal notification that the PPP Loan was forgiven in full. As of and for the three
months ended September 30, 2021, the Company reduced the ‘Current portion of notes payable’ and recorded a gain on extinguishment in the statements of operations for the $3.1 million forgiven.
On September 30, 2021, we entered into the Consent and First Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement (the 2021 Term Loan Amendment) to, among other things, amend our 2021 Term Loan to eliminate the revenue covenant for the period ended September 30, 2021 and modify the revenue covenant threshold for the three month period ended December 31, 2021. In addition, we agreed to establish a restricted cash collateral account for $15 million for the benefit of our lender if the balance of our cash and cash equivalents declines below $40 million.
On December 30, 2021, the Company raised approximately $16.3 million in gross proceeds from the sale of 3,756,994 common shares at a public offering price of $4.35 per share in an at-the-market offering. The Company received net proceeds of $15.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by the Company.
On December 31, 2021, we entered into the Consent and Second Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement (Second Amendment) to, among other things, amend our 2021 Term Loan and First Amendment to obtain consent for the $4.6 million January 2022 milestone payment under the Indi APA, repay $20 million in outstanding principal on December 31, 2021, waive the $600,000 prepayment fee on the $20 million Term Loan repayment, and waive the minimum revenue covenant as of December 31, 2021 and modify the minimum revenue requirement to not less 75% for the three months ended March 31, 2022 and not less than 75% on a trailing six month rolling basis for each quarter thereafter of the Company’s projected revenue performed at the end of each reporting period. The Lender agreed to apply the full amount of funds previously established within the restricted cash collateral account to partially prepay the $20 million in outstanding principal, thereby eliminating the restricted cash collateral account. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all restrictive and financial covenants associated with its borrowings.
As of December 31, 2021, we maintained cash and cash equivalents of $32.7 million and we have $10 million in principal balance remaining on our 2021 Term Loan. We have incurred significant losses since inception and, as a result, we have funded our operations to date primarily through the sale of common stock in our IPO in October 2020, the issuance of notes payable, and from our two primary revenue sources: (i) diagnostic testing, which include lung diagnostic testing and COVID-19 testing, and (ii) providing biopharmaceutical companies with development and testing services. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update 2014-15 (ASC Topic 205-40), Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern: Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern, the Company is required to evaluate whether there is substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern each reporting period, including interim periods. In evaluating the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, management projected its cash flow sources and needs and evaluated the conditions and events that could raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that these financial statements were issued. Management considered the Company’s current projections of future cash flows, current financial condition, sources of liquidity and debt obligations for at least one year from the date of issuance of this Form 10-K in considering whether it has the ability to meet its obligations.
Our ability to meet our obligations as they come due may be impacted by our ability to remain compliant with financial covenants in our 2021 Term Loan or to obtain waivers or amendments that impact the related covenants. Due to the continued uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, significant risks remain with respect to our ability to meet these thresholds and any material adverse effect on our revenues, income and expenses could impact our ability to maintain compliance with these covenants.
Based on our current operating plan, unless we raise additional capital (debt or equity) or obtain waiver from complying with such financial covenants, we expect that we will be unable to maintain our financial covenants under our 2021 Term Loan during the next twelve months, which could result in an Event of Default, as defined, causing an acceleration of the outstanding balance. We have taken steps to improve our liquidity through and the actions noted above and have also undertaken several proactive measures to mitigate the financial and operational impacts of COVID-19 through the reduction of planned capital expenditures and certain operating expenses but we do not expect that these actions alone will be sufficient to maintain our financial covenants. In addition, we have entered into negotiations with certain creditors to modify existing terms of arrangements to delay near term cash requirements and extend the period of payments; however, those negotiations are not final at this time and may not result in final agreement. We plan to raise additional funding through the issuance of equity or debt securities; however, we have not secured such funding at the time of this filing and any such financing activities are subject to market conditions. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. There can be no assurance that additional capital will be available to us or, if available, will be available in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us or on a timely basis nor can there be any assurance that the Company will be a beneficiary of the COVID-19 Action Plan. If adequate capital resources are not available on a timely basis, we intend to consider limiting our operations substantially. This limitation of operations could include a hiring freeze, reductions in our workforce, reduction in cash compensation, deferring capital expenditures, and reducing other operating costs.
The Company’s revenues, results of operations and cash flows have been materially adversely impacted by the items noted above. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for the foreseeable future and to incur operating losses in the near term while we make
investments to support our anticipated growth. Our current operating plan, which is in part determined based on our most recent historical actual results and trends, along with the items noted above, raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Our audited financial statements have been prepared assuming we will continue as a going concern and do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
The following summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Our cash flows resulted in a net decrease in cash of $29.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net increase in cash of $56.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities increased by approximately $6.9 million, primarily due to a year-over-year increase in net loss of $11.8 million and decrease in non-cash adjustments to net loss of $4.5 million driven primarily by a decrease in amortization of convertible notes debt discount in 2020 of $4.4 million and an increase in net gain on debt extinguishment in 2021 of $2.3 million. This is partially offset by an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $1.2 million, increase in contingent consideration of $0.8 million, and increase in other non-cash items of $0.2 million. In addition, the Company experienced favorable changes in net working capital of $9.4 million primarily as a result of increased cash collections from customers, partially offset by increased payments to vendors.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $2.5 million, a decrease of $0.4 million compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to payments in 2020 to acquire Oncimmune assets that are not present in 2021. This is partially offset by an increase in purchases of property and equipment during 2021 in support of our operations.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $1.3 million, a decrease of $79.9 million compared to the same period in 2020. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily resulted from $15.7 million net proceeds from our at-the-money public offering, net proceeds from our 2021 Term Loan of $29.9 million, and proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the ESPP and exercise of stock options of approximately $1.0 million, primarily offset by the repayment of $25.3 million from our 2018 Term Loan and a $20 million prepayment on our 2021 Term Loan. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from $72.0 million gross proceeds from our initial public offering, $13.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable, $1.3 million proceeds from stock option exercises, and $3.1 from proceeds from our paycheck protection program loan, offset by equity financing and other costs associated with our initial public offering of $8.3 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our non-cancelable contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Royalty payments that we may owe are not included as the amount and timing of such payments is uncertain.
(2)We are obligated under non-cancellable operating leases for all of our facilities. Lease terms for our facilities range from less than one to three years and generally require us to pay real estate taxes, certain insurance and operating costs.
(3)Includes the 2021 Term Loan payments of principal, interest and final payment fee of $2.7 million payment due upon loan maturity.
(4)The gross margin target associated with the purchase transaction of Indi was achieved in the quarter ending June 30, 2021, giving rise to the previously disclosed contingent obligations of $37.0 million in the aggregate payable through the issuance of Company’s shares of common stock subject to a fixed price put option. The Company entered into an amendment in August 2021 to the original agreement in which all parties agreed to forgo the issuance of shares of common stock of the Company that would otherwise be issued to it, and the Company will instead make six quarterly installment payments of $4.6 million beginning in January 2022 and a final payment of approximately $9.3 million in July 2023 for a total of $37.0 million. The aggregate amount of payments owed by the Company under this
amendment is the same as if Indi had exercised the put right or the Company had exercised the call right provided for in the original agreement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
In accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Certain of these estimates significantly influence the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments. Our critical accounting policies primarily relate to our fair value estimates, and are described in greater detail in Note 2 to our financial statements in Part 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for our goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for our arrangements with our customers, we perform a five-step process, which includes: (i) identifying the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identifying the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determining the transaction price; (iv) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognizing revenue when (or as) we satisfy our performance obligations.
Diagnostic test revenues
Diagnostic test revenues are recognized upon completion of our performance obligation to the deliver test results to our customer, either the prescribing physician or third-party to which we contracted for services to be performed. We consider diagnostic testing to be completed upon the delivery of test results to our customer which is considered the performance obligation. The fees for such services are billed either to a third party such as Medicare, medical facilities, commercial insurance payers, or to the patient. We determine the transaction price related to our contracts by considering the nature of the payer, the historical amount of time until payment by a payer and historical price concessions granted to groups of customers. These estimates require significant judgment by management.
Service revenues
Service revenues are recognized upon completion of our performance obligation to deliver testing results for assay development and testing services. The performance obligations and related revenue for these sales is defined by a written agreement between us and our customer. These services are generally completed upon the delivery of testing results, or other contractually defined milestone(s), to the customer, which is considered the performance obligation. Customers for these services are typically large pharmaceutical companies where collectability is reasonably assured and therefore revenue is accrued upon completion of the performance obligations. Revenue derived from services is often unpredictable and can cause dramatic swings in our overall net revenue line from quarter to quarter.
Share-based Compensation and Grant Date Fair Value
Share-based compensation related to stock options granted to our employees, directors and non-employees is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. For our service-based awards, the fair value of each award is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards. Compensation expense for share-based awards with performance conditions is recognized based upon the probability the performance conditions will be met as defined in the grant. Restricted stock units are measured at their grant date fair value using the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant and recognized to expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of each award. We estimate forfeitures and adjust these estimates to actual forfeitures as they occur.
We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of our share-based option awards, which requires assumptions to be made related to expected term of an award, expected volatility, the risk-free rate and expected dividend yield. Following the completion of our initial public offering, our Board of Directors has determined the fair value of our common stock is based on our closing price as reported on the date of grant on the primary stock exchange on which our common stock is traded. Changes in these subjective assumptions can materially affect the estimated value of equity grants and the share-based compensation that we record in our financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (ASC Topic 842). The new guidance maintains two classifications of leases: finance leases, which replace capital leases, and operating leases. Lessees will need to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability on the balance sheet for those leases previously classified as operating leases under the old guidance. The liability will be equal to the present value of lease payments. The asset will be based on the liability, subject to adjustment, such as for direct costs. The accounting standard will be effective for the Company beginning January 1, 2022. Based on our current analysis expect the adoption to result in the recognition of approximately $1.5 million of right of use assets and associated lease liabilities, inclusive of both lease and
non-lease components, in our balance sheet and do not expect any material impact to our statement of operations or statement of cash flows. We are implementing new processes and internal controls over lease recognition, which will ultimately assist in the application of the new lease standard.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (ASC Topic 326). This ASU requires measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets. This guidance will become effective for the Company beginning January 1, 2023 with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating this guidance and assessing the overall impact on its financial statements.
Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company
We are an “emerging growth company” within the meaning of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (JOBS Act). As an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various public company reporting requirements, including the requirement that our internal control over financial reporting be audited by our independent registered public accounting firm pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act”), certain requirements related to the disclosure of executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, the requirement that we hold a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and any golden parachute payments. We may take advantage of these exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards and to adopt certain of the reduced disclosure requirements available to emerging growth companies. As a result of the accounting standards election, we will not be subject to the same implementation timing for new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, which may make comparison of our financials to those of other public companies more difficult.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (ii) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (iii) the date on which we have issued, in any three-year period, more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities; and (iv) until December 31, 2025 (the year ended December 31st following the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering.
Additionally, we are a “smaller reporting company” as defined in Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K. Smaller reporting companies may take advantage of certain reduced disclosure obligations, including, among other things, providing only two years of audited financial statements. We will remain a smaller reporting company until the last day of the fiscal year in which: (i) the market value of our common shares held by non-affiliates exceeds $250 million as of the end of that year’s second fiscal quarter, or (ii) our annual revenues exceeded $100 million during such completed fiscal year and the market value of our common shares held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the end of that year’s second fiscal quarter.