Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a medical technology company primarily focusing on telemedicine solutions that enable the detection and monitoring of cardiac disease outside a healthcare facility setting. Our aim is to deliver innovative, remote diagnostic and monitoring technologies that can be used for patients anywhere, with initial offerings for ambulatory and emergency department use. Our products require FDA clearance and have not been cleared for marketing (hereinafter “Product” or “Products”.) We believe our Products and services will benefit many stakeholders, including patients, healthcare providers, and healthcare payors. Our initial focus is providing diagnostic data to help physicians with care management of patients with cardiovascular disease. There are two major markets for our initial Products: remote patient monitoring and the hospital ED. We are developing our telehealth Product to address the rapidly growing field of remote patient monitoring. Our telehealth Product is comprised of a credit card sized ECG machine and a powerful cloud-based diagnostic software expert system. We believe that we are uniquely positioned to play a central role in remote monitoring of high-risk coronary artery disease patients, because the studies performed so far have shown that our ischemia detection system is highly accurate. Our powerful ischemia detection system is unlike other ambulatory cardiac monitors currently on the market which focus on arrhythmia detection. We are applying our platform technology to create a software tool for detecting heart attacks in the ED environment. This software tool is designed to enable emergency physicians to more accurately and quickly diagnose heart attacks than currently available. Market release of this Product will precede that of the telehealth Product.
To date, we have developed working prototypes for both our telehealth Product and our ED Product. The ED Product is currently undergoing additional engineering work that we believe will make it ready for FDA 510(k) clearance submission. Both Products have been validated in three medical studies, which were designed by Harvard Medical School faculty. Peer reviewed publications that describe the studies and results are in preparation. One peer reviewed medical publication submission is planned for the second quarter of 2022 and followed by another one later in 2022. These two publications will describe results of our two key studies: HeartBeam Ischemia Detection Study (“HIDES”) and B Score. In 2022 we plan to publish results of a study on performance of our ED Product in the real-life environment of an ED. In November 2021 we presented a technology abstract at the IEEE EMBS 2021 Conference. The abstract describes the technology foundation of our ED Product.
The custom software and hardware of our Products, we believe, are classified as Class II medical devices by the FDA running on an FDA approved Class I registered platform. Class II medical devices are those for which general controls alone are insufficient to provide reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness and there is sufficient information to establish special controls. Special controls can include performance standards, post-market surveillance, patient histories and FDA guidance documents. Premarket review and clearance by the FDA for these devices is generally accomplished through the 510(k) or 510(k) de-novo premarket notification process
HeartBeam has three issued U.S. patents (U.S.10,433,744, U.S.10,117,592 and U.S.11,071,490), and six pending U.S applications. Three of the pending applications have published, all of the remaining three pending cases are unpublished. Outside of the U.S., HeartBeam has three pending EU utility patent applications (one of which is allowed), one pending CA utility patent application, one pending CN utility patent application, one pending JP utility patent application, one pending AU application, and two pending Patent Cooperation Treaty (“PCT”) applications.
As of December 31, 2021, we had 5 employees. We intend to hire or engage additional full-time professionals, employees, and / or consultants in alignment with our growth strategy. Although the market is highly competitive for attracting and retaining highly qualified professionals in our industry, we continue our endeavor to find such candidates for our Company. Our management team and additional personnel that we may hire in the future will be primarily responsible for executing and implementing growth opportunities, making tactical decisions related to our strategy and pursuing opportunities to invest in new technologies through strategic partnerships and acquisitions.
Significant Developments during 2021 and early 2022
Initial Public Offering
On November 10, 2021, our Registration Statement relating to our IPO was declared effective by the SEC. The IPO consisted of 2,750,000 Units, with each Unit consisting of one share of Common Stock, and one Firm Warrant to purchase Common Stock at a combined public offering price of $6.00 per Unit. The Common Stock and the Firm Warrants were immediately separable and issued separately but were purchased together in the IPO. The Firm Warrants will have a per share exercise price of $6.00 and are exercisable immediately. The Warrants will expire five years from the date of issuance.
Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement dated November 10, 2021 between us and The Benchmark Company, LLC (the “Underwriter”) we granted the Underwriter a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 412,500 shares of our Common Stock and/or Firm Warrants to cover over-allotments. On November 11, 2021, the Underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in respect of 412,500 Firm Warrants.
On November 10, 2021, as a result of the completion of the IPO and as required under the terms of the 2015 Notes, we converted the entirety of the outstanding principal of $5,084,000 and interest accrued of $1,204,404 to the 2015 Notes to 1,497,216 shares of common stock at the conversion price and issued shares to the 2015 Note holders, fully satisfying our obligations.
On November 15, 2021, we consummated the IPO and issued 192,500 warrants as compensation to the Underwriter, exercisable at a per share exercise price equal to $7.50 per share. The warrants will expire five years from the date of issuance and are subject to a 180-day lock-up period.
On November 15, 2021, we received approximately $14.7 million in net proceeds from the IPO after deducting the underwriting discount and commission and other estimated offering expenses payable by the Company.
During 2021, we raised an additional $1.7 million from the issuance of our 2015 Notes.
LIVMOR Partnership
On January 31, 2022, we entered into a partnership agreement (the “Partnership Agreement”) with LIVMOR to build a Company-branded version of the LIVMOR’s Halo+ FDA cleared turnkey solution for RPM to connect physicians and patients. The Company-branded version (“HeartBeam Platform”) of LIVMOR’s cloud-based remote monitoring portal will be an FDA registered Class 1 system and fully compliant with FDA standards for cybersecurity, software engineering and human factors and includes the prerequisite infrastructure for industry-leading solutions for telehealth. The Partnership Agreement also outlines rights and responsibilities for the customization of the HeartBeam Platform by LIVMOR with senior executives of both companies supervising the project. The Company’s Partnership Agreement with LIVMOR further support’s the Company’s project schedule for the FDA submission of its first product, an easy-to-use heart attack detection software solution, in an ED setting. In addition, the Partnership Agreement provides defined statement of work for development of the Company’s product, project management supervised by senior executives of the Company and LIVMOR, and regulatory support assistance for HeartBeam Platform by LIVMOR to obtain FDA clearance. Per the Partnership Agreement, the Company and LIVMOR have the right to enter into additional agreements as needed in order to further the Company’s development of its products.
Stock Purchase Agreement
On February 18, 2022, we entered into a stock purchase agreement (“Stock Purchase Agreement”) pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell (“Private Placement”) to OpenSky Opportunities Fund Ltd. (“Purchaser”) an aggregate of 58,000 units (“Units”), with each Unit consisting of one share of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Common Stock”) and one warrant (the “Warrants”) to purchase one share of Common Stock at a combined price of $6 per Unit. The Common Stock and the Warrants were immediately separable and issued separately but were purchased together in the
Private Placement. The Units, the Common Stock and the Warrants issued pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement shall be referred to as the “Securities”. We received $348,000 in proceeds from the Private Placement. The Warrants issued with the Private Placement will have a per share exercise price of $6.00 and are exercisable immediately subject to a 180-Day lock up. The Warrants will expire five years from the date of issuance. The Stock Purchase Agreement contains customary representations and warranties of the parties.
Technology Development Agreement
On March 7, 2022 we entered into a professional services agreement (the “Triple Ring Agreement”) with Triple Ring Technologies, Inc. (“Triple Ring”), a co-development company, to assist in the design and development of our telehealth complete solution 3D vector ECG collection device for remote heart attack or MI monitoring. The Triple Ring Agreement is a five-phase expedited device development project scheduled to be completed in the fourth quarter of 2022 for a 510k submission to the FDA.
Under the terms of the Triple Ring Agreement, the joint project will include our telehealth 3D vector ECG collection device builds for design verification and validation, device packaging, and a manufacturing technology transfer to a contract manufacturer to be named later.
The agreements with LIVMOR and Triple Ring include commitments in 2022 of approximately $3.0 million, of which approximately $1.4 million have been made to date. In addition, there will be license fees on the future commercial use of the platform.
Industry Trends and Outlook
The COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic has significantly impacted the delivery of healthcare. The transformation in daily life during the pandemic required healthcare systems to adjust how they delivered care and focus on patient convenience because of the social isolation measures. This change has resulted in innovations in virtual care and telehealth and opened new market opportunities for digital health platforms. During the pandemic the adoption rate of telehealth has increased dramatically, especially in cardiology, radiology, behavioral health, and online consultation.
The US telehealth market was $63B in 2020 and is projected to grow from $90B in 2021 to $636B in 2028 at a CAGR of 32% in the 2021-2028 period. The sudden growth in CAGR is attributable to the current market’s demand and growth, returning to pre-pandemic levels once the pandemic is over.
The change in clinical practice driven by the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in governments of many countries actively developing new policies and reimbursement guidelines to promote the use of digital health platforms. In the US, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) expanded reimbursement for telehealth. These market trends shifted care delivery from the traditional healthcare settings. Online audio and video consultations with physicians are becoming the new normal, resulting in reduced patient waiting times, easy access to specialists and a cost-effective solution for healthcare systems.
The active Government initiatives for telehealth solutions and the favorable policies to encourage telehealth solutions are set to propel market growth. Telehealth helps overcome the distance barrier for patients in rural locations and enables healthcare systems to provide virtual care platforms to serve patients with limited access to quality healthcare. The combination of market conditions, the rising prevalence of chronic conditions and the growing geriatric population point to the huge potential of telehealth. However, there are technological and infrastructure barriers that are key reasons inhibiting the expansion of the market, especially in developing countries.
We believe these favorable market conditions and our current progress on developing our first ED software product and our telehealth end-to-end solution for the patient and physician provide a positive commercial opportunity for the company. While there are technological and infrastructure barriers, especially in developing countries, our initial focus is on the US market and we don’t expect these issues to exist as we enter the US market.
Results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented on our statement of operations data. The year over year comparison of results of operations is not necessarily indicative of results of operations for future periods.
Summary of Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the year ended December 31, 2020:
General and administrative expenses (“G&A”) are largely related to personnel and professional services. G&A expense increased $1.4 million or 210% when compared to the same period in 2020. The primary increases were in employee headcount related expenses increasing $0.8 million, from $0.2 million to $1.0 million, related to the transition to market rate salaries and annual bonuses to certain executives during the fourth quarter of 2021, and business development, which included public company expenses, comprising of BOD fees, investor and public relations and SEC reporting.
Research and development expenses (“R&D”) are primarily from internally developed software and our credit-card sized collection device. R&D expense increased $0.1 million or 92% when compared with the same period in 2020. Our focus on R&D consisted largely of consultants associated with the development of our telehealth system and in 2021 the initial development work on the software-only ED Product.
Interest expense increased $1.9 million or 673%, primarily due to the accretion of the 2015 Notes 30% discount of approximately $1.9 million.
Other income of $22,000 during 2021 is due to the forgiveness of loans during the first quarter of 2021 issued under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash requirements are and will continue to be, dependent upon a variety of factors. We expect to continue devoting significant capital resources to R&D and go to market strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $13.2 million in cash, an increase of $13.18 million from $0.02 million as of December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we raised approximately $14.7 million in net proceeds from our IPO and an additional $1.7 million in 2015 Notes to support our on-going business plans.
Based on our current business plan assumptions and expected cash burn rate, we believe that our existing cash is sufficient to fund operations for the next twelve months.
Our cash is as follows (in thousands):
Cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating Activities:
Net cash used by our operating activities of $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, is primarily due to our net loss of $4.4 million less $2.3 million in non-cash expenses, offset by an increase of $1.1 million of net changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used by our operating activities of $0.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, is primarily due to our net loss of $1.1 million less $0.3 million in non-cash expense and $0.2 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Financing Activities:
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $16.4 million was primarily from our IPO totaling $14.7 million net and issuance of our 2015 Notes totaling $1.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $0.6 million was primarily from the issuance of our 2015 Notes.
We received a loan and grant through the CARES Act during the year ended December 31, 2020 for a total value of approximately $22,000. Both were forgiven in the first quarter of 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.”
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or “U.S. GAAP.” The preparation of these financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, bad debts, inventories, warranties and income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and our revenue recognition. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and the impact of such differences may be material to our financial statements.
Critical accounting policies are those policies that, in management’s view, are most important in the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. The methods, estimates and judgments that we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on the results that we report in our financial statements. These critical accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates regarding matters that are inherently uncertain. Those critical accounting policies and estimates that require the most significant judgment are discussed further below. We consider our most critical accounting policies and estimates to be revenue recognition, gain on settlements, valuation of long lived assets, income taxes and valuation allowances against net deferred tax assets, derivative liabilities, stock-based compensation and accounting for business combinations-acquisition method accounting.
Stock-based compensation
The compensation cost for all stock-based awards is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, determined using a Black-Scholes option pricing model for stock options and fair value on the date of grant for non-vested restricted stock, and is recognized as an expense over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity award). Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires significant estimates and judgments, including estimating the market price volatility of our Common Stock, future employee stock option exercise behavior and requisite service periods. We account for forfeitures as they occur, stock-based compensation expense recognized in the financial statements is reduced by the awards forfeited.
A total of 1,105,938 stock options remain outstanding as of December 31, 2021, under the 2015 Plan. We expect to increase the number of employees and consultants to help execute our strategy in the medical device business and support our public company functions. Accordingly, we expect that future equity based awards will continue to be made under the 2015 Plan and future equity incentive plans to our directors, officers and other employees and consultants, as a result, to the extent relevant, we may incur non-cash, stock-based compensation expenses in future periods that may not be comparable to historical periods presented in our financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12 - Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”). ASU 2019-12 is part of the FASB’s overall simplification initiative and seeks to simplify the accounting for income taxes by updating certain guidance and removing certain exceptions. The updated guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and interim periods within those fiscal years. We adopted this guidance on January 1, 2021. The impact to the financial statements following this guidance is deemed immaterial.
In October 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-10, Codification Improvements, which updates various codification topics by clarifying or improving disclosure requirements to align with the SEC’s regulations. We adopted ASU 2020-10 as of January 1, 2021. The impact to the financial statements following this guidance is deemed immaterial.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13 “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses-Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”. This guidance replaces the current incurred loss impairment methodology with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. The guidance applies to loans, accounts receivable, trade receivables and other financial assets measured at amortized cost, loan commitments, debt securities and beneficial interests in securitized financial assets, but the effect on the Company is projected to be limited to accounts receivable. In May 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-05 “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326)” which provides transition relief for companies adopting ASU 2016-13. This guidance amends ASU 2016-13 to allow companies to elect, upon adoption of ASU 2016-13, the fair value option on financial instruments that were previously recorded at amortized cost under certain circumstances. Companies are required to make this election on an instrument by instrument basis. The guidance will be effective for the fiscal year beginning January 1, 2023, including interim periods within that year.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06 (“ASU 2020-06”) “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity.” ASU 2020-06 will simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Limiting the accounting models will result in fewer embedded conversion features being separately recognized from the host contract as compared with current GAAP. Convertible instruments that continue to be subject to separation models are (1) those with embedded conversion features that are not clearly and closely related to the host
contract, that meet the definition of a derivative, and that do not qualify for a scope exception from derivative accounting and (2) convertible debt instruments issued with substantial premiums for which the premiums are recorded as paid-in capital. ASU 2020-06 also amends the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. ASU 2020-06 will be effective January 1, 2024, for the us. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than January 1, 2021, including interim periods within that year. We have not early adopted ASU 2020-06 and are currently evaluating the effects of the adoption, but currently believe the guidance will have no impact on our accounting.