Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Outlook
The Company is affected by general economic and industrial growth, raw material availability, cost inflation, supply chain disruptions, and general industrial production. Our business has both geographic and end market diversity, which reduces the effect of any one of these factors on our overall performance. Our results are affected by our ability to pass through raw material and other cost changes to our customers, improve manufacturing productivity and adapt to volume changes of our customers. Despite global macro-economic challenges in the short-term attributed to continued rising inflation, supply chain disruptions, currency devaluation and general market softness, in part because of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, we continue to believe our underlying long-term demand fundamental in all divisions will remain strong as we focus on delivering protective solutions that enhance consumer safety and by providing advantaged products in targeted markets. For fiscal 2023, we project cash flow from operations between $1.4 to $1.5 billion and free cash flow between $800 million to $900 million. Projected fiscal 2023 free cash flow assumes $600 million of capital spending. For the definition of free cash flow and further information related to free cash flow as a non-GAAP financial measure, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Recent Dispositions
During fiscal 2022, the Company completed the sale of its rotational molding business, which was operated in the Consumer Packaging International segment for net proceeds of $111 million. A pretax gain of $8 million was recorded in fiscal 2022 within Restructuring and transaction activities on the Consolidated Statements of Income. In fiscal 2021, the rotational molding business recorded net sales of $146 million.
Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
The Company's U.S. based results for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 are based on a fifty-two and fifty-three week period, respectively. Business integration expenses consist of restructuring and impairment charges, divestiture related costs, and other business optimization costs. Tables present dollars in millions. A discussion and analysis regarding our results of operations for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 can be found on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on November 18, 2021.
Net sales: The net sales growth is primarily attributed to increased selling prices of $1,650 million due to the pass through of inflation, partially offset by a $420 million unfavorable impact from foreign currency, a 2% organic volume decline, a $131 million decrease from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2021 divestiture sales of $118 million. The volume decline is primarily attributed to supply chain disruptions, general market softness and the moderation of advantaged products related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of goods sold: The cost of goods sold increase is primarily attributed to product mix and inflation of $1,618 million, partially offset by a $352 million favorable impact from foreign currency, the 2% volume decline, extra shipping days in fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2021 divestiture cost of goods sold of $93 million.
Other operating expenses: The other operating expense decrease is primarily attributed to a $36 million impact from foreign currency, a $22 million decrease in amortization expense and fiscal 2021 divestiture other operating expenses.
Operating Income: The operating income decrease is primarily attributed to a $32 million unfavorable impact from foreign currency, a $49 million decrease from the organic volume decline, a $22 million decrease from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2021 divestiture operating income of $16 million. These decreases are partially offset by a $36 million decrease in business integration expense and a $30 million favorable impact from price cost spread and product mix.
Net sales: The net sales growth is primarily attributed to increased selling prices of $498 million due to the pass through of inflation, partially offset by a $299 million unfavorable impact from foreign currency and fiscal 2021 divestiture sales of $84 million.
Operating Income: The operating income increase is primarily attributed to a $46 million decrease in business integration activities, a $26 million favorable impact from price cost spread. These increases were partially offset by a $24 million impact from foreign currency, and fiscal 2021 divestiture operating income of $10 million.
Net sales: The net sales growth is primarily attributed to increased selling prices of $470 million due to the pass through of inflation, partially offset by a $40 million decrease from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021.
Operating Income: The operating income increase is primarily attributed to a $72 million favorable impact from price cost spread, and a $10 million decrease in depreciation and amortization, partially offset by extra shipping days in fiscal 2021 and higher business integration expense.
Net sales: The net sales growth is primarily attributed to increased selling prices of $500 million due to the pass through of inflation, partially offset by a 5% organic volume decline, a $72 million impact from foreign currency, a $44 million decrease from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2021 divestiture sales of $34 million. The volume decline is primarily attributed to general market softness, product mix and supply chain disruptions.
Operating Income: The operating income increase is primarily attributed to a $76 million favorable impact from price cost spread, partially offset by a $22 million decrease from the volume decline, fiscal 2021 divestiture operating income of $13 million and extra shipping days in fiscal 2021.
Net sales: The net sales growth is primarily attributed to increased selling prices of $180 million due to the pass through of inflation, partially offset by a 3% organic volume decline, a $49 million impact from foreign currency, and a $42 million decrease from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021. The volume decline is primarily attributed to the moderation of advantaged products related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Income: The operating income decrease is primarily attributed to a $138 million unfavorable impact from price cost spread and negative product mix, a $14 million decline from the volume decline, and extra shipping days in fiscal 2021.
The Other expense decrease is primarily attributed to foreign currency changes related to the remeasurement of non-operating intercompany balances and debt extinguishment expense in fiscal 2021.
The interest expense decrease is primarily the result of foreign currency changes and repayments on long-term borrowings and refinancing activities in fiscal 2021.
Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 was 18% and was positively impacted by 2% from a deferred rate revalue, 2% from federal and state tax credits, and 2% from lapse in uncertain tax positions. These favorable items were partially offset by other discrete items. See Note 6. Income Taxes.
The decrease in comprehensive income is primarily attributed to a $425 million unfavorable change in currency translation, partially offset by a $77 million favorable change in the fair value of interest rate hedges and a $33 million increase in net income. Currency translation losses are primarily related to non-U.S. subsidiaries with a functional currency other than the U.S. dollar whereby assets and liabilities are translated from the respective functional currency into U.S. dollars using period-end exchange rates. The change in currency translation was primarily attributed to locations utilizing the euro, British pound sterling, and Chinese renminbi as their functional currency. As part of the overall risk management, the Company uses derivative instruments to reduce exposure to changes in interest rates attributed to the Company’s floating-rate borrowings and records changes to the fair value of these instruments in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). The change in fair value of these instruments in fiscal 2022 versus fiscal 2021 is primarily attributed to a change in the forward interest curve between measurement dates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Senior Secured Credit Facility
We manage our global cash requirements considering (i) available funds among the many subsidiaries through which we conduct our business, (ii) the geographic location of our liquidity needs, and (iii) the cost to access international cash balances. We have a $1,050 million asset-based revolving line of credit that matures in May 2024. At the end of fiscal 2022, the Company had no outstanding balance on the revolving credit facility. The Company was in compliance with all covenants at the end of fiscal 2022. See Note 3. Long-Term Debt.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $17 million from fiscal 2021 primarily attributed to working capital inflation, partially offset by derivatives settlements.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $28 million from fiscal 2021 primarily attributed to the settlement of net investment hedges, partially offset by fewer proceeds for the divestiture of business compared to fiscal 2021.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $37 million from fiscal 2021 primarily attributed to lower net repayments on long-term borrowings, partially offset by fiscal 2022 repurchases of common stock.
Dividends
In November 2022, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share (See Note 12. Subsequent Events).
Share Repurchases
During fiscal 2022, the Company repurchased approximately 12.2 million shares for $709 million. The Company did not have any share repurchases in fiscal 2021 or 2020. As of October 1, 2022, authorized share repurchases of $342 million remained available to the Company under the prior Board authorization. In November 2022, the Board approved an additional $700 million in authorized share repurchases (See Note 12. Subsequent Events).
Free Cash Flow
We define "free cash flow" as cash flow from operating activities less net additions to property, plant and equipment. Based on our definition, our consolidated free cash flow is summarized as follows:
We use free cash flow as a supplemental measure of liquidity as it assists us in assessing our ability to fund growth through generation of cash. Free cash flow may be calculated differently by other companies, including other companies in our industry or peer group, limiting its usefulness. Free cash flow is not a generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP’) financial measure and should not be considered as an alternative to any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP.
Liquidity Outlook
At the end of fiscal 2022, our cash balance was $1,410 million, of which approximately 50% was located outside the U.S. We believe our existing and future U.S. based cash and cash flow from U.S. operations, together with available borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities, will be adequate to meet our short-term and long-term liquidity needs with the exception of funds needed to cover all long-term debt obligations which we intend to refinance prior to maturity. The Company has the ability to repatriate the cash located outside the U.S. to the extent not needed to meet operational and capital needs without significant restrictions. Our unremitted foreign earnings were $1.7 billion at the end of fiscal 2022. The computation of the deferred tax liability associated with unremitted earnings is not practicable.
Summarized Guarantor Financial Information
Berry Global, Inc. (“Issuer”) has notes outstanding which are fully, jointly, severally, and unconditionally guaranteed by its parent, Berry Global Group, Inc. (for purposes of this section, “Parent”) and substantially all of Issuer’s domestic subsidiaries. Separate narrative information or financial statements of the guarantor subsidiaries have not been included because they are 100% owned by Parent and the guarantor subsidiaries unconditionally guarantee such debt on a joint and several basis. A guarantee of a guarantor subsidiary of the securities will terminate upon the following customary circumstances: the sale of the capital stock of such guarantor if such sale complies with the indentures, the designation of such guarantor as an unrestricted subsidiary, the defeasance or discharge of the indenture or in the case of a restricted subsidiary that is required to guarantee after the relevant issuance date, if such guarantor no longer guarantees certain other indebtedness of the issuer. The guarantees of the guarantor subsidiaries are also limited as necessary to prevent them from constituting a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law and any guarantees guaranteeing subordinated debt are subordinated to certain other of the Company’s debts. Parent also guarantees the Issuer’s term loans and revolving credit facilities. The guarantor subsidiaries guarantee our term loans and are co-borrowers under our revolving credit facility.
Presented below is summarized financial information for the Parent, Issuer and guarantor subsidiaries on a combined basis, after intercompany transactions have been eliminated.
(a) Includes $39 million of income associated with intercompany activity with non-guarantor subsidiaries.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We disclose those accounting policies that we consider to be significant in determining the amounts to be utilized for communicating our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows in the first note to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein. Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Pensions. The accounting for our pension plans requires us to recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of the pension plans on our balance sheet. We believe that the accounting estimates related to our pension plans are critical accounting estimates because they are highly susceptible to change from period to period based on the performance of plan assets, actuarial valuations, market conditions and contracted benefit changes. See Note 1. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 7. Retirement Plans.
Deferred Taxes and Effective Tax Rates. We estimate the effective tax rate (“ETR”) and associated liabilities or assets for each of our legal entities in accordance with authoritative guidance. We utilize tax planning to minimize or defer tax liabilities to future periods. In recording ETRs and related liabilities and assets, we rely upon estimates, which are based upon our interpretation of U.S. and local tax laws as they apply to our legal entities and our overall tax structure. Audits by local tax jurisdictions, including the U.S. Government, could yield different interpretations from our own and cause the Company to owe more taxes than originally recorded. See Note 1. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 6. Income Taxes.