ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We were incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on July 29, 2021. The Company was incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
On December 17, 2021, the Company consummated the Public Offering of 34,500,000 units (including the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option) at $10.00 per unit (each, a “Unit”). Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share and one-half
of one redeemable warrant. Each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share.
The Company will have 18 months from the closing of the Public Offering (or up to 24 months from the closing of the Public Offering if the Company extends the period of time to consummate a business combination by depositing $3,450,000 ($0.10 per share) in the Trust Account for each three-month extension, or up to an aggregate of $6,900,000 ($0.20 per share) for a full six-month extension) to consummate the initial business combination.
Pursuant to the terms of our Memorandum and Articles of Association and the trust agreement entered into between us and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, in order for the time available for us to consummate our initial business combination to be extended, the initial shareholders or their affiliates or designees, upon five days’ advance notice prior to the applicable deadline, must deposit into the Trust Account, pro rata in accordance with their percentage ownership of the total number of outstanding Founder Shares, an aggregate of $3,450,000 ($0.10 per share) for one three-month extension, or up to an aggregate of $6,900,000 ($0.20 per share), for a full six-month
extension, on or prior to the date of the applicable deadline. Any such payments would be made in the form of an Extension Loan. If we complete our initial business combination, we will, at the option of our initial shareholders or their affiliates or designees, repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us or convert a portion or all of the total loan amount into warrants at a price of $1.00 per Extension Loan Warrant. If we do not complete a business combination, we will repay such loans only from funds held outside of the Trust Account. Our initial shareholders or their affiliates or designees are not obligated to fund the Trust Account to extend the time for us to complete our initial business combination. If we are unable to consummate our initial business combination within the applicable time period, we will, as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than five business days thereafter, redeem the public shares for a pro rata portion of the funds held in the Trust Account and as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 18 months after the closing of the Public Offering (or up to 24 months from the closing of the Public Offering if we extend the period of time to consummate a business combination by depositing $3,450,000 ($0.10 per share) in the Trust Account for each three-month extension, or up to an aggregate of $6,900,000 ($0.20 per share) for a full six-month extension) or during any extension period, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at aper-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in each case, to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete an initial business combination within 18 months after the closing of the Public Offering (or up to 24 months from the closing of the Public Offering if we extend the period of time to consummate a business combination by depositing $3,450,000 ($0.10 per share) in the Trust Account for each three-month extension, or up to an aggregate of $6,900,000 ($0.20 per share) for a full six-month extension).
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from July 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 was in preparation for the Public Offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We expect to generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the period from July 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $6,375,125, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $189,239 and transaction costs of $321,236, offset by a favorable change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $6,884,712 and interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $888.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $925,758 in cash and working capital of $1,214,007.
Prior to the completion of the Public Offering, we lacked the liquidity we needed to sustain operations for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of the financial statement. We have since completed the Public Offering, at which time capital in excess of the funds deposited in the Trust Account and/or used to fund offering expenses was released to the Company for general working capital purposes. Accordingly, management has sincere-evaluated the Company’s liquidity and financial condition and determined that sufficient capital exists to sustain operations one year form the date the financial statement is issued and therefore substantial doubt has been alleviated.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, 34,500,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of the Company’s balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of Class A ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable ordinary shares are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Calculation of diluted net income (loss) per share for the period from July 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 33,550,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in the calculation of diluted income per share because they are contingent on future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income per common share is the same as basic net income per common share for such periods.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for the warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40.
Such guidance provides that because the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, each warrant must be recorded as a liability. Accordingly, the Company will classify each warrant as a liability at its fair value. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date. With each such re-measurement,
the warrant liability will be adjusted to fair value, with the change in fair value recognized in the Company’s statement of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic815-40)
(“ASU2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on July 29, 2021. We adopted ASU 2020-06
on July 29, 2021 (inception).
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights Agreement
Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, dated December 14, 2021, by and among the Company, the Sponsor, Pala, Cantor, Roth and the other holders party thereto, the holders of the (i) Founder Shares, (ii) Private Placement Warrants and the Class A ordinary shares underlying such Private Placement Warrants, (iii) Private Placement Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans and (iv) Extension Loan Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Extension Loan will have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of the Company’s securities held by them. The holders of these securities are entitled to certain demand and “piggy-back” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of the Public Offering to purchase up to an additional 4,500,000 Units to cover over-allotments, if any. The underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full on December 17, 2021.
On December 17, 2021, the underwriters earned a cash underwriting discount of two percent (2.0%) of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering, or $6,900,000. Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a Marketing Fee of five percent (5.0%) of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering, or $17,250,000, upon the completion of the Company’s initial business combination.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five (5) years following the completion of the Public Offering or until we otherwise no longer qualify as an “emerging growth company.”