ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion and analysis that follows focuses on certain factors affecting our consolidated financial condition at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and our consolidated results of operations for the two years ended December 31, 2021. Our consolidated financial statements, the related notes and the discussion of our critical accounting policies appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report should be read in conjunction with this discussion and analysis.
Overview
2021 in Review
The Company ended 2021 in strong financial and operational condition. We gained significant momentum in our commercial credit originations and maintained our historical asset quality and credit discipline. We also maintained operating expense discipline notwithstanding investments in the further expansion of our commercial credit origination capabilities and necessary expenditures for health security and information security.
Financial Results of Operations
We recorded net income of $7.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and basic and diluted earnings per common share were $0.53. Net interest income declined by $2.1 million (4.6%) due to lower average loan yields and a lower average loan portfolio balance in 2021 compared to 2020. Noninterest income increased by $323,000 (6.0%) due to higher loan fee income and higher trust fee income related to our growth in commercial loans and trust assets under management. Noninterest expense increased by $2.5 million (6.5%) primarily due to $1.2 million in expense related to our expansion of commercial loan and lease origination, treasury services and trust capabilities.
Loan Portfolio
For the year ended 2021, total loans increased by $41.6 million (4.2%) to $1.044 billion. Total commercial loans and leases increased by $84.5 million (20.9%) to $489.5 million, reflecting our increasing emphasis on commercial and industrial lending. Total multi-family mortgages and nonresidential real estate loans decreased by $31.6 million (5.6%) to $529.3 million as continued elevated portfolio prepayment rates offset an 80.3% increase in originations. Total other loans decreased by $11.7 million (26.9%) due to our cessation of residential mortgage lending in 2017 and continued prepayments of existing residential mortgage loans.
Asset Quality
Our asset quality remained stable in 2021. The ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans was 0.07% and the ratio of nonperforming assets to total assets was 0.09% at December 31, 2021. Nonperforming commercial-related loans represented 0.04% of total commercial-related loans at December 31, 2021. Our allowance for loan losses decreased to 0.64% of total loans as of December 31, 2021, compared to 0.77% at December 31, 2020, primarily due to a reduction of temporary loan loss reserves established in the earlier stages of the COVID-19 global pandemic.
Deposit Portfolio
Total deposits increased by $94.9 million (6.8%) due to continued strong liquidity held by retail and commercial depositors. Core deposits represented 86.1% of total deposits, with demand deposits representing 23.0% of total deposits.
Capital Adequacy
The Company’s capital position remained strong, with a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 9.32% at December 31, 2021. Throughout 2021, the Company maintained its quarterly dividend rate at $0.10 per common share. The Company repurchased 1,541,280 common shares during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company’s book value per share increased in 2021 by 1.6% to $11.90 per share as of December 31, 2021.
Goals for 2022
We will further accelerate our growth in commercial loans and leases, as we realize the benefits of our investments in Equipment Finance and Commercial Finance capabilities that we began implementing in 2021. Though modest in terms of financial impact in 2021, the growth in commercial loan and lease originations is an encouraging sign of the potential contributions of these initiatives to growth in our earnings and loan portfolio balances.
We will continue our focus on growth in commercial deposit account relationships and related noninterest income services, particularly Treasury Services products aligned with our commercial credit originations activities. We also expect that the expansion of our Trust Department capabilities in 2021 will continue to provide growth in noninterest income, especially as we introduce our capabilities to our expanding portfolio of business customers.
We will expand our use of technology to improve the breadth and efficiency of customer service delivery, and to maintain the environment necessary for safe and efficient operations. The deployment of appropriate information technology will provide greater convenience and additional capabilities for our customers. We must continue to carefully manage information security and other risks inherent to information technology.
We expect further volatility in market interest rates, loan demand and deposit balances resulting from changes in U.S. Government and Federal Reserve Bank policies during 2022. We believe we are well prepared for increases in interest rates and changes to market liquidity conditions, but we are mindful of the unpredictable outcomes of government policy changes intended to address anomalies in inflation and labor conditions. We will maintain our focus on operating expense efficiency and asset quality to the maximum extent feasible given the expected economic environment and our 2022 Business Plan priorities.
We believe that the cumulative impact of our 2022 Business Plan activities will achieve further growth in our portfolios and in our results of operations commensurate with our long-term objectives for the Company.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
The following information is derived from the audited consolidated financial statements of the Company. For additional information, please refer to the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company and related notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
(1) Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes a $200,000 valuation reserve recovery related to the Company's Illinois NOL carryforward. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $200,000 valuation reserve related to the Company's Illinois NOL carryforward.
(2)
The net interest rate spread represents the difference between the yield on average interest-earning assets and the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities for the period.
(3)
The net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets for the period.
(4)
The efficiency ratio represents noninterest expense divided by the sum of net interest income and noninterest income.
(5)
Nonperforming assets include nonperforming loans and foreclosed assets.
Results of Operations
Net Income
We recorded net income of $7.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net income of $9.2 million for 2020. The decrease in net income was primarily due to decreased net interest income and increased noninterest expense. Our basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock were $0.53 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.61 per share of common stock for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is our primary source of revenue. Net interest income equals the excess of interest income plus fees earned on interest-earning assets over interest expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities. The level of interest rates and the volume and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities impact net interest income. Interest rate spread and net interest margin are utilized to measure and explain changes in net interest income. Interest rate spread is the difference between the yield on interest-earning assets and the rate paid for interest-bearing liabilities that fund those assets. The net interest margin is expressed as the percentage of net interest income to average interest-earning assets. The net interest margin exceeds the interest rate spread because noninterest-bearing sources of funds, principally noninterest-bearing demand deposits and stockholders' equity, also support interest-earning assets.
The accounting policies underlying the recognition of interest income on loans, securities, and other interest-earning assets are included in Note 1 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Average Balance Sheets
The following table sets forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments were made, as the effect of these adjustments would not be material. Average balances are daily average balances. Nonaccrual loans are included in the computation of average balances, but have been reflected in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees and expenses, and discounts and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or expense; however, the Company believes that the effect of these inclusions is not material.
(1)
Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the yield on average interest-earning assets and the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities.
(2)
Net interest-earning assets represents total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(3)
Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Net interest income decreased by $2.1 million, or 4.6%, to $43.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $45.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Loan interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included amortized fees of $794,000 and $162,000, respectively, from Paycheck Protection Program loans. The decrease in net interest income was primarily attributable to a decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets, which was partially offset by a decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. Our net interest rate spread decreased 21 basis points to 2.70% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 2.91% for 2020. Our net interest margin decreased 31 basis points to 2.78% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 3.09% for 2020. The yield on interest-earning assets decreased 61 basis points, or 17.1%, to 2.95% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 3.56% for 2020. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased 40 basis points, or 61.5%, to 0.25% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 0.65% for 2020. Total average interest-earning assets increased $92.2 million to $1.576 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $1.484 billion for 2020. Our average interest-bearing liabilities increased $56.9 million to $1.126 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $1.069 billion for 2020.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for the major categories of our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Information is provided for each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities with respect to changes attributable to changes in volume (i.e., changes in average balances multiplied by the prior-period average rate), and changes attributable to rate (i.e., changes in average rate multiplied by prior-period average balances). For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate. The Company had no out-of-period items or adjustments to be excluded from the table below.
Provision for Loan Losses
We establish provisions for loan losses, which are charged to operations in order to maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level we consider necessary to absorb probable incurred credit losses in the loan portfolio. In determining the level of the allowance for loan losses, we consider past and current loss experience, evaluations of real estate collateral, current economic conditions, volume and type of lending, adverse situations that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay a loan and the levels of nonperforming and other classified loans. The amount of the allowance is based on estimates and the ultimate losses may vary from such estimates as more information becomes available or events change. We assess the allowance for loan losses on a quarterly basis and make provisions for loan losses in order to maintain the allowance.
A loan balance is classified as a loss and charged-off when it is confirmed that there is no readily apparent source of repayment for the portion of the loan that is classified as loss. Confirmation can occur upon the receipt of updated third-party appraisal valuation information indicating that there is a low probability of repayment upon sale of the collateral, the final disposition of collateral where the net proceeds are insufficient to pay the loan balance in full, our failure to obtain possession of certain consumer-loan collateral within certain time limits specified by applicable federal regulations, the conclusion of legal proceedings where the borrower’s obligation to repay is legally discharged (such as a Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding), or when it appears that further formal collection procedures are not likely to result in net proceeds in excess of the costs to collect.
We recorded a recovery of loan losses of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision for loan losses of $55,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The provision for or recovery of loan losses is a function of the allowance for loan loss methodology we use to determine the appropriate level of the allowance for inherent loan losses after net charge-offs have been deducted. The portion of the allowance for loan losses attributable to loans collectively evaluated for impairment decreased by $1.0 million, or 13.4%, to $6.7 million at December 31, 2021 from $7.7 million at December 31, 2020. Although the loans collectively evaluated for impairment increased $41.0 million, or 4.1%, to $1.048 billion at December 31, 2021 from $1.007 billion at December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan losses decreased due to changes in the portfolio mix combined with the reduction of temporary loan loss reserves that were established in the earlier stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. Net recoveries were $204,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net recoveries of $64,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. For further analysis and information on how we determine the appropriate level for the allowance for loan losses and analysis of credit quality, see “Critical Accounting Policies,” “Risk Classification of Loans” and “Allowance for Loan Losses.” There were $30,000 of reserves established for loans individually evaluated for impairment at December 31, 2021, compared to $28,000 of reserves at December 31, 2020.
Noninterest Income
Our noninterest income increased by $323,000, or 6.0%, to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $5.4 million in 2020. Loan servicing fees increased $179,000, or 32.4%, to $731,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $552,000 in 2020, due to the collection of $167,000 of commitment fees, letter of credit fees and a $61,000 release fee from a corporate lessor. Trust and insurance commissions and annuities income increased by $175,000, or 18.2%, to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31,2021, from $961,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to increased assets under management.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense increased by $2.5 million, or 6.5%, to $40.9 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $38.4 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in noninterest expense was due in substantial part to increases in compensation and benefits of $1.3 million, or 6.2%, to $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $21.3 million in 2020, primarily due to personnel additions in commercial loan and lease originations, risk management, treasury services and the trust department, all of which are targeted for growth and product expansion. Telephone expense increased $464,000 due to the upgrade and conversion of our telephone and data systems and the temporary need to operate concurrent systems. Operations of foreclosed assets increased to $364,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $17,000 for 2020, primarily due to the recording of a $420,000 valuation allowance on foreclosed assets, tax deeds and tax certificates, which was partially offset by gains on sales of foreclosed assets. FDIC insurance premiums increased $130,000, to $478,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $348,000 for 2020, because the 2020 insurance premiums were partially offset by the FDIC's small bank assessment credit. Other noninterest expense increased $317,000, or 11.3%, to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.8 million for 2020, due in part to the reversal of a $116,000 reserve on open commitments for two undrawn letters of credit in 2020.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded income tax expense of $2.3 million, compared to $3.6 million recorded in 2020. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 24.07%, compared to 28.18% for 2020. The effective tax rate increased in 2020 due to the establishment of a $200,000 valuation reserve related to the Company's Illinois NOL carryforward, while in 2021 the effective tax rate was decreased due to the reversal of that $200,000 valuation reserve.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Total assets increased $103.8 million, or 6.5%, to $1.701 billion at December 31, 2021, from $1.597 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total assets was primarily due to an increase in securities and loans receivable. Securities increased by $61.9 million to $85.7 million at December 31, 2021, from $23.8 million at December 31, 2020, primarily due to the purchase of $76.6 million of U.S. Treasury Notes. Net loans increased $41.6 million, or 4.2%, to $1.044 billion at December 31, 2021, from $1.003 billion at December 31, 2020.
Our loan portfolio consists primarily of multi-family real estate, nonresidential real estate, commercial loans and leases, which together totaled 97.0% of gross loans at December 31, 2021. Multi-family mortgage loans decreased by $26.1 million, or 5.8%; nonresidential real estate loans decreased $5.5 million, or 5.0%; commercial loans and leases increased $84.5 million, or 20.9%; and one-to-four family residential mortgage loans decreased by $11.6 million, or 27.7%. The decrease in multi-family loans was primarily due to a significant amount of loan prepayments. The loan prepayments generated $1.4 million of prepayment penalty income for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.0 million of prepayment penalty income for 2020.
Our allowance for loan losses decreased by $1.0 million, or 13.4%, to $6.7 million at December 31, 2021, from $7.7 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease reflected net recoveries of $204,000 in 2021, and a shift in the risk profile of the loan portfolio mix combined with the reduction of temporary loan loss reserves established in the earlier stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Total liabilities increased $119.3 million, or 8.4%, to $1.543 billion at December 31, 2021, from $1.424 billion at December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases in total deposits, borrowings and subordinated notes. Total deposits increased $94.9 million, or 6.8%, to $1.488 billion at December 31, 2021, from $1.394 billion at December 31, 2020. Money market accounts increased $35.6 million, or 11.9%, to $333.4 million at December 31, 2021, from $297.8 million at December 31, 2020. Interest-bearing NOW accounts increased $67.3 million, or 20.0%, to $404.3 million at December 31, 2021, from $337.0 million at December 31, 2020. Savings accounts increased $22.1 million, or 12.3%, to $201.6 million at December 31, 2021, from $179.6 million at December 31, 2020. Noninterest-bearing demand deposits increased $16.0 million, or 4.9%, to $342.2 million at December 31, 2021, from $326.2 million at December 31, 2020. Retail certificates of deposit decreased $42.4 million, or 17.2%, to $203.5 million at December 31, 2021, from $245.8 million at December 31, 2020. Core deposits (which consist of savings, money market, noninterest-bearing demand and NOW accounts) were 86.1% and 81.8% of total deposits at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company issued $20.0 million of subordinated notes in April of 2021.
Total stockholders’ equity was $157.5 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $172.9 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease in total stockholders’ equity was primarily due to the combined impact of our repurchase of 1,541,280 shares of our common stock at a total cost of $17.1 million, and our declaration and payment of cash dividends totaling $5.6 million, during the year ended December 31, 2021. These items were partially offset by net income of $7.4 million that we recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Securities
Our investment policy is established by our Board of Directors. The policy emphasizes safety of the investment, liquidity requirements, potential returns, cash flow targets, and consistency with our interest rate risk management strategy.
At December 31, 2021, our mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations (“CMOs”) reflected in the following table were issued by U.S. government-sponsored enterprises and agencies, Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae and Ginnie Mae, and are obligations which the federal government has affirmed its commitment to support. All securities reflected in the table were classified as available-for-sale at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following table sets forth the composition, amortized cost and fair value of our securities.
There are no marketable equity securities at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Portfolio Maturities and Yields
The composition and maturities of the securities portfolio at December 31, 2021 are summarized in the following table. Maturities are based on the final contractual payment dates, and do not reflect the impact of prepayments or early redemptions that may occur.
The Bank is a member of the Federal Reserve System as a result of its conversion to a national bank charter in 2016. The aggregate cost of our FRB common stock as of December 31, 2021 was $4.7 million based on its par value. The Bank is also a member of the FHLB System. Members of the FHLB System are required to hold a certain amount of common stock to qualify for membership in the FHLB System and to be eligible to borrow funds under the FHLB’s advance program. The aggregate cost of our FHLB common stock as of December 31, 2021 was $2.8 million based on its par value. There is no market for FRB and FHLB common stock. There were no purchases or redemptions of FRB and FHLB capital stock during 2020 and 2021. As a member of the FHLB, we are required to own a certain amount of stock based on the level of borrowings and other factors, at December 31, 2021, we owned 9,602 shares of excess FHLB common stock.
Loan Portfolio
We originate multi-family mortgage loans, nonresidential real estate loans, commercial loans and commercial equipment leases. In addition, we also originate consumer loans, and purchase and sell loan participations from time-to-time. Our principal loan products are discussed in Note 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio by type of loan.
Although we originate loans and leases in a number of States, our primary lending area for regulatory purposes consists of the counties in the State of Illinois where our branch offices are located, and contiguous counties. We currently derive the most significant portion of our revenues from these geographic areas. We also engage in multi-family mortgage lending activities in carefully selected metropolitan areas outside our primary lending area. At December 31, 2021, $233.6 million, or 54.8%, of our multi-family mortgage loans were in the Metropolitan Statistical Area for Chicago, Illinois; $81.6 million, or 19.2%, were in Texas; $46.1 million, or 10.8%, were in Florida; and $31.1 million, or 7.3%, were in Colorado. This information reflects the location of the collateral for the loan and does not necessarily reflect the location of the borrowers. We engage in certain types of commercial lending and commercial equipment finance activities on a nationwide basis.
Loan Portfolio Maturities
The following table summarizes the scheduled repayments of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2021. Demand loans, loans having no stated repayment schedule or maturity and overdraft loans are reported as being due in one year or less.
Nonperforming Loans and Assets
We review loans on a regular basis, and generally place loans on nonaccrual status when either principal or interest is 90 days or more past due. In addition, the Company places loans on nonaccrual status when we do not expect to receive full payment of interest or principal. Interest accrued and unpaid at the time a loan is placed on nonaccrual status is reversed from interest income. Interest payments received on nonaccrual loans are recognized in accordance with our significant accounting policies. Once a loan is placed on nonaccrual status, the borrower must generally demonstrate at least six months of payment performance before the loan is eligible to return to accrual status. We may have loans classified as 90 days or more delinquent and still accruing. Generally, we do not utilize this category of loan classification unless: (1) the loan is repaid in full shortly after the period end date; (2) the loan is well secured and there are no asserted or pending legal barriers to its collection; or (3) the borrower has remitted all scheduled payments and is otherwise in substantial compliance with the terms of the loan, but the processing of loan payments actually received or the renewal of the loan has not occurred for administrative reasons. At December 31, 2021, we had one commercial loan with a recorded investment of $10,000.
We typically obtain new third-party appraisals or collateral valuations when we place a loan on nonaccrual status, conduct impairment testing or complete a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) unless the existing valuation information for the collateral is sufficiently current to comply with the requirements of our Appraisal and Collateral Valuation Policy (“ACV Policy”). We also obtain new third-party appraisals or collateral valuations when the judicial foreclosure process concludes with respect to real estate collateral, and when we otherwise acquire actual or constructive title to real estate collateral. In addition to third-party appraisals, we use updated valuation information based on Multiple Listing Service data, broker opinions of value, actual sales prices of similar assets sold by us and approved sales prices in response to offers to purchase similar assets owned by us to provide interim valuation information for consolidated financial statement and management purposes. Our ACV Policy establishes the maximum useful life of a real estate appraisal at 18 months. Because appraisals and updated valuations utilize historical or “ask-side” data in reaching valuation conclusions, the appraised or updated valuation may or may not reflect the actual sales price that we will receive at the time of sale.
Real estate appraisals may include up to three approaches to value: the sales comparison approach, the income approach (for income-producing property) and the cost approach. Not all appraisals utilize all three approaches. Depending on the nature of the collateral and market conditions, we may emphasize one approach over another in determining the fair value of real estate collateral. Appraisals may also contain different estimates of value based on the level of occupancy or planned future improvements. “As-is” valuations represent an estimate of value based on current market conditions with no changes to the use or condition of the real estate collateral. “As-stabilized” or “as-completed” valuations assume the real estate collateral will be improved to a stated standard or achieve its highest and best use in terms of occupancy. “As-stabilized” or “as-completed” valuations may be subject to a present value adjustment for market conditions or the schedule of improvements.
As part of the asset classification process, we develop an exit strategy for real estate collateral and other foreclosed assets by assessing overall market conditions, the current use and condition of the asset, and its highest and best use. For most income-producing real estate, we believe that investors value most highly a stable income stream from the asset; consequently, we perform a comparative evaluation to determine whether conducting a sale on an “as-is,” “as-stabilized” or “as-improved” basis is most likely to produce the highest net realizable value. If we determine that the “as-stabilized” or “as-improved” basis is appropriate, we then complete the necessary improvements or tenant stabilization tasks, with the applicable time value discount and improvement expenses incorporated into our estimates of the expected costs to sell. As of December 31, 2021, substantially all impaired real estate loan collateral and foreclosed assets were valued on an “as-is basis.”
Estimates of the net realizable value of real estate collateral also include a deduction for the expected costs to sell the collateral or such other deductions from the cash flows resulting from the operation and liquidation of the asset as are appropriate. For most real estate collateral subject to the judicial foreclosure process, we apply a 10.0% deduction to the value of the asset to determine the expected costs to sell the asset. This estimate includes one year of real estate taxes, sales commissions and miscellaneous repair and closing costs. If we receive a purchase offer that requires unbudgeted repairs, or if the expected resolution period for the asset exceeds one year, we then include, on a case-by-case basis, the costs of the additional real estate taxes and repairs and any other material holding costs in the expected costs to sell the collateral. For other real estate owned, we apply a 7.0% deduction to determine the expected costs to sell, as expenses for real estate taxes and repairs are expensed when incurred.
Nonperforming Assets Summary
The following table below sets forth the amounts and categories of our nonperforming loans and nonperforming assets.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets totaled $1.5 million at December 31, 2021, and $1.4 million at December 31, 2020. Two residential loans and one commercial loan with recorded balances of $4.5 million were transferred to foreclosed assets during the year ended December 31, 2021. We ceased making residential loans in 2017. We continue to experience modest quantities of defaults on our legacy residential loan portfolios principally due either to the borrower’s personal financial condition or death, and/or deteriorated collateral value.
Loan Extensions and Modifications
Maturing loans are subject to our standard loan underwriting policies and practices. Due to the need to obtain updated borrower and guarantor financial information, collateral information or to prepare revised loan documentation, loans in the process of renewal may appear as past due because the information needed to underwrite a renewal of the loan is not available to us prior to the maturity date of the loan. At times, short-term administrative extensions, which are typically 90 days in duration, are granted to facilitate proper underwriting. In general, loan modifications are subject to a risk-adjusted pricing analysis.
When appropriate, we evaluate loan extensions or modifications in accordance with ASC 310-40 and related federal regulatory guidance concerning TDRs and the FFIEC workout guidance to determine the required treatment for nonaccrual status and risk classification purposes. In general, if we grant a loan modification or extension that involves either the absence of principal amortization (other than for revolving lines of credit which are customarily granted on interest-only terms), or if we grant a material extension of an existing loan amortization period in excess of our underwriting standards, the loan will be placed on nonaccrual status and impairment testing conducted to determine whether a specific valuation allowance or loss classification / charge-off is required. If the loan is well secured by an abundance of collateral and the collectability of both interest and principal is probable, the loan may remain on accrual status, but it will be classified as a TDR due to the concession made in the loan principal amortization payment component. A loan in full compliance with the payment requirements specified in a loan modification will not be considered as past due, but may nonetheless be placed on nonaccrual status or be classified as a TDR, as appropriate under the circumstances.
In accordance with the FFIEC workout guidance, the Company will restructure a note into two separate notes (A/B structure), charging off the entire B portion of the note. The A note is structured with appropriate loan-to-value and cash flow coverage ratios that provide for a high likelihood of repayment. The A note is classified as a nonperforming note until the borrower has displayed a historical payment performance for a reasonable time prior to and subsequent to the restructuring. A period of sustained repayment for at least six months generally is required to return the note to accrual status provided that management has determined that the performance is reasonably expected to continue. The A note will be classified as a restructured note (either performing or nonperforming) through the calendar year of the restructuring that the historical payment performance has been established.
Troubled Debt Restructurings
The Company had no TDRs at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Section 4013 of the CARES Act provides that a qualified loan modification is exempt by law from classification as a TDR pursuant to US GAAP. In addition, the Revised Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working With Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (“OCC Bulletin 2020-50”) provides more limited circumstances in which a loan modification is not subject to classification as a TDR and also defined the circumstances where the borrower’s loan is reported as current on loan payments. Pursuant to these new capabilities, we developed several loan forbearance programs to assist borrowers with managing cash flows disrupted due to COVID-19. For additional discussion of these programs, see Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Risk Classification of Loans
Our policies, consistent with regulatory guidelines, provide for the classification of loans and other assets that are considered to be of lesser quality as substandard, doubtful, or loss assets, or designated as special mention.
A substandard asset is inadequately protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Assets so classified must have a well-defined weakness, or weaknesses, that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that the Bank will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected. The risk-rating guidance published by the OCC clarifies that a loan with a well-defined weakness does not have to present a probability of default for the loan to be rated substandard, and that an individual loan’s loss potential does not have to be distinct for the loan to be rated substandard. An asset classified as doubtful has all the weaknesses inherent in one classified as substandard with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable. Assets classified as loss are those considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as assets is not warranted; such balances are promptly charged-off as required by applicable federal regulations. A special mention asset has potential weaknesses that deserve management’s close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in the institution’s credit position at some future date. Special mention assets are not adversely classified and do not expose an institution to sufficient risk to warrant adverse classification.
Based on a review of our loans at December 31, 2021, classified loans consisted of $482,000 of performing substandard loans and $740,000 of nonperforming loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1.5 million of loans designated as special mention.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We establish provisions for loan losses, which are charged to operations in order to maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level we consider necessary to absorb probable incurred credit losses in the loan portfolio. In determining the level of the allowance for loan losses, we consider past and current loss experience, trends in nonaccrual loans, evaluations of real estate collateral, current economic conditions, volume and type of lending, adverse situations that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay a loan and the levels of nonperforming and other classified loans. The amount of the allowance is based on estimates and the ultimate losses may vary from the estimates as more information becomes available or events change.
We provide for loan losses based on the allowance method. Accordingly, all loan losses are charged to the related allowance and all recoveries are credited to it. Additions to the allowance for loan losses are provided by charges to income based on various factors that, in our judgment, deserve current recognition in estimating probable incurred credit losses. We review the loan portfolio on an ongoing basis and make provisions for loan losses on a quarterly basis to maintain the allowance for loan losses in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”). The allowance for loan losses consists of two components:
•
specific allowances established for any impaired residential non-owner occupied mortgage, multi-family mortgage, nonresidential real estate, construction and land, commercial loans and leases for which the recorded investment in the loan exceeds the measured value of the loan; and
•
general allowances for loan losses for each loan class based on historical loan loss experience; and adjustments to historical loss experience (general allowances), maintained to cover uncertainties that affect our estimate of probable incurred credit losses for each loan class.
The adjustments to historical loss experience are based on our evaluation of several factors, including levels of, and trends in, past due and classified loans; levels of, and trends in, charge-offs and recoveries; trends in volume and terms of loans, including any credit concentrations in the loan portfolio; experience, and ability of lending management and other relevant staff; and national and local economic trends and conditions.
We evaluate the allowance for loan losses based upon the combined total of the specific and general components. Generally, when the loan portfolio increases, absent other factors, the allowance for loan loss methodology results in a higher dollar amount of estimated probable incurred credit losses than would be the case without the increase. Conversely, when the loan portfolio decreases, absent other factors, the allowance for loan loss methodology generally results in a lower dollar amount of estimated probable losses than would be the case without the decrease.
We review our loan portfolio on an ongoing basis to determine whether any loans require classification and impairment testing in accordance with applicable regulations and accounting principles. When we classify loans as either substandard or doubtful and in certain other cases, we review the collateral and future cash flow projections to determine if a specific reserve is necessary. The allowance for loan losses represents amounts that have been established to recognize incurred credit losses in the loan portfolio that are both probable and reasonably estimable at the date of the consolidated financial statements. When we classify problem loans as loss, we charge-off such amounts.
Our calculation of the general component of the allowance for loan losses includes the FASB disclosure requirement that each loan portfolio category must be segmented into specific loan classes (FASB Standards Update 2010-20 (ASU 210-20), “Receivables (Topic 310): Disclosures about the Credit Quality of Financing Receivables and the Allowance for Credit Losses”). Loan class segmentation tables are presented in Note 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. To maintain consistency, the loan class segmentation was also applied within the 12-quarter loss history that we use to calculate the general component of the allowance for loan losses, inherent risk factor weightings were adjusted based on our evaluation of their relevance to the new loan classes, and duplicative historical loss factors were eliminated from the loan class segmentation.
While we use the best information available to make evaluations, future adjustments to the allowance may become necessary if conditions differ substantially from the information that we used in making the evaluations. Our determinations as to the risk classification of our loans and the amount of our allowance for loan losses are subject to review by our regulatory agencies, which can require that we establish additional loss allowances.
Net Charge-offs and Recoveries
The following table sets forth activity in our allowance for loan losses.
We recorded a recovery of loan losses of $1.2 million in 2021, compared to a $55,000 provision for loan losses in 2020. The provision for or recovery of loan losses is a function of the allowance for loan loss methodology that we use to determine the appropriate level of the allowance for inherent loan losses after net charge-offs have been deducted. The portion of the allowance for loan losses attributable to loans collectively evaluated for impairment decreased $1.0 million, or 13.4%, to $6.7 million at December 31, 2021 from $7.7 million at December 31, 2020. The reserve established for loans individually evaluated for impairment increased $2,000, to $30,000 at December 31, 2021, from $28,000 at December 31, 2020. Net recoveries were $204,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net recoveries of $64,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
A loan balance is classified as a loss and charged-off when it is confirmed that there is no readily apparent source of repayment for the portion of the loan that is classified as loss. Confirmation can occur upon the receipt of updated third-party appraisal valuation information indicating that there is a low probability of repayment upon sale of the collateral, the final disposition of collateral where the net proceeds are insufficient to pay the loan balance in full, our failure to obtain possession of certain consumer-loan collateral within certain time limits specified by applicable federal regulations, the conclusion of legal proceedings where the borrower’s obligation to repay is legally discharged (such as a Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding), or when it appears that further formal collection procedures are not likely to result in net proceeds in excess of the costs to collect.
Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses
The following table sets forth our allowance for loan losses allocated by loan category. The allowance for loan losses allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category and does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in other categories.
Sources of Funds
Deposits. At December 31, 2021, our deposits totaled $1.488 billion. Interest-bearing deposits totaled $1.146 billion and noninterest-bearing demand deposits totaled $342.2 million. NOW, savings and money market accounts totaled $939.3 million. At December 31, 2021, we had $206.9 million of certificates of deposit outstanding, of which $167.4 million had maturities of one year or less. Although a significant portion of our certificates of deposit are shorter-term certificates of deposit, we believe, based on historical experience and our current pricing strategy, that we will retain a significant portion of the non-brokered accounts upon maturity.
The following table sets forth the distribution of total deposit accounts, by account type.
The following table sets forth certificates of deposit by time remaining until maturity at December 31, 2021:
At December 31, 2021 and 2020 we have $359.8 million and $248.3 million of uninsured deposits; our only uninsured deposits are those in excess of the FDIC insurance limits of $250,000.
Borrowings Outstanding. On April 14, 2021, the Company entered into Subordinated Note Purchase Agreements with certain qualified institutional buyers and accredited investors pursuant to which the Company sold and issued $20.0 million in aggregate principal amount of its 3.75% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Subordinated Notes due May 15, 2031.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020 we had $5.0 million and $4.0 million, respectively of FHLB advances at zero interest rate.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes have been prepared in conformity with US GAAP, which generally requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation, if any, is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike industrial companies, our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary in nature. As a result, changes in market interest rates can have a greater impact on performance than the effects of inflation.
Management of Interest Rate Risk
Qualitative Analysis. A significant form of market risk is interest rate risk. Interest rate risk results from timing differences in the maturity or repricing of our assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet contracts (i.e., forward loan commitments), the effect of loan prepayments and deposit withdrawals, the difference in the behavior of lending and funding rates arising from the use of different indices and “yield curve risk” arising from changing rate relationships across the spectrum of maturities for constant or variable credit risk investments. In addition to directly affecting net interest income, changes in market interest rates can also affect the amount of new loan originations, the ability of borrowers to repay variable-rate loans, the volume of loan prepayments and refinancings, the carrying value of investment securities classified as available-for-sale and the flow and mix of deposits.
The general objective of our interest rate risk management is to determine the appropriate level of risk given our business strategy and then manage that risk in a manner that is consistent with our policy to reduce, to the extent possible, the exposure of our net interest income to changes in market interest rates. Our Asset/Liability Management Committee (“ALCO”), which consists of certain members of senior management, evaluates the interest rate risk inherent in certain assets and liabilities, our operating environment and capital and liquidity requirements, and modifies our lending, investing and deposit gathering strategies accordingly. The Board of Directors then reviews the ALCO’s activities and strategies, the effect of those strategies on our net interest margin, and the effect that changes in market interest rates would have on the economic value of our loan and securities portfolios as well as the intrinsic value of our deposits and borrowings.
We actively evaluate interest rate risk in connection with our lending, investing and deposit activities. In an effort to better manage interest rate risk, we have de-emphasized the origination of residential mortgage loans, and have increased our emphasis on the origination of nonresidential real estate loans, multi-family mortgage loans, commercial loans and leases. In addition, depending on market interest rates and our capital and liquidity position, we generally sell all or a portion of our longer-term, fixed-rate residential loans, usually on a servicing-retained basis. Further, we primarily invest in shorter-duration securities, which generally have lower yields compared to longer-term investments. Shortening the average maturity of our interest-earning assets by increasing our investments in shorter-term loans and securities, as well as loans with variable rates of interest, helps to better match the maturities and interest rates of our assets and liabilities, thereby reducing the exposure of our net interest income to changes in market interest rates. Finally, we have classified our entire investment portfolio as available-for-sale so as to provide flexibility in liquidity management.
We utilize a combination of analyses to monitor the Bank’s exposure to changes in interest rates. The economic value of equity analysis is a model that estimates the change in net portfolio value (“NPV”) over a range of interest rate scenarios. NPV is the discounted present value of expected cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet contracts. In calculating changes in NPV, we assume estimated loan prepayment rates, reinvestment rates and deposit decay rates that seem most likely based on historical experience during prior interest rate changes.
Our net interest income analysis utilizes the data derived from the dynamic GAP analysis, described below, and applies several additional elements, including actual interest rate indices and margins, contractual limitations such as interest rate floors and caps and the U.S. Treasury yield curve as of the balance sheet date. In addition, we apply consistent parallel yield curve shifts (in both directions) to determine possible changes in net interest income if the theoretical yield curve shifts occurred instantaneously. Net interest income analysis also adjusts the dynamic GAP repricing analysis based on changes in prepayment rates resulting from the parallel yield curve shifts.
Our dynamic GAP analysis determines the relative balance between the repricing of assets and liabilities over multiple periods of time (ranging from overnight to five years). Dynamic GAP analysis includes expected cash flows from loans and mortgage-backed securities, applying prepayment rates based on the differential between the current interest rate and the market interest rate for each loan and security type. This analysis identifies mismatches in the timing of asset and liability repricing but does not necessarily provide an accurate indicator of interest rate risk because it omits the factors incorporated into the net interest income analysis.
Quantitative Analysis. The following table sets forth, as of December 31, 2021, the estimated changes in the Bank’s NPV and net interest income that would result from the designated instantaneous parallel shift in the U.S. Treasury yield curve. Computations of prospective effects of hypothetical interest rate changes are based on numerous assumptions including relative levels of market interest rates, loan prepayments and deposit decay, and should not be relied upon as indicative of actual results.
The table set forth above indicates that at December 31, 2021, in the event of an immediate 25 basis point decrease in interest rates, the Bank would be expected to experience a 2.34% increase in NPV and a $387,000 decrease in net interest income. In the event of an immediate 200 basis point increase in interest rates, the Bank would be expected to experience a 5.14% increase in NPV and a $5.9 million increase in net interest income. This data does not reflect any actions that we may undertake in response to changes in interest rates, such as changes in rates paid on certain deposit accounts based on local competitive factors, which could reduce the actual impact on NPV and net interest income, if any.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodology used in the above interest rate risk measurements. Modeling changes in NPV and net interest income requires that we make certain assumptions that may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. The NPV and net interest income table presented above assumes that the composition of our interest-rate-sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the beginning of a period remains constant over the period being measured and, accordingly, the data does not reflect any actions that we may undertake in response to changes in interest rates, such as changes in rates paid on certain deposit accounts based on local competitive factors. The table also assumes that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration to maturity or the repricing characteristics of specific assets and liabilities. Accordingly, although the NPV and net interest income table provides an indication of our sensitivity to interest rate changes at a particular point in time, such measurements are not intended to and do not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on our net interest income and will differ from actual results.
Liquidity Management
Liquidity Management - Bank. The overall objective of our liquidity management is to ensure the availability of sufficient cash funds to meet all financial commitments and to take advantage of investment opportunities. We manage liquidity in order to meet deposit withdrawals on demand or at contractual maturity, to repay borrowings as they mature, and to fund new loans and investments as opportunities arise.
Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans and securities, and, to a lesser extent, wholesale borrowings, the proceeds from maturing securities and short-term investments, and the proceeds from the sales of loans and securities. The scheduled amortizations of loans and securities, as well as proceeds from borrowings, are predictable sources of funds. Other funding sources, however, such as deposit inflows, mortgage prepayments and mortgage loan sales are greatly influenced by market interest rates, economic conditions and competition.
Our cash flows are derived from operating activities, investing activities and financing activities as reported in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our primary investing activities are the origination for investment of multi-family mortgage loans, nonresidential real estate loans, commercial loans and leases and the purchase of investment securities and mortgage-backed securities. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our loans originated or purchased for investment totaled $879.1 million and $651.9 million, respectively. Purchases of securities totaled $79.1 million and $44.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These activities were funded primarily by principal repayments on loans and securities.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, principal repayments on loans totaled $834.0 million and $817.4 million, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, principal repayments on securities totaled $1.8 million and $2.7 million, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, proceeds from maturities of securities totaled $20.2 million and $77.8 million, respectively. There were no sales of loans or securities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Loan origination commitments totaled $38.9 million at December 31, 2021, and consisted of $14.1 million of fixed-rate loans and $24.8 million of adjustable-rate loans. Unused lines of credit and standby letters of credit granted to customers totaled $184.3 million and $6.9 million, respectively, at December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, there were no commitments to sell mortgages.
Deposit flows are generally affected by the level of market interest rates, the interest rates and other terms and conditions on deposit products offered by our banking competitors, and other factors, including government fiscal stimulus payments to households and businesses. We had net deposit increases of $94.9 million and $108.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Certificates of deposit that are scheduled to mature in one year or less at December 31, 2021 totaled $167.4 million.
We anticipate that we will have sufficient funds available to meet current loan commitments and lines of credit and maturing certificates of deposit that are not renewed or extended. We generally remain fully invested and may utilize additional sources of funds through FHLB advances, of which $5.0 million was outstanding at December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021 we had the ability to borrow an additional $274.8 million under our credit facilities with the FHLB. We also have the ability to pledge U.S. Treasury Notes of $75.0 million for FHLB advances. Finally, at December 31, 2021, we had a line of credit available with the FRB. At December 31, 2021, there was no outstanding balance on this credit line.
Liquidity Management - Company. The liquidity needs of the Company on an unconsolidated basis consist primarily of operating expenses, dividends to stockholders and stock repurchases. The primary sources of liquidity for the Company currently are $8.2 million of cash and cash equivalents and any cash dividends it may receive from the Bank. In 2020, the Company established a $5.0 million unsecured line of credit with a correspondent bank. Interest is payable at a rate of Prime Rate as published in the Wall Street Journal minus 0.75%, with a minimum rate of 2.40%. The line of credit has been extended since its original maturity date and the current maturity date is March 31, 2022. The line of credit had no outstanding balance at December 31, 2021. The Company issued $20.0 million of subordinated notes in April of 2021.
During 2021, we paid $17.1 million to repurchase shares of our common stock and paid $5.6 million in cash dividends to stockholders, using dividends received from the Bank.
As of December 31, 2021, we were not aware of any known trends, events or uncertainties that had or were reasonably likely to have a material impact on our liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, we had no other material commitments for capital expenditures.
Capital Management
Capital Management - Bank. The overall objectives of our capital management are to ensure the availability of sufficient capital to support loan, deposit and other asset and liability growth opportunities and to maintain capital to absorb unforeseen losses or write-downs that are inherent in the business risks associated with the banking industry. We seek to balance the need for higher capital levels to address such unforeseen risks and the goal to achieve an adequate return on the capital invested by our stockholders.
The Bank is subject to regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. The capital adequacy guidelines and prompt corrective action regulations, involve the quantitative measurement of assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance-sheet items calculated under regulatory accounting practices. Capital amounts and classifications are also subject to qualitative judgments by regulators. The failure to meet minimum capital requirements can result in regulatory actions. The final rules implementing Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's capital guidelines for U.S. banks (Basel III rules) became effective in 2015. The net unrealized gain or loss on available-for-sale securities is not included in computing regulatory capital.
In addition, as a result of the legislation, the federal banking agencies developed a “Community Bank Leverage Ratio” (the ratio of a bank’s tangible equity capital to average total consolidated assets) for financial institutions with assets of less than $10 billion. A “qualifying community bank” that exceeds this ratio will be deemed to be in compliance with all other capital and leverage requirements, including the capital requirements to be considered “well capitalized” under Prompt Corrective Action statutes. The federal banking agencies may consider a financial institution’s risk profile when evaluating whether it qualifies as a community bank for purposes of the capital ratio requirement. The federal banking agencies must set the minimum capital for the new Community Bank Leverage Ratio at not less than 8% and not more than 10%. Beginning in the second quarter 2020 and until the end of 2020, a banking organization that had a leverage ratio of 8% or greater and met certain other criteria could elect to use the Community Bank Leverage Ratio framework; and qualifying community banks will have until January 1, 2022, before the Community Bank Leverage Ratio requirement is re-established at greater than 9%. Pursuant to Section 4012 of the CARES Act and related interim final rules, the Community Bank Leverage Ratio is 8.5% for calendar year 2021, and 9% thereafter. A financial institution can elect to be subject to this new definition, and opt-out of this new definition, at any time. As a qualifying community bank, we elected to be subject to this definition beginning in the second quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank's Community Bank Leverage Ratio was 9.91%.
The prompt corrective action regulations provide five classifications, including well-capitalized, adequately capitalized, undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized, and critically undercapitalized, although these terms are not used to represent overall financial condition. If only adequately capitalized institutions require regulatory approval to accept brokered deposits. If undercapitalized, a financial institution’s capital distributions, asset growth and expansion are limited, and the submission of a capital restoration plan is required.
The Company and the Bank have each adopted Regulatory Capital Policies that target a Tier 1 leverage ratio of at least 7.5% and a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 10.5% at the Bank. The minimum capital ratios set forth in the Regulatory Capital Policies will be increased and other minimum capital requirements will be established if and as necessary. In accordance with the Regulatory Capital Policies, the Bank will not pursue any acquisition or growth opportunity, declare any dividend or conduct any stock repurchase that would cause the Bank's total risk-based capital ratio and/or its Tier 1 leverage ratio to fall below the targeted minimum capital levels or the capital levels required for capital adequacy plus the capital conservation buffer (“ CCB”). The minimum CCB is 2.5%. As of December 31, 2021 the Bank was well-capitalized under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. There are no conditions or events that management believes have changed the Bank’s prompt corrective action capitalization category.
Capital Management - Company. Total stockholders’ equity was $157.5 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $172.9 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease in total stockholders’ equity was primarily due to the combined impact of our repurchase of 1,541,280 shares of our common stock at a total cost of $17.1 million, and our declaration and payment of cash dividends totaling $5.6 million, during the year ended December 31, 2021. These items were partially offset by net income of $7.4 million that we recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash Dividends. Our Board of Directors declared four quarterly cash dividends totaling $5.6 million during 2021, consisting of a cash dividend of $0.10 per share for each quarter of 2021.
Stock Repurchase Program. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had repurchased 7,317,771 shares of its common stock out of the 7,560,755 shares of common stock authorized under the share repurchase authorization approved on March 30, 2015, as amended and extended from time to time. Pursuant to the share repurchase authorization, as of December 31, 2021, there were 242,984 shares of common stock authorized for repurchase. On April 19, 2021, the Board extended the expiration of the Company's share repurchase authorization from April 30, 2021 to November 15, 2021, and increased the total number of shares currently authorized for repurchase by 250,000 shares. On October 28, 2021 and June 24, 2021, the Board increased the number of shares authorized for repurchase by 200,000 and 900,000 shares, respectively. On October 28, 2021, the Board also extended the expiration of the Company's share repurchase authorization from November 15, 2021 to May 15, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties, and could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the most critical accounting policies upon which our financial condition and results of operation depend, and which involve the most complex subjective decisions or assessments, are as follows:
Allowance for Loan Losses. Arriving at an appropriate level of allowance for loan losses (“ALLL”) involves a high degree of judgment. Our ALLL provides for probable incurred losses based upon evaluations of known and inherent risks in the loan portfolio. We review the level of the allowance on a quarterly basis and establish the provision for loan losses based upon historical loan loss experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, information about specific borrower situations, estimated collateral values, economic conditions and other factors to assess the adequacy of the ALLL. Among the material estimates that we must make to establish the allowance are loss exposure at default; the amount and timing of future cash flows on affected loans; the value of collateral; and a determination of loss factors to be applied to the various elements of the loan portfolio. All of these estimates are susceptible to significant change. Although we believe that we use the best information available to us to establish the allowance for loan losses, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary and the Company’s results of operations could be adversely affected if borrower financial, collateral valuation or economic conditions differ substantially from the information and assumptions used in making the evaluation. While management believes it has established the allowance for loan losses in conformity with US GAAP, our regulators, in reviewing the loan portfolio, may request us to increase our allowance for loan losses based on judgments different from ours. In addition, because future events affecting borrowers and collateral cannot be predicted without uncertainty, the existing allowance for loan losses may not be adequate or increases may be necessary should the quality of any loans or leases deteriorate as a result of the factors discussed above. Any material increase in the ALLL would adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
The Company’s incurred loss method is a multi-variate model that includes the consideration of historical loss experience and several objective data including levels of, and trends in, past due and classified loans; levels of, and trends in, charge-offs and recoveries; the volume of loans by product type and terms of loans, including any credit concentrations in the loan portfolio and various national and local economic data, trends and conditions. In addition, we evaluate credit environmental factors including changes in underwriting standards, market conditions affecting the valuation of collateral, the ability to enforce loan documents and collateral liens upon default via judicial process, and the experience and ability of lending management and other relevant staff. Given the scope and breadth of the analysis and the interrelationships of data elements, it is not possible to quantify the impact on the ALLL based on changes in specific individual inputs.
Income Taxes. We consider accounting for income taxes a critical accounting policy due to the subjective nature of certain estimates that are involved in the calculation. We use the asset/liability method of accounting for income taxes in which deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for the temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities. Under GAAP, a deferred tax asset valuation allowance is required to be recognized if it is “more likely than not” that the deferred tax asset will not be realized. The determination of the realizability of the deferred tax assets is dependent upon judgments made following management’s periodic evaluation of all available positive and negative evidence, including prior pre-tax losses and the events or conditions that caused them, forecasts of future taxable income, and current and future economic and business conditions.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an NOL carryforward for Illinois, which begins to expire in 2031 and fully expires in 2033 pursuant to changes to Illinois law enacted in 2021. In 2021, we exceeded our Business Plan projection for purposes of deferred tax asset utilization analysis. Based on our long-term Business Plan projections, we expect that we will fully utilize the Illinois NOL carryforward before it expires in 2033. We also performed a stress analysis of our projections as the key known variable in our analysis and determined that we fully utilize the Illinois NOL carryforward by 2033. Based on our 2021 Business Plan performance, we concluded it is more likely than not that we will be able to achieve the Business Plan performance required to fully utilize the Illinois NOL carryforward by 2033.