ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Throughout this section, the Big 5 Sporting Goods Corporation (“we,” “our,” “us”) fiscal years ended January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021 are referred to as fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2021 and 2020 includes information with respect to our plans and strategies for our business and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes, the risk factors and the cautionary statement regarding forward-looking information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday nearest December 31. Fiscal 2021 included 52 weeks and fiscal 2020 included 53 weeks.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the rapidly growing novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) outbreak to be a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted health and economic conditions throughout the United States, as public concern about becoming ill with the virus has led to the issuance of recommendations and/or mandates from federal, state and local authorities to practice social distancing or self-quarantine.
Beginning on March 20, 2020 and continuing into the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we temporarily closed more than one-half of our retail store locations in response to state and local shelter orders related to the COVID-19 outbreak. We were subsequently able to gradually reopen all store locations based initially on qualifying as an “essential” business under applicable regulations and later as a result of the easing of regulatory restrictions on retail operations in our market areas. Throughout fiscal 2020, the pandemic and the shelter orders that were in place in our market areas negatively impacted customer traffic into the stores that were operating, and certain stores required additional closures during the remainder of the year. In an effort to promote social distancing protocols, we implemented reduced store hours for our open stores and limited the number of customers in our stores at any one time. While these temporary store closures, limited hours of operation and shelter orders in our market areas related to the initial COVID-19 outbreak had an unfavorable impact on our operations initially, as we began reopening stores we recognized significant shifts in consumer demand in favor of fitness and outdoor recreational products and we rapidly evolved our product assortment, which had a favorable impact on our operating results throughout the remainder of fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, as COVID-19 restrictions continued easing in many of our markets, we experienced strong consumer demand across a broad assortment of product categories, including increased consumer demand for team sports products, which was weak during the prior year due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
During fiscal 2020, in response to COVID-19, we also initially took measures to reduce expense and preserve capital across the organization, including negotiating lease concessions with landlords that would reduce or defer our lease-related payments, scaling back merchandise inventory orders and extending payment terms with merchandise vendors, implementing temporary and permanent workforce reductions throughout the organization, reducing advertising and the amount of planned capital spending, and suspending our quarterly dividend payment, among other measures. Although a certain portion of the expense reduction initiatives only benefited the second quarter of fiscal 2020, the remainder of fiscal 2020 continued to reflect labor expense savings due primarily to continued reduced store operating hours throughout most of the period, as well as advertising expense savings due to significantly reduced advertising activity. In fiscal 2021, our labor expense gradually increased as we increased wage rates in a tightening labor market and increased our store operating hours compared to the same period in the prior year. While store operating hours were higher in fiscal 2021 compared with the same period last year, store operating hours remained below pre-pandemic levels for the comparable periods, and we expect this trend to continue during fiscal 2022. We continue to maintain reduced advertising expense in comparison to historical levels and expect this trend to remain during fiscal 2022 as we continue to evaluate the impact on our sales. We will continue to evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on our future operations.
The initial unfavorable impacts caused by the COVID-19 outbreak also led us to take various actions to enhance our liquidity. We initially increased borrowings and exercised the accordion feature under our previous revolving credit facility, and we drew down additional amounts that resulted in our highest borrowing level of $143.3 million as of March 31, 2020. However, with our favorable operating results throughout the remainder of fiscal 2020, we were able to fully repay our borrowings while increasing our levels of cash and cash equivalents. Our financial condition was further enhanced during fiscal 2021, reflecting our strong sales and operating cash flow for the period. As of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, we had zero revolving credit borrowings and cash and cash equivalents of $97.4 million and $64.7 million, respectively.
A substantial amount of our inventory is manufactured abroad. COVID-19, and surging consumer demand initially associated with the pandemic, has impacted our supply chain for products sold, particularly those products that are sourced from Asia. To the extent one or more vendors is negatively impacted by continued supply chain disruptions or by COVID-19, including due to interruptions at or closure of those vendors’ distribution centers or manufacturing facilities, or we or our vendors are unable to obtain the necessary shipping capacity to transport products to our distribution center, we may be unable to maintain delivery schedules or adequate inventory in our stores. During the second half of fiscal 2021, we experienced significant shipping delays of products sourced from overseas vendors to be received at the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, which reflected increased shipping volume and insufficient labor resources at the ports that have significantly increased cargo backlogs. These factors, in addition to workforce shortages in the trucking industry, have limited our ability to obtain desired quantities of inventory for various merchandise categories. While we have generally been able to sufficiently stock product in our stores to meet most consumer demand during the pandemic, future prolonged and sustained delays in product reaching our stores from overseas vendors, particularly during the holiday season, could result in our inability to obtain adequate levels of merchandise inventories to meet our consumers’ needs, which could have an adverse impact on our net sales and profitability.
Overview
We are a leading sporting goods retailer in the western United States, operating 431 stores and an e-commerce platform under the name “Big 5 Sporting Goods” as of January 2, 2022. We provide a full-line product offering in a traditional sporting goods store format that averages approximately 11,000 square feet. Through our e-commerce platform, we also offer selected products online. E-commerce sales for fiscal 2021 and 2020 were not material. Our product mix includes athletic shoes, apparel and accessories, as well as a broad selection of outdoor and athletic equipment for team sports, fitness, camping, hunting, fishing, home recreation, tennis, golf, and winter and summer recreation.
We believe that over our 67-year history we have developed a reputation with the competitive and recreational sporting goods customer as a convenient neighborhood sporting goods retailer that consistently delivers value on quality merchandise. Our stores carry a wide range of products at competitive prices from well-known brand name manufacturers, including adidas, Coleman, Columbia, Everlast, New Balance, Nike, Rawlings, Skechers, Spalding, Under Armour and Wilson. We also offer brand name merchandise produced exclusively for us, private label merchandise and specials on quality items we purchase through opportunistic buys of vendor over-stock and close-out merchandise. We reinforce our value reputation through digital marketing and print advertising in major and local newspapers and direct mailers, in an effort to generate customer traffic, drive sales and build brand awareness. We have gradually been decreasing our print advertising over recent years while simultaneously increasing our digital advertising, which we believe allows us to more effectively manage our advertising expense while expanding our consumer outreach. We also maintain social media sites to enhance distribution capabilities for our promotional offers and to enable communication with our customers.
Throughout our history, we have emphasized controlled growth. Our store openings during recent years reflect our cautious approach toward store expansion in the current retail environment, which includes increasing e-commerce competition, especially in response to changing consumer buying habits resulting from concerns surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. The following table summarizes our store count for the periods presented:
(1)Stores that are relocated are classified as new stores. Sales from the prior location are treated as sales from a closed store and thus are excluded from same store sales calculations.
For fiscal 2022, we anticipate opening approximately six new stores and closing two stores.
Executive Summary
Our increased net income for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was mainly attributable to higher net sales and merchandise margins, partially offset by higher selling and administrative expense year over year. Higher net sales in fiscal 2021 primarily reflected strong consumer demand for various sporting goods products as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and consumers’ desire to recreate and stay active. Merchandise margins increased in fiscal 2021 due primarily to reduced promotional activity, a shift in our product sales mix and higher sales prices in response to increases in product purchase costs. Selling and administrative expense for fiscal 2021 increased over the prior year mainly reflecting higher employee labor and benefit-related expense and higher company performance-based incentive accruals.
•Net sales for fiscal 2021 increased 11.6% to $1,161.8 million compared to $1,041.2 million for fiscal 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily attributable to an increase in sales from same stores and added sales from new stores, partially offset by lower sales from closed stores. As a result of our fiscal calendar, net sales in fiscal 2020 also reflected one extra week of activity compared with fiscal 2021.
•Our same store sales for fiscal 2021, which are computed on a comparable 52-week basis, increased 13.9% versus the prior year. We experienced strong same store sales increases for each of our major merchandise categories of apparel, footwear and hardgoods in fiscal 2021. Same store sales for a period reflect sales from stores that operated throughout the period as well as the full corresponding prior-year period, and same store sales comparisons exclude sales from stores closed during the comparable periods.
•Gross profit for fiscal 2021 represented 37.5% of net sales, compared with 33.5% in the prior year. Merchandise margins were 250 basis points higher than the prior year, while occupancy expense as a percentage of net sales and distribution expense, including costs capitalized into inventory, as a percentage of net sales were lower compared with fiscal 2020.
•Selling and administrative expense for fiscal 2021 increased 8.9% to $299.8 million, or 25.8% of net sales, compared to $275.4 million, or 26.5% of net sales, for fiscal 2020. The increase in selling and administrative expense primarily reflects higher employee labor expense, due in part to store closures in the prior year as a result of COVID-19, and higher company performance-based incentive accruals year over year.
•Net income for fiscal 2021 was $102.4 million, or $4.55 per diluted share, compared to net income of $55.9 million, or $2.58 per diluted share, for fiscal 2020. The increase was driven primarily by increased net sales and merchandise margins, partially offset by increased selling and administrative expense in fiscal 2021.
Our principal liquidity requirements are for working capital, capital expenditures and cash dividends. We fund our liquidity requirements primarily through cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and borrowings from our revolving credit facility.
•Operating cash flow for fiscal 2021 was a positive $115.5 million compared to a positive $148.7 million in the prior year. The decrease in operating cash flow primarily reflected increased funding for merchandise inventory as a result of healthy consumer demand for various products, after reducing inventory in fiscal 2020 in response to COVID-19, partially offset by higher net income in fiscal 2021.
•Capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 increased to $10.9 million from $7.3 million in fiscal 2020, primarily reflecting the opening of new stores in fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020, in which no new stores were opened.
•Borrowings under our credit facility were zero as of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, which reflected a full pay-down of the credit facility since the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2020. We had cash and cash equivalents of $97.4 million and $64.7 million as of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, respectively, which included cash equivalents of $75.0 million and $50.0 million, respectively, related to investments in highly-liquid U.S. Treasury bills.
•We paid cash dividends in fiscal 2021 of $61.8 million, or $2.83 per share, compared with $5.5 million, or $0.25 per share, in fiscal 2020. In response to the improved strength of our balance sheet, operations and cash flow generation, in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, second quarter of fiscal 2021 and third quarter of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors declared increases in our quarterly cash dividends to $0.15 per share of outstanding common stock, $0.18 per share of outstanding common stock and $0.25 per share of outstanding common stock, respectively. Additionally, in the second quarter of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors declared a special cash dividend of $1.00 per share of outstanding common stock. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share of outstanding common stock and also declared a special cash dividend of $1.00 per share of outstanding common stock.
•We repurchased 361,323 shares of common stock for $7.6 million in fiscal 2021.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected items from our consolidated statements of operations by dollar and as a percentage of our net sales, and other financial data, for the periods indicated:
(1)Fiscal 2021 and 2020 included 52 weeks and 53 weeks, respectively.
(2)Cost of sales includes the cost of merchandise, net of discounts or allowances earned, freight, inventory reserves, buying, distribution center expense, including depreciation, and store occupancy expense. Store occupancy expense includes rent, amortization of leasehold improvements, common area maintenance, property taxes and insurance.
(3)Selling and administrative expense includes store-related expense, other than store occupancy expense, as well as advertising, depreciation and amortization, expense associated with operating our corporate headquarters and impairment charges, if any.
(4)Same store sales for a period reflect net sales from stores that operated throughout the period as well as the full corresponding prior-year period and sales from e-commerce. For purposes of reporting same store sales comparisons to the prior year for fiscal 2021, we used comparable 52-week periods. For purposes of reporting same store sales comparisons to the prior year for fiscal 2020, we used comparable 53-week periods.
Net Sales. Net sales increased by $120.6 million, or 11.6%, to $1,161.8 million for fiscal 2021 from $1,041.2 million for fiscal 2020. The change in net sales was primarily attributable to the following:
•Same store sales increased by $139.7 million, or 13.9%, for fiscal 2021 versus the comparable prior-year period. The increase in same store sales reflected the following:
oWe experienced strong same store sales increases for each of our major merchandise categories of apparel, footwear and hardgoods.
oContinued healthy demand for many categories of sporting goods products, particularly winter-related products, was a result of COVID-19 and consumers’ desire to recreate and stay active during the pandemic, and increased consumer demand for team sports products was a result of COVID-19 restrictions easing in many of our markets over the course of the year. Sales were negatively impacted by an active wildfire season in some of our markets during the third quarter of fiscal 2021 that resulted in the closing of certain national parks and affected various outdoor activities, including camping and watersports.
oThe increase in same store sales in fiscal 2021 was based on a 52-week comparison to the prior fiscal year, which reflected temporary store closures related to COVID-19 in the prior year and unfavorable winter weather in the first quarter of fiscal 2020.
oSame store sales for a period normally consist of sales for stores that operated throughout the period and the full corresponding prior-year period, along with sales from e-commerce. Same store sales comparisons exclude sales from stores permanently closed, or stores in the process of permanently closing, during the comparable periods. Sales from e-commerce in fiscal 2021 and 2020 were not material.
•We experienced increased customer transactions and a slightly higher average sale per transaction in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year.
•The net sales increase in fiscal 2021 was partially offset by a reduction of $19.4 million in sales due to one less week of activity compared with fiscal 2020 as a result of the 53-week fiscal year in 2020.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased by $86.6 million to $435.8 million, or 37.5% of net sales, in fiscal 2021 from $349.2 million, or 33.5% of net sales, in fiscal 2020. The change in gross profit was primarily attributable to the following:
•Net sales increased by $120.6 million, or 11.6%, in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year.
•Merchandise margins, which exclude buying, occupancy and distribution expense, increased by a favorable 250 basis points compared with fiscal 2020, when merchandise margins increased by a favorable 190 basis points over the prior year. The increase primarily reflects lower promotional activities, a shift in our product sales mix and higher sales prices in response to increases in product purchase costs. The higher product purchase costs we are experiencing reflect increased labor and freight costs initially resulting from shortages related to COVID-19, as well as strong consumer demand. Shipping capacity constraints and labor shortages at the ports are also contributing to higher freight costs and are adversely impacting our ability to obtain sufficient quantities of certain products in our stores to meet the higher demand.
•Distribution expense, including costs capitalized into inventory, decreased by $0.3 million, or a favorable 56 basis points, compared to the prior year. The decrease primarily reflected higher costs capitalized into inventory corresponding to the increase in merchandise inventories compared with fiscal 2020, largely offset by higher employee labor and benefit-related expense, as well as higher trucking and fuel expense, in order to meet the increased demand for our products. Higher fuel expense also resulted from gas price inflation, which we experienced over the last three quarters of fiscal 2021.
•Store occupancy expense increased by $1.7 million, but declined by a favorable 83 basis points as a percentage of net sales, year over year in fiscal 2021. Store occupancy expense for fiscal 2020 reflected the favorable impact from lease concessions in the amount of $3.1 million that we negotiated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling and Administrative Expense. Selling and administrative expense increased by $24.4 million, or 8.9%, to $299.8 million, or 25.8% of net sales, in fiscal 2021 from $275.4 million, or 26.5% of net sales, in fiscal 2020. The change in selling and administrative expense was primarily attributable to the following:
•Store-related expense, excluding occupancy, increased by $17.1 million, due largely to increased employee labor and benefit-related expense as a result of increased store operating hours compared to the same period in the prior year that reflected temporary workforce reductions and reduced store operating hours in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and increased wage rates in a tightening labor market, as well as increases in credit card fees and business insurance premiums.
oThe increase in employee labor-related expense included wage pressures that continue to reflect the incremental impact of legislated minimum wage rate increases primarily in California, where over fifty percent of our stores are located. In April 2016, California passed legislation to enact additional state-wide minimum wage rate increases from $10.00 to $15.00 per hour to be implemented in annual increments through fiscal 2022, with annual increases of $1.00 per hour effective in fiscal 2019 through fiscal 2022. Additionally, certain other jurisdictions within California, including Los Angeles and San Francisco, as well as various other states in which we do business, are implementing their own scheduled increases, which may also include interim impacts effective at various points throughout the year. We estimate that the impact of the California state-wide minimum wage rate increase, combined with the impact of the additional minimum wage rate increases in certain other jurisdictions within California and other states, caused our labor expense to increase by approximately $1.9 million for fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020.
oThe increase in employee labor and benefit-related expense included an increase in sick leave expense reflecting a California regulatory requirement that employers provide two weeks of COVID-19-related sick-time benefits to employees while they are self-quarantining.
oThe increase in employee labor and benefit-related expense also reflects an employee retention credit provided by the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) to provide relief for employers subject to closure due to the impact of COVID-19, which reduced employee labor and benefit-related expense by $0.9 million for fiscal 2020.
•Administrative expense increased by $6.9 million, primarily attributable to an increase in company performance-based incentive accruals and certain increased staffing-related expenses, as well as comparison to an insurance recovery of $1.7 million recognized in fiscal 2020 related to a store damaged as a result of a fire.
•Advertising expense increased by $0.3 million, due mainly to increased digital advertising in fiscal 2021, partially offset by lower print advertising in the prior fiscal year. Advertising expense in fiscal 2020 was significantly lower than fiscal 2019 as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Income. Other income in fiscal 2020 consisted of a cash condemnation settlement related to eminent domain proceedings, as more fully described in Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased to $0.9 million in fiscal 2021 compared with $1.9 million in fiscal 2020, primarily reflecting a zero balance in borrowings under our existing credit facility since July 2020.
Income Taxes. The provision for income taxes increased to $32.7 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $18.4 million for fiscal 2020, primarily reflecting higher pre-tax income in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Our effective tax rate of 24.2% for fiscal 2021 compared with 24.8% for fiscal 2020. Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 reflects an increased tax benefit related to the deduction for share-based compensation, a $0.3 million favorable reduction of our previously established valuation allowance related to unused California Enterprise Zone Tax Credits and a $0.2 million disaster recovery credit related to fires in California. Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 reflects a $0.4 million favorable reduction of our previously established valuation allowance related to unused California Enterprise Zone Tax Credits and the write-off of deferred tax assets related to share-based compensation of $0.3 million. As a result of the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act enacted on March 27, 2020, to provide relief from the impact of COVID-19, we amended our 2018 income tax return and our effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 reflects the carryback of our 2018 net operating loss to a period with a higher statutory income tax rate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal liquidity requirements are for working capital, capital expenditures and cash dividends. We fund our liquidity requirements primarily through cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and borrowings from our revolving credit facility. We believe our cash and cash equivalents, future cash flows from operations and borrowings from our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our cash requirements for at least the next 12 months.
We ended fiscal 2021 and 2020 with $97.4 million and $64.7 million of cash and cash equivalents, respectively, and no revolving credit borrowings. The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for each of the past two fiscal years:
The seasonality of our business historically provides greater cash flows from operations during the holiday and winter selling season. We use operating cash flows and borrowings under our revolving credit facility, if necessary, to fund inventory increases in anticipation of the holidays and our inventory levels are normally at their highest in the months leading up to Christmas. As holiday sales typically reduce inventory levels, this reduction, combined with net income, historically provides us with strong cash flows from operations at the end of our fiscal year.
For fiscal 2021, as COVID-19 restrictions continued easing in many of our markets, we experienced continued strong consumer demand across a broad assortment of product categories, including increased consumer demand for team sports products, which was weak last year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This strong consumer demand for fiscal 2021 contributed to higher sales and margins and increased net income year-over-year. After reducing merchandise inventory in fiscal 2020 in response to COVID-19, we increased purchases of merchandise inventory in fiscal 2021 to support the strong consumer demand. Although our operating cash flow for fiscal 2021 was healthy, reflecting our higher earnings, the increased funding of merchandise inventory for the year contributed to reduced operating cash flow compared to fiscal 2020.
For fiscal 2020, we experienced weak customer demand for winter-related products in the first quarter as a result of unfavorable warm and dry weather in most of our markets which contributed to higher merchandise inventory and lower operating cash flow compared to the first quarter of 2019. Also beginning on March 20, 2020, we temporarily closed more than one-half of our retail store locations in response to state and local shelter orders related to the COVID-19 outbreak and took measures to reduce expenses across the organization and enhance liquidity, including scaling back merchandise inventory orders and extending payment terms with merchandise vendors, among other measures. We were subsequently able to gradually reopen all store locations during the second quarter and, as we began reopening stores, we recognized significant increases in consumer demand. The combination of increasing sales and margins, reduced expenses and scaled back inventory purchases contributed to substantially higher operating cash flow for the second quarter and first half of fiscal 2020. In the second half of fiscal 2020, strong consumer demand related to COVID-19 continued to drive higher sales and margins which, combined with a reduced cost structure and lower merchandise inventory, produced meaningfully-higher operating cash flow for the year and enabled us to entirely pay down our credit facility borrowings.
Operating Activities. Operating cash flows for fiscal 2021 and 2020 were a positive $115.5 million and a positive $148.7 million, respectively. While we experienced strong cash flows from operating activities for both periods, the decrease in cash flow from operating activities for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily reflects increased funding for merchandise inventory as a result of strong consumer demand for various products, after reducing merchandise inventory in the prior year in response to COVID-19. The lower operating cash flow year over year also reflects decreased accrued expenses primarily related to taxes, partially offset by higher net income and decreased credit card receivables in fiscal 2021.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021 and 2020 was $10.6 million and $5.4 million, respectively. Capital expenditures, excluding non-cash acquisitions, represented substantially all of the cash used in investing activities for each period. In fiscal 2021, capital expenditures of $10.9 million were partially offset by a portion of settlement proceeds related to a civil unrest insurance recovery of $0.2 million, and in fiscal 2020, capital expenditures of $7.3 million were partially offset by proceeds from insurance recoveries of $1.8 million and a portion of settlement proceeds from an eminent domain condemnation of $0.2 million. Our capital spending is primarily to fund store-related remodeling, the opening of new stores, distribution center equipment, and computer hardware and software purchases. Capital expenditures by category for each of the last two fiscal years are as follows:
Capital expenditures in both fiscal years included investment in existing store remodeling to support our merchandising initiatives and enhancement of information security measures to support our infrastructure. Our capital expenditures included five new stores, including relocations, in fiscal 2021 and, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our capital expenditures included no new stores in fiscal 2020.
Financing Activities. Financing cash flows for fiscal 2021 and 2020 were a negative $72.1 million and a negative $87.0 million, respectively. For fiscal 2021, net cash was used primarily to fund dividend payments, treasury stock purchases and finance lease payments, partially offset by proceeds received from the exercise of share option awards. For fiscal 2020, net cash was used primarily to pay down borrowings under the credit facility and fund payments of outstanding checks, dividend payments and finance lease payments. The decreased cash flow used in financing activities for fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year primarily reflects a full pay-down of borrowings under the credit facility during fiscal 2020 to zero, partially offset by substantially higher dividends paid in fiscal 2021, as a result of improved profitability and cash generation.
As of January 2, 2022, we had no revolving credit borrowings and letter of credit commitments of $1.1 million outstanding. These balances compare to no revolving credit borrowings and letter of credit commitments of $2.6 million outstanding as of January 3, 2021.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2020, we paid a quarterly cash dividend of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock. In the second quarter of fiscal 2020, our Board of Directors suspended our quarterly cash dividend as a result of COVID-19. In response to the improved strength of our balance sheet, operations and cash flow generation, in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, our Board of Directors reinstated our quarterly cash dividend at the previous rate of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock and declared a cash dividend of $0.10 per share of outstanding common stock. The $0.10 cash dividend reflected our reinstated quarterly cash dividend of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock for the third quarter of fiscal 2020, and also included an additional $0.05 per share in recognition that we did not pay a dividend in the second quarter of fiscal 2020. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, first quarter of fiscal 2021, second quarter of fiscal 2021 and third quarter of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors declared increases in our quarterly cash dividends to $0.10 per share of outstanding common stock, $0.15 per share of outstanding common stock, $0.18 per share of outstanding common stock and $0.25 per share of outstanding common stock, respectively. Additionally, in the second quarter of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors declared a special cash dividend of $1.00 per share of outstanding common stock. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share of outstanding common stock and also declared a special cash dividend of $1.00 per share of outstanding common stock. In the first quarter of fiscal 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share of outstanding common stock, which will be paid on March 25, 2022 to stockholders of record as of March 11, 2022.
Periodically, we repurchase our common stock in the open market pursuant to programs approved by our Board of Directors. We may repurchase our common stock for a variety of reasons, including, among other things, our alternative cash requirements, existing business conditions and the current market price of our stock. In fiscal 2016, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program for the purchase of up to $25.0 million of our common stock, which was in effect through the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 and under which a total of $7.7 million remained available for share repurchases as of January 2, 2022. In the first quarter of fiscal 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of up to $25.0 million of our common stock, which replaced the previous share repurchase program. Under these programs, we may purchase shares from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. However, the timing and amount of such purchases, if any, would be at the discretion of our management and Board of Directors, and would depend on market conditions and other considerations. We repurchased 361,323 shares of common stock in fiscal 2021 and no shares of common stock in fiscal 2020. Since the inception of our initial share repurchase program in May 2006 through January 2, 2022, we have repurchased a total of 3,890,295 shares for $49.4 million.
Loan Agreement. As of January 3, 2021, we had a credit agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (“Wells Fargo”), as administrative agent, and a syndicate of other lenders, as amended (the “Prior Credit Agreement”), which was terminated and replaced on February 24, 2021 as discussed below.
On February 24, 2021, we terminated the Prior Credit Agreement and entered into a Loan, Guaranty and Security agreement with Bank of America, N.A. (“BofA”), as agent and lender, which was amended on November 22, 2021 (as so amended, the “Loan Agreement”). The Loan Agreement has a maturity date of February 24, 2026 and provides for a revolving credit facility with an aggregate committed availability of up to $150.0 million. We may also request additional increases in aggregate availability, up to a maximum of $200.0 million, in which case the existing lender under the Loan Agreement will have the option to increase their commitment to accommodate the requested increase. If the lender does not exercise that option, we may (with the consent of BofA in its role as the administrative agent, not to be unreasonably withheld) seek other lenders willing to provide such commitments. The credit facility includes a $50.0 million sublimit for issuances of letters of credit.
Similar to the Prior Credit Agreement, we may borrow under the Loan Agreement from time to time, provided the amounts outstanding will not exceed the lesser of the then aggregate committed availability (as discussed above) and the Borrowing Base (such lesser amount being referred to as the “Line Cap”). As defined in the Loan Agreement, the “Borrowing Base” generally is comprised of the sum, at the time of calculation, of (a) 90.00% of eligible credit card receivables; plus (b) the cost of eligible inventory (other than eligible in-transit inventory), net of inventory reserves, multiplied by 90.00% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory (expressed as a percentage of the cost of eligible inventory); plus (c) the cost of eligible in-transit inventory, net of inventory reserves, multiplied by 90.00% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible in-transit inventory (expressed as a percentage of the cost of eligible in-transit inventory), minus (d) certain agreed-upon reserves as well as other reserves established by BofA in its role as the administrative agent in its reasonable discretion.
Generally, we may designate specific borrowings under the Loan Agreement as either base rate loans or LIBO rate loans. The applicable interest rate on our borrowings is a function of the daily average, over the preceding fiscal quarter, of the excess of the Line Cap over amounts borrowed (such amount being referred to as the “Average Daily Availability”). Those loans designated as LIBO rate loans bear interest at a rate equal to the then applicable adjusted LIBO rate plus an applicable margin as shown in the table below. Those loans designated as base rate loans bear interest at a rate equal to the applicable margin for base rate loans (as shown below) plus the highest of (a) the Federal funds rate, as in effect from time to time, plus one-half of one percent (0.50%), (b) the LIBO rate, plus one percentage point (1.00%), or (c) the rate of interest in effect for such day as announced from time to time within BofA as its “prime rate.” The applicable margin for all loans will be a function of Average Daily Availability for the preceding fiscal quarter as set forth below.
The commitment fee assessed on the unused portion of the credit facility is 0.20% per annum.
Obligations under the Loan Agreement are secured by a general lien on and security interest in substantially all of our assets. The Loan Agreement contains covenants that require us to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.0:1.0 in certain circumstances, and limits the ability to, among other things, incur liens, incur additional indebtedness, transfer or dispose of assets, change the nature of the business, guarantee obligations, pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase stock, and make advances, loans or investments. We may generally declare or pay cash dividends or repurchase stock only if, among other things, no default or event of default then exists or would arise from such dividend or repurchase of stock and, after giving effect to such dividend or repurchase, certain availability and/or fixed charge coverage ratio requirements are satisfied, although we are permitted to make up to $5.0 million of dividend payments or stock repurchases per year without satisfaction of the availability or fixed charge coverage ratio requirements, but dividends or stock repurchases made without satisfying the availability and/or fixed charge coverage ratio requirements will require the establishment of an additional reserve that will reduce borrowing availability under the Loan Agreement for 75 days. The Loan Agreement contains customary events of default, including, without limitation, failure to pay when due principal amounts with respect to the credit facility, failure to pay any interest or other amounts under the credit facility, failure to comply with certain agreements or covenants contained in the Loan Agreement, failure to satisfy certain judgments against us, failure to pay when due (or any other default which permits the acceleration of) certain other material indebtedness in principal amount in excess of $5.0 million, and certain insolvency and bankruptcy events. As amended, the Loan Agreement provides for a transition to an alternative benchmark reference rate following the cessation of the LIBO rate.
The Prior Credit Agreement had a maturity date of September 29, 2022 and, as amended, provided for a line of credit up to $140.0 million, which amount could be increased at our option up to a maximum of $165.0 million. We could also request additional increases in aggregate availability, on an uncommitted basis up to a maximum of $200.0 million. The prior revolving credit facility included a $25.0 million sublimit for issuances of letters of credit and a $20.0 million sublimit for swingline loans. The Prior Credit Agreement provided for LIBO rate loans to bear interest at a rate equal to the applicable adjusted LIBO rate plus an applicable margin, as shown in the table below. The loans designated as base rate loans bore interest at a rate equal to the applicable margin for base rate loans plus the highest of (a) the Federal funds rate in effect plus one-half of one percent, (b) the LIBO rate, plus one percentage point, or (c) the prime interest rate. Under the Prior Credit Agreement, the applicable margin for all loans was a function of Average Daily Availability for the preceding fiscal quarter as set forth below.
The commitment fee assessed on the unused portion of the prior credit facility was 0.20% per annum.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we paid and capitalized $0.7 million in new creditor and third-party fees associated with the Loan Agreement, which will be amortized over the term of the Loan Agreement, and extinguished $0.2 million of deferred financing fees associated with the Prior Credit Agreement.
In order to support our liquidity in response to the rapidly growing COVID-19 outbreak, in March 2020 we exercised the accordion feature under our $140.0 million prior credit facility and drew down additional amounts under that facility that resulted in long-term revolving credit borrowings of $143.3 million as of March 31, 2020, our highest borrowing level. As a result of improved profitability and cash generation activities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we paid down to zero our long-term revolving credit borrowings and we had letter of credit commitments of $1.1 million outstanding as of January 2, 2022, compared with zero borrowings and letter of credit commitments of $2.6 million as of January 3, 2021. Total remaining borrowing availability, after subtracting letters of credit, was $148.9 million and $162.4 million as of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, respectively.
The following table provides information about our revolving credit borrowings as of and for the periods indicated:
Future Capital Requirements. We had cash and cash equivalents on hand of $97.4 million as of January 2, 2022. We expect capital expenditures for fiscal 2022, excluding non-cash acquisitions, to range from approximately $15.0 million to $20.0 million, primarily for the opening of new stores, store-related remodeling, distribution center equipment and computer hardware and software purchases. For fiscal 2022, we anticipate opening approximately six new stores and closing two stores.
Dividends are paid at the discretion of the Board of Directors. In fiscal 2021 and 2020 we paid annual cash dividends of $2.83 per share and $0.25 per share, respectively, of outstanding common stock. Dividends declared in fiscal 2021 included special dividends in the amount of $2.00 per share of outstanding common stock. In the first quarter of fiscal 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share of outstanding common stock, which will be paid on March 25, 2022 to stockholders of record as of March 11, 2022.
As of January 2, 2022, a total of $7.7 million remained available for share repurchases under our previous share repurchase program. In the first quarter of fiscal 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of up to $25.0 million of our common stock, which replaced the previous share repurchase program. We consider several factors in determining when and if we make share repurchases including, among other things, our alternative cash requirements, existing business conditions and the market price of our stock.
Contractual Obligations. Our material contractual obligations include operating lease commitments associated with our leased properties and other occupancy expense, finance lease obligations, borrowings under our credit facility, if any, and other liabilities. Operating lease commitments consist principally of leases for our retail store facilities, distribution center and corporate offices. These leases frequently include options which permit us to extend the terms beyond the initial fixed lease term, and we intend to renegotiate most of these leases as they expire. Operating lease commitments also consist of information technology (“IT”) systems hardware and distribution center delivery tractors. Additional information regarding our operating leases is available in Item 2, Properties and Note 7, Lease Commitments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into arrangements with vendors to purchase merchandise in advance of expected delivery. Because most of these purchase orders do not contain any termination payments or other penalties if cancelled, they are not considered as outstanding contractual obligations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our critical accounting estimates detailed below are included in our significant accounting policies as described in Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Those consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP. Critical accounting estimates are those that we believe are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expense. Our estimates are evaluated on an ongoing basis and drawn from historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. Actual results may differ from our estimates. Management believes that the following accounting estimates are critical and reflect the more significant judgments and estimates we use in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Valuation of Merchandise Inventories, Net
Our merchandise inventories are made up of finished goods and are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted-average cost method that approximates the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method. Average cost consists of the direct purchase price of merchandise inventory, net of vendor allowances and cash discounts, in-bound freight-related costs and allocated overhead costs associated with our distribution center.
We record valuation reserves on a quarterly basis for merchandise items with slow-moving or obsolescence exposure and merchandise that has a carrying value that exceeds net realizable value. These reserves are estimates of a reduction in value to reflect inventory valuation at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Factors included in determining slow-moving or obsolescence reserve estimates include recent customer demand, merchandise aging, seasonal trends and decisions to discontinue certain products. Because of our merchandise mix, we have not historically experienced significant occurrences of obsolescence. Our inventory valuation reserves for damaged and defective merchandise, slow-moving or obsolete merchandise and for lower of cost or net realizable value provisions totaled $2.7 million and $3.5 million as of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, respectively, representing approximately 1% of our merchandise inventory for both periods.
A 10% change in our inventory valuation reserves estimate in total as of January 2, 2022, would result in a change in reserves of $0.3 million and a change in pre-tax earnings by the same amount. Our reserves are estimates, which could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from actual results if future economic conditions, consumer demand and competitive environments differ from our expectations. At this time, we do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions that we use to calculate our inventory reserves.
Seasonality and Impact of Inflation
We experience seasonal fluctuations in our net sales and operating results, which can suffer when weather does not conform to seasonal norms, such as the first quarter of fiscal 2020 when we experienced warm and dry winter-weather conditions across our markets. Seasonality in our net sales influences our buying patterns which directly impacts our merchandise and accounts payable levels and cash flows. We purchase merchandise for seasonal activities in advance of a season and supplement our merchandise assortment as necessary and when possible during the season. Our efforts to replenish products during a season are not always successful. In the fourth fiscal quarter, which includes the holiday selling season and the start of the winter selling season, we normally experience higher inventory purchase volumes and increased expense for staffing and advertising. If we miscalculate the consumer demand for our products generally or for our product mix in advance of a season, particularly the fourth quarter, our net sales can decline, which can harm our financial performance. A significant shortfall from expected net sales, particularly during the fourth quarter, can negatively impact our annual operating results.
In fiscal 2021 and 2020, we experienced greater inflation in the cost of products that we purchase for resale as well as higher freight costs than in previous years. While our merchandise inventory costs in fiscal 2021 and 2020 were impacted by these inflationary pressures, up to this point we have generally been able to adjust our selling prices in response to these higher product purchase costs. However, if we are unable to continue to adjust our selling prices for product purchase cost increases that might occur in the future, then our merchandise margins could decline, which would adversely impact our operating results.
Recently Issued Accounting Updates
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.