Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis provide information which we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our audited consolidated results of operations and financial condition. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. For a complete discussion of forward-looking statements, see the section in this report entitled “Forward-Looking Statements.” Certain risk factors may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the following discussion. For a discussion of such risk factors, see the sections in this report entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Business Overview
We are an Intelligent Enterprise Robotics (“IER”) company pioneering and delivering transformative AI-enabled robotic solutions that automate filling ecommerce orders for consumers or businesses, filling orders to resupply retail and grocery stores, and handling packages shipped to fill those orders. Our solutions transform supply chain operations and enable our customers to meet and exceed the demands of today’s connected consumers and businesses.
Our IER capabilities are grounded in patented and proprietary technologies for robotic picking (each picking or unit handling), robotic movement and mobility (movement and storage of orders and goods), and system orchestration (which enables various intelligent subsystems to work together so that the right work is being done at the right time to meet our customer’s needs). We are a technology leader in robotics and AI automation with an intellectual property position buttressed by trade secrets supporting our technologies and over 285 patent filings with 120 U.S. and international patents issued to date in technologies including robotic picking, mobility, gripping, sensing and perception, general robot control, and differentiated supporting mechanisms. Our proprietary technologies enable us to offer holistic solutions that automate supply chain operations. Our solutions include moving goods to robots that then pick and pack ecommerce or retail orders, robotically moving and organizing inventory and orders within a warehouse or logistics facility, and robotically sorting packages and shipments.
We are not a component technology company nor are we a conventional systems integrator. Instead, we create products from the technologies we pioneer and develop, and then incorporate the products (product modules) into solutions - solutions that incorporate said modules and are designed by us to meet customer performance metrics like throughput and accuracy rates. We believe that this technology plus performant, whole-enterprise solution view, enables customers to focus on the core of their business and creates attractive returns for them. Following the whole-enterprise solution view, we not only make, install, test, and commission the solutions, but we also offer customers continued support in the form of software updates as well as professional services including maintenance, system operation, and cloud-based monitoring and analytics. Because of our modular approach to solutions and the role of our software, we offer customers the ability to incrementally add to or change solutions, and we can incorporate outside technologies with our product modules if desired. The same modular attributes mean we can offer small and large solutions and can design for brownfield and greenfield installations. We offer customers a range of purchase options including a robotics-as-a-service (“RaaS”) program that minimizes the up-front capital required when compared to conventional equipment purchase models.
To date, most of our deployments have been with large, Fortune 50 companies, where our technology and solutions in production have achieved targeted metrics including throughput, accuracy, equipment effectiveness, and others. Our customers include Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (“Wal-Mart”), Target Corporation (“Target”), FedEx Corporation (“FedEx”), Meijer Distribution, Inc. (“Meijer”) and SoftBank Robotics Corp. (“Softbank”).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Target, TJX, FedEx, and Meijer comprised approximately 32%, 27%, 14% and 12% of our revenue, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Target and Softbank comprised approximately 70% and 30% of our revenue.
With the completion of an existing Softbank project, we do not anticipate further immediate business with SoftBank. We do not anticipate that this will have an adverse effect on our expected future revenues or results of operations. We expect the master purchase and license agreement with Softbank to expire in June 2022, and Softbank has notified us they intend the same.
We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operating activities in each of our annual periods since our inception, and we expect we will continue to need investments to support the growth of our business, continue research and development in our customer solutions, and support our operations. We also expect that we will incur operating losses and negative cash flows from operating activities for the next few years as a result of these continued investments. Our ability
to achieve profitability and positive cash flows from operating activities will depend primarily on our ability to substantially scale our revenues with current and future customers. We believe that our revenue growth will be driven by expanding relationships with our current, large anchor customers and by investing in sales and marketing resources to build a diverse, global customer base and expand geographically. By scaling our revenues, we expect to be able to lower our solution costs through increased volumes with our contract manufacturers. Additionally, we believe that scaling our revenues will allow us to leverage overhead and other fixed costs supporting our business, contributing towards improving overall profitability. We believe that our proprietary technology powered by our artificial intelligence software platform combined with our engineering capabilities and proven customer experiences will enable us to fully realize our potential in the large and rapidly growing robotics and AI automation industry.
Recent Developments
Merger Agreement
On February 23, 2021, Legacy Berkshire Grey entered into the Merger Agreement with RAAC, as summarized in Note 1, "Nature of the Business and Basis of Presentation", and Note 3, "Merger" of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. On July 21, 2021, the Company completed a business combination transaction with RAAC and the combined company was renamed Berkshire Grey, Inc.
COVID-19
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations remains unpredictable due to the evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and the extent of its impact across industries and geographies and numerous other uncertainties. For example, we cannot predict the duration and spread of the outbreak of new variants of the virus, additional actions that may be taken by governmental entities, or the impact the pandemic may have on the ability of us, our customers, our suppliers, our manufacturers, and our other business partners to conduct business. Governments in affected regions have implemented, and may continue to implement, safety precautions which include quarantines, travel restrictions, business closures, cancellations of public gatherings, and other measures as they deem necessary. Many organizations and individuals, including our Company and employees, are taking additional steps to avoid or reduce infections, including limiting travel and working from home. These measures are disrupting normal business operations and have had significant negative impacts on businesses and financial markets worldwide. We continue to monitor our operations and government recommendations and have made modifications to our normal operations because of the COVID-19 pandemic, including utilizing heightened cleaning and sanitization procedures, implementing new health and safety protocols and reducing non-essential travel.
To date, travel restrictions and capacity limits at customer locations imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic have caused delays in the deployment of two customer contracts; however, the pandemic has not significantly impacted our financial condition and operations. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and related governmental advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our results may be materially adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and judgments include, but are not limited to, revenue recognition including performance obligations, variable consideration and other obligations such as warranty cost and incentives and accounting for stock-based compensation including performance-based assessments. We base these estimates and judgments on historical experience, market participant fair value considerations, projected future cash flows and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates. We believe that our accounting policies relating to revenue recognition and stock-based compensation are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. We have identified these policies as critical because they both are important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require us to make judgments and estimates on matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in future periods. For more information regarding these policies, you should refer to Note 2, "Significant Accounting Policies" of our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We primarily derive revenues from the sale of our AI-enabled robotics and automation solutions, which consist of a network of automated machinery installed at the customer location and configured to meet specified performance requirements. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised products is transferred to the customer, or when services are satisfied under the contract, in an amount that reflects the consideration Berkshire Grey expects to be entitled to in exchange for those products or services (the transaction price). Revenue is recognized only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur. Taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities, are excluded from revenue.
Our customer contracts typically have multiple performance obligations. Judgment is required to determine whether performance obligations specified in these contracts are distinct and should be accounted for as separate revenue transactions for recognition purposes. We also provide assurance-based warranties that are not considered a distinct performance obligation. We allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation in an amount based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices (“SSP”) of the promised goods or services underlying each performance obligation.
We began generating revenue from the sale of systems in 2018. The absence of observable prices resulting from our relatively short period of revenue generation requires us to estimate the SSPs of distinct performance obligations in a given contract. We use a cost plus margin approach to determine the SSP for separate performance obligations. Expected margins may vary based on the complexity of the underlying equipment and technologies. Our determination of SSP may change in the future as standalone sales of solutions and services occur, providing observable prices.
Each customer contract is evaluated individually to determine the appropriate pattern of revenue recognition. The majority of our revenues is from the sale of systems which are delivered and installed by our deployment teams. Revenue recognition for these contracts begins upon delivery and continues throughout the installation and implementation period. Berkshire Grey typically uses total estimated labor hours as the input to measure progress as labor hours represent work performed and the transfer of control to the customer. Revenue from sale of services may be recognized over the life of the associated service contract or as services are performed, depending on the nature of the services being provided.
Our complete revenue recognition policy is more fully described in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and non-employees based on their fair value on the date of the grant and recognize the corresponding compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur. We grant stock options, restricted stock awards, and restricted stock units that are subject to service and/or performance-based vesting conditions. Compensation expense related to awards to employees and non-employees with performance-based vesting conditions is recognized based on the grant date fair value over the requisite service period using the accelerated attribution method to the extent achievement of the performance condition is probable. We estimate the probability that certain performance criteria will be met and do not recognize compensation expense until it is probable that the performance-based vesting condition will be achieved.
We classify stock-based compensation expense in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss in the same way the payroll costs or service payments are classified for the related stock-based award recipient.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option using the Black-Scholes option pricing model or a lattice model, which requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including (i) the expected volatility of our stock, (ii) the expected term of the award, (iii) the risk-free interest rate, (iv) expected dividends, and (v) the fair value of our common stock.
A complete discussion of stock-based compensation expense, including cost components and amounts, is more fully described in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary of Recent Financial Performance
Revenue was $50.9 million in 2021 compared to $34.8 million in 2020. The increase in revenue primarily relates to fulfillment of orders placed by existing customers.
Gross profit declined from $2.8 million to a loss of $8.2 million in 2021, which was mainly driven by the accrual of estimated future costs in excess of estimated future revenues for select contracts expected to be deployed in 2022.
Combined general and administrative, selling and marketing, and research and development expenses in 2021 increased to $156.1 million, compared to $64.7 million in 2020. The net increase in total operating expenses of $91.4 million
was primarily driven by an increase in employee expenses of $22.7 million, materials and professional services expenses of $21.2 million and an increase in stock based compensation of $43.4 million.
Net losses were $153.4 million in 2021 compared to $57.6 million in 2020. The increase in net losses was due primarily to increase in operating expenses.
Results of Operations
The following is a description of significant components of our operations, including significant trends and uncertainties that we believe are important to an understanding of our business and results of operations.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
In 2021 and 2020, we generated revenue through the sale, delivery and, installation of customer contracts in the United States and Japan. The following table presents revenue as well as the change from the prior period.
Revenue was $50.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with revenue of $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $16.1 million. The increase in revenue primarily relates to fulfillment of orders placed by our existing customers. Our revenue is dependent upon our existing customers, and we expect that we will continue to derive a majority of our revenue from a limited number of significant customers in future years. No assurance can be given that our significant customers will expand their business relationship with us, will continue to do business with us, or that they will maintain their historical levels of business. If our relationship with any significant customer were to cease, then our revenues would decline and negatively impact our results of operations.
Cost of Revenue
The following table presents cost of revenue as well as the change from the prior period.
Cost of revenue includes the cost of components and other materials that comprise the products we deploy, the cost of labor, and overhead. Total cost of revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $59.1 million and $32.0 million, respectively, an increase of $27.1 million or 85%. The increase in total cost of revenue was driven primarily by an increase in the number of fulfilled contracts and the accrual of estimated future costs in excess of estimated future revenues for select contracts expected to be deployed in 2022.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The following table presents gross profit as well as the change from the prior period.
Total gross (loss) profit during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was a loss of $8.2 million and a profit of $2.8 million, respectively. The decrease in gross profit of $11.0 million was primarily driven by the accrual of estimated future costs in excess of estimated future revenues for select contracts expected to be deployed in 2022.
The following table presents gross margin as well as the change from the prior period.
Total gross margin was approximately (16)% for 2021 compared with total gross margin of 8% for 2020, a decrease of 24% . Gross margins may fluctuate significantly based on actual volumes realized in any given reporting period. By scaling our revenues, we expect to be able to lower our solution costs through increased volumes with our contract manufacturers. Additionally, we believe that scaling our revenues allows us to leverage other overhead costs, contributing towards improving overall gross margins.
General and Administrative
The following table presents general and administrative expenses as well as the change from the prior period.
General and administrative expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $40.3 million and $15.9 million, respectively, an increase of $24.4 million or 153%. The increase in general and administrative expenses included an increase in stock-based compensation of $16.1 million, a $1.5 million increase in salaries and related employee costs, and a $6.4 million increase in business services (e.g., legal, recruiting, insurance, consulting), which were incurred primarily as a result of the Business Combination.
Sales and Marketing
The following table presents sales and marketing expenses as well as the change from the prior period.
Sales and marketing expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $52.0 million and $12.9 million, respectively, an increase of $39.1 million or 302%. The increase in sales and marketing expenses included a $25.7 million increase in stock-based compensation, a $10.6 million increase in employees and related costs, and a $2.8 million increase in marketing services and materials to expand our customer reach, create and expand our branding programs, and implement systems to support planned future growth.
Research and Development
The following table presents research and development expenses as well as the change from the prior period.
Research and development expenses related to conceptual formulation and design of products and processes consist primarily of salaries and related costs for our engineers, contractors and consulting expenses, costs of components and products, and occupancy and other overhead costs. Research and development expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $63.8 million and $35.8 million, respectively, an increase of $28.0 million or 78%. The increase in research and development expenses included a $10.8 million increase in salaries and related employee costs related to personnel growth and expanded development programs, an $11.9 million increase in costs associated with equipment related to engineering projects, a $3.6 million increase in occupancy cost, and a $1.6 million increase in stock-based compensation.
Interest Income
The following table presents interest income as well as the change from the prior period.
Interest income during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was less than $0.1 million and $0.3 million, respectively, a decrease of approximately $0.2 million. The decrease in interest income was due to a decrease in the balance of our money market funds during the first half of 2021 and a decline in interest rates.
Other Income
The following table presents other income as well as the change from the prior period.
Other (expense) income during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was an expense of $0.1 million and income of $3.9 million, respectively, a decrease of $4.0 million or 102%. The decrease in other income is related to the revaluation of warrants issued to purchase shares of Berkshire Grey Series B-3 Preferred Stock when we determined, upon evaluation of achievement of certain performance milestones, that the vesting of the warrants was not probable. These warrants were cancelled upon consummation of the Merger. See Note 9 "Convertible Preferred Stock and Stockholders Equity" for more information.
Income Taxes
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded no income tax benefits due to the uncertainty of future taxable income, given that we have incurred net losses since inception.
We have provided a valuation allowance for all our net deferred tax assets as a result of our historical net losses in the jurisdictions in which we operate. We continue to assess our future taxable income by jurisdiction based on our recent historical operating results, the expected timing of reversal of temporary differences, various tax planning strategies that we may be able to enact in future periods, the impact of potential operating changes on our business and our forecast results from operations in future periods based on available information at the end of each reporting period. To the extent that we are able to reach the conclusion that deferred tax assets are realizable based on any combination of the above factors in a single, or multiple, taxing jurisdictions, a reversal of the related portion of our existing valuation allowances may occur.
Non-GAAP Financial Information
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, each non-GAAP financial measures, are useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use this non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that this non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance.
We define “EBITDA” as net loss plus interest income, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization expense.
We define “Adjusted EBITDA” as EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation, the change in fair value of warrant liabilities, and other expenses.
We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends because it eliminates the effect of financing, capital expenditures, and non-cash expenses (such as stock-based compensation and changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities) and provides investors with a means to compare our financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
Our computation of these measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies because not all companies calculate these measures in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA during the years presented.
Backlog
Our order backlog as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, was valued at approximately $105.0 million and $71.1 million, respectively. Although our backlog consists of firm purchase orders, the level of backlog at any particular time may not be necessarily indicative of future sales. Given the nature of our relationships with our customers, and the fact that to-date we have not entered into long-term purchase commitments with our customers, we may allow our customers to cancel or reschedule deliveries, and therefore, backlog may not be a meaningful indicator of future financial results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity, Capital, and Capital Requirements
We have incurred a net loss in each of our annual periods since our inception. We incurred net losses of $153.4 million and $57.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. As an early-stage company, we have primarily obtained cash to fund our operations through preferred stock and common stock offerings. From inception through December 31, 2021, we have received cumulative gross proceeds from the sale of our preferred stock, common stock and warrants of $419.4 million to fund our operations.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to support our operating plan and cash commitments for the next 12 months. We completed the Business Combination on July 21, 2021 and received proceeds, net of transaction costs, of $192.1 million. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including the growth of the business, continued research and development in our customer solutions, and support for our operations.
Our lease portfolio includes leased offices and facilities. As of December 31, 2021, future minimum rental commitments for operating leases with non-cancellable terms in excess of one year were as follows:
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows during the years presented.
Cash Flows for the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $114.1 million, primarily consisting of $153.4 million of net losses, adjusted for non-cash items, which primarily included stock-based compensation of $49.8 million and a gain on change in fair value of warrants of $11.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $56.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of $57.6 million of net losses, adjusted for certain non-cash items, which primarily included stock-based compensation expense of $6.0 million and gain on change in fair value of warrants of $3.9 million.
Cash used from changes in net operating assets and liabilities increased by $0.9 million from 2020, which is composed of a $21.7 million increase in deferred fulfilment costs and a $9.2 million increase in prepaid expenses, partially offset by a $19.7 million decrease in accounts receivable, a $5.2 million decrease in contract liabilities, and a $4.5 million increase in accounts payable.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $4.1 million and $8.7 million, respectively. The decrease of $4.6 million is attributed to a reduction of capital expenditures for development systems, leasehold improvements for lab and office space, and information technology infrastructure for research and development activities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $195.2 million and $0.2 million, respectively. The increase in cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to proceeds received from issuance of common stock upon the Merger of $192.1 million.
Long-Term Indebtedness
As of December 30, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt.