Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and Notes thereto in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. You should also bear in mind the Risk Factors set forth in Part I, Item 1A, any of which could materially and adversely affect the Company’s business, operating results, financial condition and the actual results of the matters addressed by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion.
For further discussion and analysis regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
COVID Pandemic Update
In late 2019, there was an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus (COVID) first identified in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, which has since spread globally. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID a pandemic. Further, the COVID outbreak has resulted in government authorities around the world implementing numerous measures to try to reduce the spread of COVID, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, “shelter-in-place,” “stay-at-home,” and total lock-down orders, business limitations or shutdowns and similar orders. As a result, the COVID pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and workforce participation, and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. In an effort to first and foremost protect the health and safety of our employees, we continue to take proactive action to adopt social distancing policies at our locations globally, including working from home for certain employees, limiting the number of employees attending meetings, reducing the number of people in our locations at any one time, and significantly limiting employee travel. More recently, more contagious variants of COVID (the Delta and Omicron variants) have emerged and spread globally, which has caused some governments to reimplement various measures, or impose new restrictions, in an effort to lessen the spread of COVID and its variants. It is unclear at this point the full impact the Delta and Omicron variants will have on the global economy and on our Company.
As a result of the COVID pandemic, our revenue during 2020 and 2021 was negatively impacted primarily as a result of operational inefficiencies relating to reduced productivity levels throughout our facilities and supply chain constraints, which affected our ability to support customer demand. Additionally, the COVID pandemic negatively impacted our 2020 and 2021 results due to increased direct costs associated with labor expenses and personal protective equipment for our employees, as well as under absorption of fixed costs.
Benchmark provides critical infrastructure products and essential services in each of our locations, which has allowed us to continue to operate. The COVID pandemic continues to affect the Company’s operations into 2022. End market demand continues to grow as more customers recover from the pandemic. However, we continue to see component supply chain constraints across all commodity categories which are constraining our ability to produce the full demand forecasts we are receiving from customers. See "2021 Overview" below and "Risk Factors-Shortages or price increases of components specified by our customers have delayed and are expected to continue delaying shipments and may adversely affect our profitability" in Part II, Item 1A of this Report for additional information.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted in the United States in response to the COVID pandemic. The CARES Act among other things, permits net operating loss carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021, and contains modifications on the limitation of business interest for tax years beginning in 2019 and 2020. The Company evaluated the impact of these provisions and determined these provisions did not have any impact on the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. In addition, the CARES Act allows for employee retention tax credits to be taken in U.S. payroll tax filings and allows for the deferral of the employer portion of social security taxes with 50% to be paid at the end of calendar years 2021 and 2022, respectively. Accordingly, the Company deferred the payment of the employer portion of social security taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 until the end of 2021 and 2022, respectively. During December 2021, the Company paid approximately 50% of the social security taxes previously deferred. The Company has also determined it was entitled to employee retention credits and filed for the credits in the second quarter 2020 payroll tax reports pursuant to the guidance provided by the Internal Revenue Service. The amount of credits has been recorded in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company has determined that it is not eligible for employee retention tax credits as of December 31, 2021, and the deferral of the employer portion of social security taxes is not available for 2021. We have not received the retention credits from
the Internal Revenue Service that we applied for during second quarter of 2020. The Internal Revenue Service has had some delays in processing the filings for the tax refunds.
We continue to monitor the evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities, and may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, the exact extent of the impact of the COVID pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations, is currently unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, continuously evolving and cannot be predicted. This includes, but is not limited to, the duration and spread of the COVID pandemic and its severity; the emergence and severity of its variants, including the Delta and Omicron variants; the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, including the availability and efficacy of vaccinations (particularly with respect to emerging strains of the virus) and the rate of inoculations; general economic factors, such as increased inflation; global supply chain constraints and shortages; labor supply issues; and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume, which may not return fully to pre-pandemic levels.
Accordingly, our current results and financial condition discussed herein may not be indicative of future operating results and trends. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Report for additional risks we face due to the COVID pandemic.
Ransomware Incident
During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2019, some of the Company’s systems were affected by a ransomware incident that encrypted information on its systems and disrupted customer and employee access to its applications and services. The Company immediately took steps to isolate the impact and implemented measures to prevent additional systems from being affected, including taking its network offline as a precaution. In connection with this incident, third party consultants and forensic experts were engaged to assist with the restoration and remediation of the Company’s systems and, with the assistance of law enforcement, to investigate the incident. The Company has found no evidence that customer or employee data was exfiltrated from its network.
The Company restored connectivity and resumed operations quickly following the ransomware incident. However, fourth quarter 2019 operations were adversely affected by the inefficiencies caused by taking the network offline for a period of time. As a result, the Company’s fourth quarter 2019 revenue was also adversely affected as the Company was unable to fulfill a portion of customer demand during the quarter.
In 2019, ransomware incident related costs incurred totaled $7.7 million, net of estimated insurance recoveries of $5.0 million. These costs were primarily comprised of the certain employee related expenses and various third party consulting services, including forensic experts, legal counsel and other IT professional expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company collected $6.6 million of insurance recoveries which include the $5.0 million of estimated insurance recoveries recorded in 2019 and an additional $1.6 million recorded in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company collected an additional $3.9 million of insurance recoveries. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has collected insurance recoveries totaling $10.5 million. No further insurance recoveries are expected.
2021 OVERVIEW
Sales for 2021 were $2.3 billion, a 10% increase from sales of $2.1 billion in 2020. During 2021, sales to customers in our various industry sectors fluctuated from 2020 as follows:
•Industrials increased by 15%,
•A&D decreased by 10%
•Medical decreased by 7%,
•Semi-cap increased by 49%,
•Computing increased by 16%, and
•Telecommunications increased by 8%.
The overall revenue increase was due primarily to higher overall demand from both our Higher-value and Traditional markets (as discussed below). Higher-value market revenues were up 10% year-over-year from strength in the Semi-Cap and Industrials sectors. Traditional market revenues were up 12% year-over-year from strength in both Computing and Telecommunications sectors.
Our sales depend on the success of our customers, some of which operate in businesses associated with rapid technological change and consequent product obsolescence. Developments adverse to our major customers or their products, the availability of electronic component supply, or the failure of a major customer to pay for components or services, including in each case as a result of the COVID pandemic, have adversely affected us. A substantial percentage of our sales are made to a small number of customers, and the loss of a major customer, if not replaced, would adversely affect us. Sales to our ten largest customers represented 47% and 41% of our total sales in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Sales to Applied Materials represented 16% and 12% of our total sales in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Due to the COVID pandemic, as well as global labor and supply disruptions, we continue to see component supply chain constraints across all commodity categories that are constraining our ability to produce the full demand forecasts we are receiving from customers. Lead times continue to extend, and more components are being placed on allocation by suppliers. Additionally, there continues to be an increase in pushouts of previously committed component orders and tighter allocation and timing restrictions across the component suppliers. These last-minute allocations created inefficiencies in our operations and contributed to the sequential increase in inventory.
We experience fluctuations in gross profit from period to period. Different programs contribute different gross profits depending on the type of services involved, location of production, size of the program, complexity of the product and level of material costs associated with the various products. Moreover, new programs can contribute relatively less to our gross profit in their early stages when manufacturing volumes are usually lower, resulting in inefficiencies and unabsorbed manufacturing overhead costs. In addition, a number of our new program ramps remain subject to competitive constraints that can exert downward pressure on our margins. During periods of low production volume, we generally have unabsorbed manufacturing overhead costs and reduced gross profit. Gross profit can also be impacted by other situations, such as COVID and supply chain constraints.
We have undertaken initiatives to restructure our business operations with the intention of improving utilization and reducing costs. During 2021, we recognized $9.3 million of restructuring and other costs due in part to expenses associated with various site closures and restructuring activities. In addition, we incurred $4.4 million in costs related to asset impairments in the Americas.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents the percentage relationship that certain items in our consolidated statements of income bear to sales for the periods indicated. The financial information and the discussion below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and Notes thereto in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.
2021 Compared With 2020
Sales
As noted above, sales increased 10% in 2021. The percentages of our sales by sector were as follows:
Industrials. 2021 sales increased 15% to $428.4 million from $373.1 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to continued demand improvements from oil & gas, building infrastructure, and commercial transportation programs.
Aerospace and Defense. 2021 sales decreased 10% to $381.7 million from $423.6 million in 2020 primarily due to program transitions and lower demand in our commercial aerospace programs which have yet to recover to pre-pandemic levels.
Medical. 2021 sales decreased 7% to $461.8 million from $498.5 million in 2020 primarily due to the slower ramp in new medical programs, the impact of supply chain constraints which limited revenue growth and lower demand for elective surgery products in the first half of 2021. While demand improved in the second half, component availability continued to limit our ability to fulfill all demand from our medical customers.
Semiconductor Capital Equipment. 2021 sales increased 49% to $549.3 million from $369.0 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher demand across our customer base in the front-end semiconductor capital equipment space where we provide differentiated engineering design, precision machining services, and complex system assembly.
Computing. 2021 sales increased 16% to $199.4 million from $171.3. million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to the planned ramp of high-performance computing programs.
Telecommunications. 2021 sales increased 8% to $234.6 million from $217.7 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to demand improvement for satellite programs and new broadband ramps.
Our international operations are subject to the risks of doing business abroad. See Item 1A for factors pertaining to international sales, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and a discussion of potential adverse effects in operating results associated with the risks of doing business abroad. During 2021 and 2020, 55% and 52%, respectively, of our sales were from international operations.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased 17.7% to $205.9 million in 2021 from $175.0 million in 2020. Similarly, gross profit margin increased to 9.1% in 2021 from 8.5% in 2020. Both due primarily to higher revenues, mix of revenues and improved utilization.
Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) Expenses
SG&A increased to $136.7 million in 2021 from $122.2 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to the increase in variable compensation, medical expenses, and continued IT infrastructure investments along with reinstatement of some benefits in 2021 such as the 401(k) match that was temporarily suspended as a cost saving
measure in 2020 due to COVID. During 2021 and 2020, the provisions to accounts receivable for doubtful accounts (net of recoveries) were $0.0 million and $2.2 million, respectively.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets was $6.4 million in 2021 and $9.1 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to an intangible asset becoming fully amortized in 2020.
Restructuring Charges and Other Costs
During 2021, we recognized $9.3 million of restructuring and other costs due primarily to expenses associated with announced site closures, reduction in force and other restructuring activities. In addition, we incurred $4.4 million in costs related to asset impairments in the Americas that were the result of restructuring activities. During 2020, we recognized $13.2 million of restructuring and other costs due primarily to expenses associated with announced site closures, reduction in force and other restructuring activities. In addition, we incurred $5.7 million in charges and $1.0 million in costs related to asset impairments in the Americas and Asia, respectively. See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for additional information on our restructuring charges.
Ransomware Incident Related Costs, Net
During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2019, ransomware incident related costs incurred totaled $12.7 million or $7.7 million, net of estimated insurance recoveries of $5.0 million. These costs were primarily comprised of certain employee related expenses and various third-party consulting services, including forensic experts, legal counsel and other IT professional expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we collected $6.6 million of insurance recoveries which include the $5.0 million of estimated insurance recoveries recorded in 2019 and an additional $1.6 million recorded in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we collected an additional $3.9 million of insurance recoveries. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has collected insurance recoveries totaling $10.5 million. No further insurance recoveries are expected.
Interest Expense
Interest expense remained essentially flat at $8.5 million in 2021 from $8.4 million in 2020.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased to $0.5 million in 2021 from $1.2 million in 2020 due to lower invested cash equivalents and lower interest rates.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense of $9.6 million in 2021 represented an 21.2% effective tax rate for 2021, compared with $3.2 million for 2020 representing an effective tax rate of 18.3%. The higher effective tax rate in 2021 is the result of the mix of profits in our foreign and U.S. jurisdictions with a higher amount of foreign earnings being taxed in the U.S. from the global intangible low-tax income calculation method under the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (U.S. Tax Reform).
The Company has been granted certain tax incentives, including tax holidays, for its subsidiaries in China, Malaysia, and Thailand that expire at various dates, unless extended or otherwise renegotiated and are subject to certain conditions with which the Company expects to comply. The expiration dates of these tax incentives are as follows: 2023 in China and 2028 in Thailand. The Malaysia tax incentive expired as of March 31, 2021, but the Company has applied for an extension of the Malaysia tax holiday in 2022 which will extend the tax holiday for another five years until 2026. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.
Net Income
We reported a net income of $35.8 million, or $0.99 per diluted share for 2021, compared with a net income of $14.1 million, or $0.38 per diluted share, for 2020. The net increase of $21.7 million in 2021 is primarily the result of items discussed above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We have historically financed our organic growth and operations through funds generated from operations and occasional borrowings under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as defined below). Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash totaled $271.7 million at December 31, 2021 and $396 million at December 31, 2020. During 2021 and 2020, we repatriated $35 million and $25 million, respectively, of foreign earnings to the U.S.
Cash used in operating activities was $2.6 million in 2021. The cash used in operations during 2021 consisted primarily of $35.8 million of net income, adjusted for $44.2 million of depreciation and amortization, a $140.0 million increase in accounts payable, and a $34.0 million increase in advance payments from customers, primarily offset by a $47.0 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher sales and a $197.9 million increase in inventories in support of meeting customer demand. Working capital was $0.7 billion at both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
We primarily purchase components only after customer orders or forecasts are received, which mitigates, but does not eliminate, the risk of loss on inventories. Supplies of electronic components and other materials used in operations are subject to industry-wide shortages. In certain instances, suppliers may allocate available quantities to us. When shortages of these components and other material supplies used in operations have occurred, vendors have at times been unable to ship the quantities we need for production, forcing us to delay shipments, which can increase backorders and impact cash flows. In certain instances, we request and receive advance payments from customers as prepayments of inventory to meet working capital demands of a contract, offset inventory risks such as inventory purchased in advance of current needs and protect the Company from the failure of other parties to fulfill obligations under a contract. For example, as discussed above under “COVID Pandemic Update,” we have been impacted by supply chain constraints, including shortages, longer lead times and increased transit times.
Cash used in investing activities was $41.9 million in 2021 primarily due to purchases of additional property, plant and equipment totaling $38.8 million. The purchases of property, plant and equipment were primarily for machinery and equipment in the Americas and Asia.
Cash used in financing activities was $74.0 million in 2021. Principal payments on our credit agreement and finance lease obligations totaled $155.6 million and $0.9 million, respectively, borrowings under the credit agreement totaled $150.0 million, share repurchases totaled $40.2 million, dividends paid totaled $23.3 million, and we received $0.3 million from the exercise of stock options.
On December 21, 2021, the Company amended and restated the Company's prior $650 million credit agreement by entering into a $381 million amended and restated credit agreement (the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement). Under the terms of the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, in addition to the $131.3 million Term Loan facility, we have a $250.0 million five-year revolving credit facility to be used for general corporate purposes, both with a maturity date of December 21, 2026. The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement includes an accordion feature pursuant to which the Company is permitted to add one or more incremental term loans and/or increase commitments under the revolving credit facility in an aggregate amount not exceeding $100 million, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions and exceptions. As of December 31, 2021, we had $131.3 million in borrowings outstanding under the Term Loan facility and $3.9 million in letters of credit outstanding under our revolving credit facility. $246.1 million remains available for future borrowings under the revolving credit facility. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for more information regarding the terms of the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.
The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants related to interest coverage and debt leverage, and certain customary affirmative and negative covenants, including restrictions on our ability to incur additional debt and liens, pay dividends, repurchase shares, sell assets and merge or consolidate with other persons. Amounts due under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement could be accelerated upon specified events of default, including a failure to pay amounts due, breach of a covenant, material inaccuracy of a representation, or occurrence of bankruptcy or insolvency, subject, in some cases, to cure periods. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all of these covenants and restrictions.
Our operations, and the operations of businesses we acquire, are subject to certain foreign, federal, state and local regulatory requirements relating to environmental, waste management, health and safety matters. We believe we operate in substantial compliance with all applicable requirements and we seek to ensure that newly acquired businesses comply or will comply substantially with applicable requirements. To date, the costs of compliance and workplace and environmental remediation have not been material to us. However, material costs and liabilities may arise from these requirements or from new, modified or more stringent requirements in the future. In addition, our past, current and future operations, and the operations of businesses we have or may acquire, may give rise to claims
of exposure by employees or the public, or to other claims or liabilities relating to environmental, waste management or health and safety concerns.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, totaling $271.7 million and we have $246.1 million available for borrowings under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. During the next 12 months, we believe our capital expenditures will approximate $50 million to $60 million, principally for machinery and equipment to help increase our production capacity to support anticipated revenue growth and our ongoing business around the globe.
On March 6, 2018, our Board of Directors approved an expanded stock repurchase program granting us the authority to repurchase up to $250 million in common stock in addition to the $100 million approved on December 7, 2015. On October 26, 2018, the Board of Directors authorized an additional $100 million shares for repurchase above our existing program. On February 19, 2020, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional $150 million of the Company’s common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had $164.0 million remaining under the share repurchase authorization to purchase additional shares. We are under no commitment or obligation to repurchase any particular amount of common stock.
The Company began declaring and paying quarterly dividends during the first quarter of 2018. In February 2020, the Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend increase, raising the quarterly dividend from $0.15 to $0.16 per common share. In May 2021, the Board of Directors approved another quarterly dividend increase, raising the quarterly dividend from $0.16 to $0.165 per common share. During 2021 and 2020, cash dividends paid totaled $23.3 million and $23.0 million, respectively. On December 13, 2021, the Company declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.165 per share of the Company’s common stock to shareholders of record as of December 30, 2021. The dividend of $5.8 million was paid on January 13, 2022. The Board of Directors currently intends to continue paying quarterly dividends. However, the Company’s future dividend policy is subject to the Company’s compliance with applicable law, and depending on, among other things, the Company’s results of operations, financial condition, level of indebtedness, capital requirements, contractual restrictions, restrictions in the Company’s debt agreements, and other factors that the Board of Directors may deem relevant, including the impact of the COVID pandemic. Dividend payments are not mandatory or guaranteed; there can be no assurance that the Company will continue to pay a dividend in the future.
Management believes that our existing cash balances, funds generated from operations, and borrowing availability under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to permit us to meet our liquidity requirements over the next 12 months. Management further believes that our ongoing cash flows from operations and any borrowings we may incur under our revolving credit facility will enable us to meet operating cash requirements in future years. If we consummated significant acquisitions in the future, our capital needs would increase and could possibly result in our need to increase available borrowings under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement or access public or private debt and equity markets. There can be no assurance, however, that we would be successful in raising additional debt or equity on acceptable terms.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to accounts receivable, inventories, revenue recognition, income taxes, long-lived assets, stock-based compensation and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is recognized when a contract exists and when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of a product or service to the customer. A contract exists when it has approval and commitment
from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. For the Company, the arrangement with the customer is generally documented through a master agreement which outlines the general terms and conditions of the arrangement and a specific purchase commitment from the customer.
Our performance obligations are satisfied over time as work progresses or at a point in time. The determination of how our performance obligations are satisfied requires judgment and is assessed on a contract by contract basis. Under the majority of our contracts, our performance obligations are satisfied over time as work progresses since the customer controls all of the work-in-progress as products are being built. For these contracts, the selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. We use a cost-based input measurement of progress because it best represents the transfer of assets to the customer. For our other contracts, revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of the product or service, which is generally upon shipment or delivery pending on the terms of the underlying contract. Revenue from design, development and engineering services is generally recognized over time as the services are performed.
Generally, there are no subjective customer acceptance requirements or further obligations related to goods of services provided. Our contracts with customer do not allow for a general right of return.
Income Taxes
We estimate our income tax provision in each of the jurisdictions where we operate, including estimating exposures related to uncertain tax positions. We must also make judgments regarding the ability to realize our deferred tax assets. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. Our valuation allowance as of December 31, 2021 of $18.7 million relates to deferred tax assets from our foreign locations.
Differences in our future operating results as compared to the estimates utilized in the determination of the valuation allowances could result in adjustments in valuation allowances in future periods. For example, a significant increase in our operations in the United States, future accretive acquisitions in the United States and any movement in the mix of profits from our international operations to the United States would result in a reduction in the valuation allowance and would increase income in the period such determination was made. Alternatively, significant economic downturns in the United States generating additional operating loss carryforwards and potential movements in the mix of profits to international locations would result in an increase in the valuation allowance and would decrease income in the period such determination was made. In addition, any significant prolonged economic downturns in some of our foreign locations would generate operating loss carryforwards and an increase in the valuation allowance, respectively.
We are subject to examination by tax authorities for different periods in various U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. During the course of such examinations, disputes may occur as to matters of fact and/or law. In most tax jurisdictions the passage of time without examination will result in the expiration of applicable statutes of limitations, thereby precluding the taxing authority from examining the relevant tax period(s). We believe that we have adequately provided for our tax liabilities.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Goodwill
Long-lived assets, such as property, plant, and equipment and purchased intangibles subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount that the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis, at a minimum, and whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired. Circumstances that may lead to impairment include unforeseen decreases in future performance or industry demand or the restructuring of our operations as a result of a change in our business strategy. We perform a qualitative assessment to determine if goodwill is potentially impaired. If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if we elect not to perform a qualitative assessment, then we would be required to perform a
quantitative impairment test for goodwill. This process involves determining the fair values of the reporting units and comparing those fair values to the carrying values, including goodwill, of the reporting unit. An impairment loss would be recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the asset’s fair value. For purposes of performing our goodwill impairment assessment, our reporting units are the same as our operating segments as defined in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had goodwill of approximately $192.1 million, respectively, associated with our Americas and Asia business segments.
Based on our qualitative assessments of goodwill as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of our Americas and Asia business segments were greater than their carrying amounts, and therefore no further testing was required.
Changes in economic and operating conditions that occur after the annual impairment analysis or an interim impairment analysis, and that impact these assumptions, may result in a future goodwill impairment charge.
Recently Enacted Accounting Principles
See Note 1(r) to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for a discussion of recently enacted accounting principles.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
We have certain contractual obligations that extend beyond 2022 under lease obligations and debt arrangements. Non-cancelable purchase commitments do not typically extend beyond normal lead-times of 4 to 20 weeks; however, some electronic component manufacturers now have lead-times in excess of 52 weeks. These select long lead-time manufacturers of semiconductors and electronics components seeking to prevent customers from over-ordering quantities beyond their true demand, are now requiring all new purchase orders to have NCNR (non-cancellable, non-returnable) purchase order terms. Most purchase orders beyond this time frame are normally cancelable, however more manufacturers in the current constrained environment are looking to limit their liability and adding NCNR terms. We do not use off-balance sheet financing techniques other than traditional operating leases, and we have not guaranteed the obligations of any entity that is not one of our wholly owned subsidiaries.
A summary of our operating lease obligations as of December 31, 2021 can be found in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.
A summary of our long-term debt obligations as of December 31, 2021 can be found in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.
U.S. federal income tax on deemed mandatory repatriation is payable over four years pursuant to the U.S. Tax Reform. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.