Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements, the information described under the caption “Risk Factors” in Part 1, Item 1A of this report and our Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements at the outset of this report.
Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, references in this section to “we,” “us,” “our” and other similar terms refer to Legacy Benson Hill and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the merger and to New Benson Hill and its consolidated subsidiaries after giving effect to the merger.
Overview
We are a food technology company that uniquely combines data science, plant science and food science to unlock nature’s genetic diversity in the development of more nutritious, sustainable, affordable, great-tasting food and ingredients. We are headquartered in St. Louis, Missouri, where the majority of our research and development activities are managed. We operate a food-grade white flake and soy flour manufacturing operation in Creston, Iowa and a soy crushing facility in Seymour, Indiana. We also process dry peas in North Dakota, which we sell throughout North America, and supply fresh produce through packing, distribution, and growing locations in the southeastern states of the United States.
Our purpose is to catalyze and broadly empower innovation starting with the plant to offer better food options to everyone. We combine cutting-edge technology with an innovative business approach to bring product innovations to customers and consumers. Our CropOS® technology platform uses the natural genetic diversity in plants and links it to consumer preference to bring innovation to the food system - starting with a better seed.
Our business is comprised of two reportable segments - our Ingredients segment and our Fresh segment. Our Ingredients segment is currently focused on partnering with farmers and plant-based food and feed customers to commercialize our proprietary innovations in soybean and yellow pea products, including soy-based vegetable oils, animal feed ingredients, aquaculture ingredients, and food ingredients derived from our ultra-high protein (“UHP”) soy-based ingredients that have the potential to eliminate costly water and energy intensive ingredient processing associated with producing products for the food and feed markets, alleviating supply constraints to help bring plant-based proteins to scale. Our Fresh segment, which primarily includes our wholly-owned subsidiary, J&J Produce, Inc., is focused on growing, packing, and selling fresh produce products to major retail and food service customers.
COVID-19
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, governmental authorities have implemented numerous and rapidly evolving measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limits on gatherings, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and in accordance with governmental orders, we have also modified our business practices and implemented proactive measures to protect the health and safety of employees, including limiting employee travel, requiring, at times, remote work arrangements for non-laboratory employees, implementing social distancing, and enhanced sanitary measures in our headquarters, and cancelling attendance at events and conferences. Many of the suppliers, vendors, and service providers on whom we rely have made similar modifications. To date, with the exception of us modifying our physical business practices, including lower travel, and delays in the receipt of certain laboratory supplies and the performance of related services, we have not experienced a material impact on business operations from the effects of COVID-19. There is no certainty measures implemented by government authorities will be sufficient to mitigate the risks posed by, or the impacts and disruptions of, the COVID-19 pandemic.
Merger with Star Peak Corp II
On September 29, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), Star Peak Corp II (“STPC”), a special purpose acquisition company, consummated a merger (the “Closing”) pursuant to that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated May 8, 2021 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among STPC, STPC Merger Sub Corp., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of STPC (“Merger Sub”), and Benson Hill, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Legacy Benson Hill”). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, a business combination between STPC and Legacy Benson Hill was effected through the merger of Merger Sub with and into Legacy Benson Hill, with Legacy Benson Hill surviving the transaction as a wholly-owned subsidiary of STPC (the “Merger”). On the Closing Date, STPC changed its name to Benson Hill, Inc. and Legacy Benson Hill changed its name to Benson Hill Holdings, Inc.
As a consequence of the Merger, we became the successor to a company registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) and listed on the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”). Accordingly, we were and are required to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, additional internal and external accounting fees, including audit fees and costs associated with readiness to comply with provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, legal and administrative resources, including increased external legal fees. We are classified as an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a)(19) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). As a result, we are provided certain disclosure and regulatory relief, provided by the SEC, as an “emerging growth company.”
Our future results of consolidated operations and financial position may not be comparable to historical results as a result of the Merger.
Key Components of Statement of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from product sales and commissions earned on product sales.
Product sales consist primarily of sales of harvested produce, both farmed by us and purchased from growers in non-exclusive arrangements, sales of seed, and sales of processed yellow pea, soybean grain, soybean oil, soybean meal, soybean flakes and soybean flour.
In addition to selling our owned farmed produce, we enter into consignment arrangements with produce growers of certain perishable products. In these arrangements, we act as an agent, earn a commission on the sale and report the revenue and cost of the product on a net basis.
The Company uses exchange-traded futures to manage price risk of fluctuating prices related to forecasted sales of soybean oil and soybean meal with the gains and losses on these instruments recorded in revenue. All of the Company’s soybean oil and soybean meal futures have not been designated as hedging instruments, and as such, changes in fair value of these derivatives are recognized in earnings immediately.
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements for additional information on our revenue recognition.
Cost of Sales
Our cost of sales includes all costs incurred to purchase, process and provide the product or services to our customers. For harvested produce farmed by us, this includes the direct cost of land preparation, seed, planting, growing, maintenance, packaging and distribution of product sales. For produce we purchase from growers in non-exclusive arrangements and, hence, do not farm, this cost includes the acquisition, warehousing, packaging and distribution of the purchased inventory.
The cost of sales on processed yellow pea, soybean grain, soybean oil, soybean meal, soybean flakes and soybean flour includes the cost of the crop, inclusive of the grower contracting premiums, as well as the crush, refining and transportation costs necessary to prepare the product for sale.
The Company uses exchange-traded futures to manage price risk of fluctuating prices related to forecasted purchases of soybeans with the gains and losses on these instruments recorded in cost of sales. All of the Company’s soybean futures have not been designated as hedging instruments, and as such, changes in fair value of these derivatives are recognized in earnings immediately.
Research and Development
Research and Development expenses consist of the costs of performing activities to discover and develop products and to advance our intellectual property. These costs consist primarily of employee-related expenses for personnel who research and develop our products, fees for contractors who support product development and breeding activities, expenses for trait validation, greenhouse and field trial expenses, purchasing material and supplies for our laboratories, licensing, information technology expenses, and other costs associated with operating our own laboratories.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) consist of employee-related expenses for selling our products, and costs related to business development to commercialize our product offerings along with our executive, legal, intellectual property, finance and human resources functions. SG&A expenses also include facility and information technology expenses not otherwise allocated to research and development or cost of sales, professional fees for auditing, tax and legal services, expenses associated with maintaining patents, and consulting costs.
Total Other Expense (Income), Net
Total other expense (income), net consists primarily of interest expense per the terms of our various financing obligations, amortization of debt discount and commitment fees, remeasurements of our warrant liability and interest related to finance leases as reduced by interest earned on cash and marketable securities.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis are for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020 unless otherwise stated. For a discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in
2019, please refer to Benson Hill’s Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Registration Statement on Form S-4, filed with the SEC on August 30, 2021.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table shows the amounts from our consolidated statements of operations for the periods presented:
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $147.2 million, an increase of $32.9 million or 29%, as compared to the same period in 2020. In October 2020, we sold our barley operations, which contributed revenues of $14.1 million in 2020. Excluding the contribution from the barley operations, revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $46.9 million or 47%. The increase was primarily driven by higher sales volumes of our proprietary soybean ingredients products, for which commercialization efforts were initiated in the fourth quarter of 2020, including $17.0 million of revenue generated from our Seymour soy processing plant acquired in September 2021, which includes a mix of proprietary and non-proprietary revenues. The increase was also the result of higher average selling prices on yellow peas and higher sales volumes of fresh produce. Partially offsetting these increases were the impacts of lower average selling prices of fresh produce and lower royalties and retail seed sales. Lower average selling prices of fresh produce were driven by higher regional and ex-U.S. farm yields within the industry resulting in a higher supply versus demand. Lower royalties and retail seed sales were driven by our repositioning of our seed operations to predominately support our integrated business model or “closed loop” soy operation.
Cost of Sales and Gross (Loss) Profit
Cost of sales and gross (loss) profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $148.2 million and a loss of $0.9 million, respectively, represented an increase in cost of sales of $45.7 million and a decrease in gross profit of $12.9 million as compared to the same period in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were certain items expected to be non-recurring. In the second quarter of 2021, we incurred $2.8 million of higher freight costs necessary to transport soybean seed stock from South America. Also, as noted previously, we sold our barley operations in October 2020, which contributed $2.2 million in gross profit in 2020. Excluding the impact of the non-recurring items noted above, gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.9 million, which represented a decline in gross profit of $7.9 million.
Gross loss for our Ingredients segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5.9 million, which represents a decrease in gross profit of $10.6 million as compared to the same period in 2020. Excluding the impact of the non-recurring items noted above, gross loss for our Ingredients segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.1 million, which represents a decrease in gross profit of $5.6 million as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in gross profit in the
Ingredients segment was primarily driven by losses generated on the commercial launch of our proprietary soybean ingredient products under the Bright Day™ and Veri™ brands, as higher average selling prices were more than offset by operating costs associated with early-stage commercialization of these products and start-up costs associated with our recently acquired Seymour soy processing plant as well as lower royalties and seed sales associated with legacy seed distribution contracts. These decreases were partially offset by higher average selling prices on yellow peas.
Gross profit for our Fresh segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5.0 million, which represents a decrease in gross profit of $2.3 million as compared to the same period in 2020, driven by a year over year decline in average selling prices on fresh produce.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $40.6 million increased $11.1 million as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher payroll and related expenses from increases in staffing, technology costs, facilities, and laboratory supplies partially offset by lower field trial expenses and travel. Reductions in field trial expenses were primarily attributable to a scope reduction of our legacy maize project, which is no longer active. Higher facility costs are primarily related to the costs associated with our corporate headquarters, into which we relocated in July 2020 and our Crop Accelerator which opened in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $81.6 million increased $44.1 million as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by Merger transaction costs of $11.7 million and, higher professional fees, increased staffing and related expenses, including non-cash stock-based compensation expense, higher acquisition fees and facility costs. The increase in professional fees, including investor relations, accounting, legal and other consulting expenses, was predominantly driven by costs related to preparation to be a public company including non-recurring costs of $5.3 million. The increase in staff and related expenses related to the increase in personnel necessary to support the scale of anticipated business operations and the requirements associated with being a public company. The increase in facility costs, which includes depreciation and amortization expense, was primarily attributable to capital costs associated with our corporate headquarters which we relocated into in July 2020.
Impairment of Goodwill
There were no impairment charges of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Impairment of goodwill charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $4.8 million were incurred due to non-cash charges of $3.0 million in our Ingredients segment and $1.8 million in our Fresh segment.
Total Other Expense (Income), Net
Total other expense (income), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $2.9 million decreased $4.4 million as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by income of $12.1 million resulting from the change in fair value of the Company’s warrant liabilities, income of $2.2 million recorded for the Company’s qualification for the COVID-19 Employee Retention Credit, and a $2.2 million decrease in interest expense driven by the repayment of outstanding debt in connection with the Merger and capitalized interest on capital projects as partially offset by the loss on extinguishment of debt of $11.7 million, resulting from the repayment of the remaining outstanding balance of $37.5 million in notes payable, which is composed of $5.5 million in prepayment penalties and $6.2 million in the write-off of unamortized debt discounts and debt issuance costs.
Income Tax Expense
No net income tax benefit for net operating losses incurred in the U.S. has been recorded due to uncertainty in realizing a benefit from these items. The tax expense recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 relates to deferred tax liabilities associated with indefinite-lived intangibles and foreign operations.
Results of Operations by Segment
The Company operates in two reportable segments: Ingredients and Fresh. The Ingredients segment delivers healthy food ingredients derived from soybean seeds, including meal and oil, and processed yellow peas. The Fresh segment is a grower, packer and distributor of year-round fresh produce located in the southeastern United States. Financial results associated with
licensing arrangements that are not related to the Ingredients and Fresh segments and costs associated with centralized operations, including unallocated research and development expenses, are reported as Unallocated and Other.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Segment Revenues
Segment revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are presented below:
Ingredients revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $90.7 million, which represents an increase of $32.1 million as compared to the same period in 2020. In October 2020, we sold our barley operations, which contributed revenues of $14.1 million in 2020. Excluding the contribution from the barley operations, revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $46.1 million. The increase was predominantly driven by sales attributable to the commercial launch of our proprietary soybean ingredients products, including $17.0 million of revenue generated from our Seymour soy processing plant acquired in September 2021, higher sales volumes and average selling prices of yellow peas, as partially offset by lower royalties and retails sales of seeds.
Fresh revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $56.3 million, which represents an increase of $1.0 million as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was predominantly driven by higher sales volumes which were partially offset by lower average selling prices. Lower average selling prices in our Fresh segment in 2021 were driven by higher regional and ex-U.S. farm yields within the industry resulting in a higher supply versus demand.
Segment Loss
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure of performance. Among other financial metrics, our management reviews segment profit based upon Adjusted EBITDA. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as consolidated net loss before net interest expense, income tax provision and depreciation and amortization, further adjusted to exclude stock-based compensation, and the impact of significant non-recurring items.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful in comparing our financial performance with the performance of other companies for the following reasons:
•Adjusted EBITDA is widely used by investors and securities analysts to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items such as stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and interest expense, that can vary substantially from company to company depending upon their financing and capital structures, and the method by which assets were acquired; and
•Adjusted EBITDA provides consistency and comparability with our past financial performance, and facilitates comparisons with other companies, many of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results.
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider this measure in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are as follows:
•Although depreciation expense is a non-cash charge, the assets being depreciated may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA excludes stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring non-cash expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
•Adjusted EBITDA excludes other material non-recurring items;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect: (1) recurring changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (2) interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt, which reduces cash available to us; or (3) tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; and
•the expenses and other items that we exclude in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may differ from the expenses and other items, if any, that other companies may exclude from Adjusted EBITDA when they report their operating results.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should be considered along with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, is presented below. A reconciliation of our consolidated net loss to Adjusted EBITDA is also presented below.
Ingredients Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $29.6 million, which represents a decrease in segment Adjusted EBITDA of $21.6 million as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by losses generated on the commercial launch of our proprietary soybean ingredients products as higher average selling prices were more than offset by operating costs associated with early-stage commercialization of these products and start-up costs associated with our recently acquired Seymour soy processing plant, a lack of sales and gross profit on barley as driven by our sale of this business in October 2020, and higher research and development costs associated with products anticipated to be commercialized within this segment, if successful.
Fresh Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $3.1 million, which represents a decrease in segment Adjusted EBITDA of $3.3 million as compared to the same period in 2020. This decrease was driven by lower average selling prices and higher operating expenses, including higher freight costs, as partially offset by higher sales volumes.
Unallocated and Other Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $47.7 million, which represents a decrease in segment Adjusted EBITDA of $9.0 million as compared to the same period in 2020. This decrease was driven by increases in centralized operations costs primarily driven by increased staffing and higher professional fees as the Company expanded its legal, finance and human resources departments to prepare for and operate as a publicly traded company. The decrease was also driven by an increase in research and development expenses resulting from an increase in staffing and facility expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity describes our ability to access sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of our business operations, including working capital needs, debt service, acquisitions, contractual obligations and other commitments. We assess liquidity
in terms of our ability to access cash flows from operations, marketable securities and available credit facilities and their sufficiency to fund our operating, investing and financing activities. To meet our payment service obligations, we must have sufficient highly liquid assets and be able to move funds on a timely basis.
Since inception, our primary sources of liquidity have been equity and debt financings. On December 31, 2021, our liquidity was comprised of cash and marketable securities of $182.7 million, and access to a revolving credit facility of up to $6.0 million, which is subject to renewal in November 2022, as capped by a defined borrowing base that could result in availability that is less than this amount. If we meet certain milestones in 2022, we would be eligible to draw down term loans in an amount of up to $20.0 million between April 2022 and June 2022. See Note 13 - Debt in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements for further discussion. Also as of December 31, 2021, our commitments include term debt and notes payable outstanding of $84.1 million, lease liabilities of $81.6 million, capital expenditures associated with expansion of farming operations, including distribution within our Fresh segment, expected to be completed in the second quarter of 2022, and operating costs supporting the sale of products, research and development expenses, and selling, general and administrative expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $126.2 million and had negative cash flows from operating activities of $117.8 million and violated certain financial covenants under our DDB term debt agreement, which were subsequently waived. As described further in Note 23 - Subsequent Events, in March 2022 the Company entered into subscription agreements with a number of investors which resulted in proceeds, net of issuance costs, of approximately $81.1 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities on hand as of December 31, 2021, in addition to the proceeds from the subscription agreements completed in March 2022, are sufficient to meet the needs of operations, including working capital requirements, debt requirements and our currently planned capital expenditure requirements for a period of at least 12 months from the date of this Annual Report. See Note 1 - Description of Business in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Our business prospects are subject to risks, expenses, and uncertainties frequently encountered by companies in the early stages of commercial operations. As of December 31, 2021 we had multiple debt instruments (see Note 13 - Debt), including term loans, notes payable and a revolving line of credit, certain of which require adherence to financial covenants, including maintaining minimum liquidity and maintenance of a minimum cash balance. If we breach these covenants, the holder of the debt may declare all amounts immediately due and payable. If the covenants are breached, we plan to attempt to secure a waiver of the covenants or an amendment that modifies the covenants but there are no assurances that we will be able to comply with our future covenants without such a waiver or that we would be successful in obtaining a waiver or an amendment during 2022.
Our attainment of profitable operations is also dependent upon future events, including obtaining adequate financing to complete and commercialize our research and development activities, obtaining adequate grower relationships, building our customer base, successfully executing our business and marketing strategy, and hiring appropriate personnel.
Our failure to generate sufficient revenues, achieve planned gross margins and operating profitability, control operating costs, maintain existing debt arrangements or secure additional funding may require us to modify, delay, or abandon some of our planned future expansion or development, or to otherwise enact operating cost reductions available to management, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results, financial condition, and our ability to achieve our intended business objectives.
We expect to require additional financing over and above our current liquidity position to continue to grow our business. We may also require additional capital in the future to fund capital expenditures, acquisitions or other investments. These capital requirements could be substantial. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the success of the commercialization of certain of our products, our ability to continue to satisfy our financial covenants under our financing facilities, and the ability to repay or refinance such indebtedness as it becomes due. We could potentially use our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect and may need to incur additional indebtedness to meet future financing needs. Although we anticipate being able to obtain additional financing through non-dilutive means, we may be unable to do so. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have significant negative consequences for our business, financial condition and results of consolidated operations. We cannot guarantee that we will be able to meet existing financial covenants or obtain new financing on favorable terms, if at all. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors - Risks Relating to Our Business and Industry.”
Summary of Cash Flows
A summary of the Company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities is presented in the following table:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $117.8, which represents an increase of $65.1 million as compared to the same period in 2020. This increased use of cash was driven by a higher net loss of $59.1 million and increased working capital needs of $10.2 driven primarily by the commercial launch of our proprietary soybean ingredients products. These increases were partially offset by higher non-cash charges of $4.2 million primarily comprised of the loss on debt extinguishment, higher depreciation and amortization expense, and higher non-cash stock-based compensation expense as partially offset by the mark-to-market income on our warrant liabilities.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $154.6 million, which represents an increase of $53.9 million as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was driven by payments of $116.3 million made in connection with the acquisition of two soybean processing facilities and related assets and an increase in capital expenditures of $21.6 million primarily driven by the purchase of land and construction costs incurred toward the expansion of farm operations and distribution in Vero Beach, Florida in our Fresh segment. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in net purchases of marketable securities (maturities and sales of marketable securities less purchases of marketable securities) of $6.8 million in 2021, as compared to $92.5 million in the same period of 2020.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $341.6 million, which represents an increase of $180.9 million as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily driven by net contributions from the Merger of $285.4 million and an increase in proceeds from the issuance of debt of $79.1 million as partially offset by $43.1 million of payments to extinguish debt in connection with the Merger as compared to $154.4 million of proceeds, net of issuance costs, from the Company’s Series D preferred stock issuance for the same period in 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
Interest payments on debt was calculated using rates in effect at December 31, 2021, for the remaining term of outstanding borrowings.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has not entered into off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Our critical accounting policies are those that materially affect our consolidated financial statements and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. A thorough understanding of these critical accounting policies is essential when reviewing our consolidated financial statements. We believe that the critical accounting policies listed below involve the most difficult management decisions because they require the use of significant estimates and assumptions as described above.
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements for more information.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from product sales and commissions earned on product sales.
Product Sales
We recognize revenue on product sales, consisting primarily of harvested produce, processed yellow pea, barley, soybeans, and soybean meal, oil, flakes and flour, at the point in time when obligations under the terms of a contract with the customer are satisfied. This generally occurs at the time of transfer of control of the product. In reaching this conclusion, we consider several control indicators of the timing of the transfer of control, including significant risks and rewards of ownership, physical possession, and our right to receive payment. Shipping and handling costs related to contracts with customers for product sales are accounted for as a fulfillment activity and not as a separate performance obligation to customers.
In addition to selling our own farmed produce, we enter into consignment arrangements with produce growers and packers located outside of the U.S. and growers of certain perishable products in the U.S. Within these arrangements, we act as an agent and earn a stated commission and as such revenue is reported on a net basis representing the commissions earned in our consolidated statement of operations. For certain of these transactions, we are responsible for shipping and handling activities. When that is the case, revenue is recognized for those services as performed.
Sales, use, value-added, and other excise taxes are excluded from the measurement of the transaction price. We generally do not allow a right of return.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock Options
We recognize in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss the grant-date fair value of stock options issued to employees and directors. Our options are subject only to service-based vesting conditions. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the associated service period of the award, which is generally the vesting term. We recognize forfeitures of awards as they occur.
We estimate the fair value of our stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the fair value of our common stock, expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends.
Fair Value of Common Stock - Historically, as there has been no public market for our common stock, the fair value of our common stock was determined by the board of directors based in part on valuations of the common stock prepared by a third-party valuation firm. Should the Company issue stock options in the future the fair value of common stock will be based on the Company’s closing stock price on the grant date.
Expected Term - The expected term of the options represents the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding. As we do not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise
patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior, the expected term of options granted is derived from the average midpoint between the weighted average vesting and the contractual term, also known as the simplified method.
Expected Volatility - Because we recently became a public company and do not have a meaningful trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility is based on the historical volatilities of the common stock of comparable publicly traded companies.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield of zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes as of the grant date with maturities commensurate with the expected term of the awards.
Expected Dividends - The expected dividends assumption is based on the expectation of not paying dividends in the foreseeable future; therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
The grant date fair value for our stock options granted in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were based on the following assumptions used within the Black-Scholes option pricing model:
Assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of stock options granted involve inherent uncertainties and the application of judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and significantly different assumptions or estimates are used, our equity-based compensation could be materially different.
Restricted Stock Units (“RSUs”)
The fair value of RSUs with only service-based vesting conditions are estimated on the date of grant based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock while the fair value of RSUs with service-based and market performance vesting conditions are estimated on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation. As we recently became a public company and do not have a meaningful trading history for our common stock, we estimate our expected stock volatility based on the historical volatilities of the common stock of comparable publicly traded companies and expect to continue to do so until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our own common stock.
The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award from a time period approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill, arising from a business combination as the excess of purchase price and related costs over the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is not amortized and is subject to an annual impairment test as of December 1, unless events indicate an interim test is required. In performing this impairment test, management will first qualitatively assess indicators of a reporting unit’s fair value. If after completing the qualitative assessment, management believes it is likely that a reporting unit is impaired, a discounted cash flow analysis is prepared to estimate the fair value of the reporting unit.
Critical estimates in the determination of the fair value of each reporting unit include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows based on estimates of future sales volumes, sales prices, production costs, and discount rates. These estimates generally constitute unobservable Level 3 inputs under the fair value hierarchy. An adjustment to goodwill will be recorded for any goodwill that is determined to be impaired. Impairment of goodwill is measured as the excess of the carrying amount of goodwill over the fair value of the reporting unit.
Intangible assets consist primarily of customer relationships, trade names, employment agreements, technology licenses, and in-process research and development (“IPRD”). Intangible assets are valued based on the income approach which utilizes discounted cash flows. These estimates generally constitute Level 3 inputs under the fair value hierarchy.
Acquired IPRD, consisting of seed germplasm, is considered an indefinite-lived intangible asset until the abandonment or completion of the associated research and development efforts. If abandoned, or our projections regarding the costs to complete
the research and future revenues and cash flows require adverse revisions, the assets would be impaired. If the activities are completed, a determination is made regarding the useful lives of such assets and methods of amortization.
Similar to goodwill, indefinite lived intangible assets are subject to an annual impairment test as of December 1, unless events indicate an interim test is required.
In conjunction with business acquisitions, we obtain trade names, permits, enter into employment agreements, and gain access to the distribution channels and customer relationships of the acquired companies. Trade names and permits are amortized over their estimated useful life, which is generally ten years. Employment agreements are being amortized over the contractual period, which is two years. Customer relationships are expected to provide us with economic benefits over the estimated life of the relationship, which is generally 15 years, and are amortized on a straight-line basis. The amortization period of customer relationships represents management’s best estimate of the expected usage or consumption of the economic benefits of the acquired assets, which is based on our historical experience of customer attrition rates.
Definite lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment, at the asset group level, whenever, in management’s judgement, impairment indicators are present. At a minimum, we assess all definite lived intangible assets annually for indicators of impairment. When indicators of impairment are present, such an assessment involves estimating undiscounted cash flows over the remaining useful life of the intangible. If the review indicates that undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the intangible asset, the asset group is written down to fair value, and any impairment is assigned to the asset in the asset group in accordance with the applicable guidance, and a corresponding impairment is recognized in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
Derivatives
We have master netting agreements with our counterparties which allow for the settlement of contracts in an asset position with contracts in a liability position in the event of default or termination. Further, all of our derivative contracts are centrally cleared and therefore are cash-settled on a daily basis which results in the derivative contracts having a fair value that approximates zero on a daily basis.
The accounting for changes in the fair value (i.e., gains or losses) of a derivative instrument depends on whether it has been designated and qualifies as part of a hedging relationship and on the type of hedging relationship. All of our derivatives have not been designated as hedging instruments, and as such, changes in fair value of these derivatives are recognized in earnings immediately.
Our soybean positions are designed to hedge risk related to inventory purchases therefore the gains and losses on soybean instruments are recorded in cost of sales in the consolidated statements of operations. Our meal and oil positions are designed to hedge risk related to sales transactions therefore the gains and losses on meal and oil instruments are recorded in revenues in the consolidated statements of operations.
We classify the cash effects of our derivatives within the “Cash Flows From Operating Activities” section of the condensed consolidated statements of cash flows.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for our Private Placement Warrants, Public Warrants, Notes Payable Warrants and Convertible Notes Payable Warrants as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815 with the exception of the Notes Payable Warrant issued in connection with the Merger which qualifies for equity treatment. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the change in fair value of warrants in the consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants are measured based on the closing price of the warrant traded on the NYSE while the Private Placement Warrants and Convertible Notes Payable Warrants are estimated at each measurement date using a Black-Scholes option pricing model and Monte Carlo simulation, respectively. As the Notes Payable Warrant holder has the ability to exercise the warrant at no cost upon expiration we value the warrant at each measurement date based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock for which the warrant is exercisable into.
Conversion Option Liability
We account for the conversion option on our convertible term loan as a derivative liability in accordance with ASC 815 and therefore recognize the conversion option at fair value and adjust the liability to fair value at each reporting period. The liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised or expired, and any change in fair value is recognized in
the consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of the conversion option is measured based on a Monte Carlo simulation.
Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of its acquisitions to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their respective fair values at the acquisition date. We utilize management estimates and an independent third-party valuation firm to assist in determining these fair values. When necessary based on the timing of an acquisition, we will utilize a benchmarking approach based on our historical acquisitions and similar industry acquisitions to determine the preliminary fair values for certain acquired assets. The excess of the acquisition price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is adjusted for any changes to acquisition date fair value amounts made within the measurement period. Acquisition-related transaction costs are recognized separately from the business combination and expensed as incurred.
Income Tax Valuation Allowances
The determination of the income tax valuation allowances requires us to use judgements and assumptions that may have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements, especially at the early stage of commercialization. We provide deferred taxes for deductible and taxable temporary differences. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when we believe it is more likely than not that some portion or all the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Because we generate losses currently, a full valuation allowance is recorded against our net deferred tax assets, as we believe it is more likely than not that some portion or all the deferred tax assets will not be realized. If we were to generate cumulative profits, the valuation allowance may change.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, and have elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards. We expect to remain an emerging growth company at least through June 30, 2022 and expect to continue to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period, although we may decide to early adopt such new or revised accounting standards to the extent permitted by such standards. We expect to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and non-public companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”). This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an emerging growth company, we intend to rely on such exemptions, we are not required to, among other things: (a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (b) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (c) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (d) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (a) December 31, 2026, (b) the last date of our fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (c) the last date of our fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates or (d) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three years.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as the market value of our voting and non-voting Common Stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed
fiscal year and the market value of our voting and non-voting Common Stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Recent Accounting Guidance
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the FASB or other standard setting bodies that are adopted by the Company as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, the Company believes that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on the Company’s financial position or results of operations under adoption. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption and the Company’s assessment, to the extent the Company has made one, of their potential impact on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.