Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those described in or implied by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company innovating in the oral delivery of biotherapeutics. Our drug-device combinations could enable new treatment approaches in two main areas:
•Targeted delivery of therapeutics to the site of disease in the gastrointestinal ("GI") tract, designed to improve outcomes for patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease ("IBD"); and
•Systemic delivery of biotherapeutics, designed to replace injection with needle-free, oral capsules.
Our mission is to improve human health through a more advanced approach to biotherapeutic delivery.
Our historical operations included a licensed Clinical License Improvement Amendment and College of American Pathologists certified laboratory specializing in the molecular testing markets serving women’s health providers in the obstetric, gynecological, fertility, and maternal fetal medicine specialty areas. Previously, our core business was focused on the prenatal carrier screening and noninvasive prenatal test market, targeting preconception planning and routine pregnancy management for genetic disease risk assessment. Through our affiliation with Mattison Pathology, LLP (“Mattison”), a Texas limited liability partnership doing business as Avero Diagnostics (“Avero”), our operations also included anatomic and molecular pathology testing products in the United States.
Strategic Transformation and Factors Affecting Our Performance
In June 2021, we announced a strategic transformation ("Strategic Transformation") pursuant to which we are refocusing our efforts on our robust research and development pipeline to better position the business for future growth. The Strategic Transformation includes the closure of our genetics laboratory in Ann Arbor, Michigan, the sale of our Avero laboratory business, a reduction in force and other cost-cutting measures and operational improvements.
Prior to the closure of our genetics laboratory in Ann Arbor, Michigan, we generated revenue by providing tests through our Ann Arbor laboratory, including throughout most of the second quarter of 2021. We received payments for such tests from payors, laboratory distribution partners, and self-paying individuals, and more than 95% of payments for our tests we received through reimbursement. We received reimbursement from several distinct channels: commercial third-party payors, laboratory distribution partners, and government health benefits programs such as Medicare and Medicaid. Due to the typical lag in payment following performance of a test, we expect to continue to receive reimbursement payments for a period of time following the closure of the laboratory.
In the second quarter of 2020, we added COVID-19 testing to our offering and began offering COVID-19 testing nationally in mid-November 2020. We are no longer performing COVID-19 testing following the shut-down of our laboratory operations.
We are engaged in research and development activities with respect to tests under development and precision medicine product candidates. Following the Strategic Transformation, we are devoting substantially all of our resources to developing and perfecting our intellectual property rights, conducting research and development activities (including undertaking preclinical and clinical studies of our precision medicine product candidates), conducting clinical trials of our most advanced precision medicine product candidates, organizing and staffing our company, business planning and raising capital. We do not have any precision medicine products approved for sale, and we have not generated any revenue from precision medicine product sales.
Our business involves significant investment in research and development activities for the development of new products. We intend to continue investing in our pipeline of new products and technologies. We expect our investment in research and development to increase as we pursue regulatory approval of our Targeted Therapeutics and Oral Biotherapeutics product candidates and expand our pipeline of diagnostics device product candidates. The achievement of key development milestones is a key factor in evaluating our performance.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses in the near term. While we materially reduced our spend profile as a result of the Strategic Transformation in 2021, we expect our expenses may increase in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•continue to advance the preclinical and clinical development of our lead Targeted Therapeutics and Oral Biotherapeutics product candidates;
•initiate preclinical studies and clinical trials for additional Targeted Therapeutics and Oral Biotherapeutics product candidates that we may identify in the future;
•increase personnel and infrastructure to support our clinical development, research and manufacturing efforts;
•build out and expand our in-house process development and engineering and manufacturing capabilities for R&D and clinical purposes;
•continue to develop, perfect and defend our intellectual property portfolio; and
•incur additional legal, accounting or other expenses in operating our business, including the additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
We do not expect to generate significant product revenue unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory and marketing approval of, and begin to sell, one or more of our Targeted Therapeutics and Oral Biotherapeutics product candidates, which we expect will take several years. We expect to spend a significant amount in development costs prior to such time. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory and marketing approval for our precision medicine product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our preclinical and clinical trials. We may elect to discontinue, delay or modify preclinical and clinical trials of our precision medicine product candidates. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Accordingly, until such time as we can generate significant product revenue, if ever, we expect to continue to seek private or public equity and debt financing to meet our capital requirements. There can be no assurance that such funding may be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all, or that we will be able to commercialize our precision medicine product candidates. In addition, we may not be profitable even if we commercialize any of our precision medicine product candidates.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
We are providing the following summary of our revenues, research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses to supplement the more detailed discussion below. This summary excludes our revenues, research and development expenses, selling and marketing, general and administrative and other expenses associated with our Laboratory Operations, which are reported within loss from discontinued operations.
Revenue
Historically, all of our revenue has been derived from molecular laboratory tests, principally from the sale of NIPT, genetic carrier screening, and pathology molecular testing. If our development efforts for our precision medicine product candidates or other products under development are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue from future product sales. If we enter into license or collaboration agreements for any of our precision medicine product candidates, other pipeline products or intellectual property, we may generate revenue in the future from payments as a result of such license or collaboration agreements. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our precision medicine product candidates or from license or collaboration agreements. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our precision medicine product candidates.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs associated with developing new products, including our preeclampsia test and our precision medicine product candidates. Research and development expenses also consist of personnel expenses, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, benefits, consulting costs, and allocated overhead costs. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
We plan to continue investing in research and development activities for the foreseeable future as we focus on our Targeted Therapeutics and Oral Biotherapeutics programs through preclinical studies and clinical trials. We also expect our investment in research and development to increase as we pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates and as we seek to expand our pipeline of product candidates.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. While we plan to partner with large pharmaceutical companies, especially for the later stage clinical work, we still expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years as we conduct additional preclinical studies and clinical trials, including later-stage clinical trials, for our current and future product candidates and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates. The process of conducting the necessary preclinical and clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors including:
•the safety and efficacy of our product candidates;
•early clinical data for our product candidates;
•investment in our clinical programs;
•the ability of collaborators to successfully develop our licensed product candidates;
•competition;
•manufacturing capability; and
•commercial viability.
We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates due to the uncertainties discussed above. We are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates, if ever.
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and work-from-home policies and other operational limitations mandated by federal, state, and local governments as a result of the pandemic, certain of our research and development activities have been delayed and may be further delayed. For more information on risks related to COVID-19, see "Risk Factors-The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic could further materially affect our operations, as well as the business or operations of third parties with whom we conduct business. Our business could be adversely affected by the effects of other future health epidemics or pandemics in regions where we or third parties on which we rely have significant business operations."
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, commissions, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and benefits for our sales and marketing team. Selling and marketing expenses also include costs for communication, advertising, conferences, other marketing events, and allocated overhead costs. We expect selling and marketing expenses to decrease for the foreseeable future as a result of the closure of our Laboratory Operations in Ann Arbor and the sale of our Avero affiliate.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and benefits, for our finance and accounting, legal, human resources, and other administrative teams. Additionally, these expenses include professional fees of audit, legal, and recruiting services. Following the listing of our common stock on Nasdaq, we incurred additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a U.S. securities exchange and costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. In addition, as a public company, we expect to continue to incur increased expenses in the areas of insurance, investor relations, and professional services. Furthermore, we will continue to incur expenses related to maintaining compliance with the stipulations of the government settlement and the legal costs associated with the California subpoena, the Colorado recoupment, the Ravgen lawsuit and IPO related litigation described in Part I, Item 3. “Legal Proceedings” in this Annual Report. Despite such expenses, we expect our overall general and administrative expenses to decrease for the foreseeable future as a result of the closure of our Laboratory Operations in Ann Arbor and the sale of our Avero affiliate.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income (expense), net is primarily attributable to borrowings under our Credit Agreement (as defined below), our outstanding mortgages and capital lease agreements, and interest income earned from our cash and cash equivalents.
Loss on Warrant Liability
Loss on warrant liability consists of changes in the fair value of our liability-classified warrants to purchase common stock.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of changes in the fair value of our embedded derivative liability related to the convertible notes, loss on extinguishment of our obligations outstanding under the Credit and Security Agreement, as amended, in the fourth quarter of 2020, loss on extinguishment of convertible note in the second quarter of 2020, inducement loss on our Convertible Notes, and changes in fair value of short-term investments.
Income Tax Provision
We account for income taxes under the asset-and-liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We recognize the effect of income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are recognized in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Due to losses generated in the past and projected future taxable losses anticipated in the future, we established a 100% valuation allowance on net deferred tax assets.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, was enacted. The CARES Act includes several significant provisions for corporations, including the usage of net operating losses, interest deductions and payroll benefits. Corporate taxpayers may carryback net operating losses, or NOLs, originating during 2018 through 2020 for up to five years. During the three months ended March 31, 2020, we recorded a discrete tax benefit of $37.7 million related to the NOL carryback provisions available under the CARES Act legislation for taxes paid in years 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2017. We agreed to pay 65% of any tax refund received in excess of $5.0 million in a single year, along with other civil settlements, damages awards, and tax refunds, to accelerate payments to the government in connection with our government settlement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received a tax refund of $37.7 million related to the NOL carryback provisions available under the CARES Act. As of December 31, 2020, we had paid a total of $37.0 million to the government in connection with our government settlements. See Part I, Item 3. “Legal Proceedings-Federal Investigations” in this Annual Report. There is no additional carryback for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
As a result of the classification of the Company's Laboratory Operations to discontinued operations, all revenue from Laboratory Operations has been classified as discontinued operations. The remaining revenue is related to license and collaboration agreements.
Cost of Sales
As a result of the classification of the Company's Laboratory Operations to discontinued operations, all cost of sales from Laboratory Operations has been classified as discontinued operations.
Research and Development Expenses
The decrease in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to a decrease in supplies costs and consulting costs, partially offset by an increase in salary and benefits.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
The decrease in selling and marketing expenses was primarily attributable to a decrease in salary and benefits due to the Strategic Transformation, partially offset by an increase in consulting fees and advertising expense.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to an increase in consulting professional fees as part of the Strategic Transformation restructuring, legal fees related to general corporate and patent litigation matters, salary and benefits due to new equity awards and business insurance costs related to our director and officer insurance premiums.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
The increase in interest expense, net was due to the extinguishment of the Term Loan and the issuance of the convertible notes in December 2020.
Loss on Warrant Liability
The loss on warrant liability is attributable to issuances, exercises and remeasurement of liability classified warrants during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
* The change is more than 100%
The change in other income (expense), net was primarily due to a $32.3 million gain related to a decrease in the fair value of our embedded derivative liability related to the convertible notes during year ended 2021 and a loss on extinguishment of debt associated with the exchange of our obligations under the Credit and Security Agreement, as amended, for convertible notes issued to the same related party, and a loss on extinguishment of debt associated with the conversion of an unsecured promissory note into shares of common stock upon completion of the IPO in 2020 that did not reoccur in 2021.
Income Tax Benefit
The tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2020 was recorded primarily due to the NOL carryback provisions available under the CARES Act legislation enacted in March 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we established a full valuation allowance on net deferred tax assets due to losses generated in 2018 and projected taxable losses anticipated in the future.
Discontinued Operations
In connection with the Strategic Transformation, we began reporting the results of our Laboratory Operations in discontinued operations. The decrease in loss was attributable to a decrease in revenues and cost of sales due to a decrease in volumes of Progenity tests during 2021, offset by the loss recognized from the sale of Avero. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding discontinued operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources.
Since our inception, our primary sources of liquidity have been generated by our operations, sales of common stock, preferred stock, warrants to purchase common stock and preferred stock and cash from debt financings, including convertible notes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $88.4 million of cash and cash equivalents and convertible notes, net outstanding of $126.4 million. Our accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2021, was $788.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $247.4 million and cash used in operations of $167.5 million. Our primary requirements for liquidity have been to fund our working capital needs, capital expenditures, dividends, research and development, and general corporate needs.
While we have greatly reduced our cash burn following the Strategic Transformation and we are forecasting our spend to be less than our current cash and cash equivalents for the next 12 months, we have not yet built a track record for our lower spend profile. As a result, we have not completely eliminated the risks surrounding our ability to fund our operations for at least 12 months from the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, without relying on additional funding. As a result, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for 12 months following the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. We therefore intend to raise additional capital through equity offerings and/or debt financings or from other potential sources of liquidity, which may include new collaborations, licensing or other commercial agreements for one or more of our research programs or patent portfolios. Adequate funding, if needed, may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or other operations. If any of these events occur, our ability to achieve our operational goals would be adversely affected. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those described in “Risk Factors.” Depending on the severity and direct impact of these factors on us, we may be unable to secure additional financing to meet our operating requirements on terms favorable to us, or at all. Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Credit and Security Agreements, Series B Preferred Stock, and Convertible Notes
On October 27, 2017, we entered into a credit and security agreement, (the "Credit Agreement") with a fund managed by Athyrium, as collateral agent and a lender. The Credit Agreement provided for a term loan of $75.0 million, the issuance of Series B Preferred Stock, and the issuance of a warrant to purchase Series B Preferred Stock, (the "Series B Preferred Stock Purchase Warrant"). The Credit Agreement was discharged in December 2020 in connection with the offering of convertible notes described below. The Credit Agreement contained customary covenants, including a requirement to maintain a minimum unrestricted cash balance at all times of at least $5.0 million. The term loan was secured by all our tangible and intangible property assets, with the exception of our intellectual property. The term loan accrued interest at a rate per annum equal to 9.5% and was due October 27, 2022.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized interest expense on the term loan of $7.5 million, respectively.
In connection with the IPO, on June 18, 2020, the Series B Preferred Stock Purchase Warrant became exercisable for 400,160 shares of common stock.
On February 28, 2020, we completed an equity financing pursuant to the 2019 Series B Stock Purchase Agreement executed on November 12, 2019 with Athyrium Opportunities III Acquisition 2 LP, a fund managed by Athyrium and Dr. Stylli, our former Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, for an aggregate purchase price of $11.4 million. We issued an aggregate of 5,066,666 shares of Series B Preferred Stock at a purchase price of $2.25 per share.
On March 31, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to the Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement Amendment") with the collateral agent and lender party thereto, providing for the payment of interest due and payable as of March 31, 2020 in shares of our Series B Preferred Stock, and further providing for the payment of interest due and payable as of June 30, 2020 in shares of our Series B Preferred Stock in the event our IPO had not been consummated by such date. Pursuant to the Credit Agreement Amendment, we concurrently entered into a Series B Preferred Stock Subscription Agreement (the "Subscription Agreement") with the lender, which provided for the issuance of 967,130 shares of Series B Preferred Stock at a subscription price of $2.25 per share, as payment for interest due and payable as of March 31, 2020 and all applicable fees as set forth in the Credit Agreement Amendment. The Subscription Agreement further provided for a potential additional issuance of shares of Series B Preferred Stock as payment for the interest due and payable under the Credit Agreement as of June 30, 2020, in the event our IPO had not been consummated by such date, with the amount of shares to be determined at such time.
On April 3, 2020, we entered into a Series B Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement with Athyrium Opportunities III Acquisition 2 LP, pursuant to which we issued an additional 4,444,444 shares of Series B Preferred Stock at $2.25 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $10.0 million.
On May 8, 2020, we entered into a Note Purchase Agreement with Athyrium Opportunities 2020 LP, a fund managed by Athyrium, pursuant to which we issued and sold an unsecured convertible promissory note with an annual interest rate of 8.0% and in an aggregate principal amount of $15.0 million. The convertible note had a maturity date of May 8, 2022 and was convertible at the option of the holder into shares of our common stock at a per share conversion price of the lesser of $13.90 and eighty percent of the public price. In connection with the issuance and sale of the convertible note, we entered into (i) the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement (the "Second Credit Agreement Amendment"), dated May 6, 2020, allowing for the creation or incurrence of certain indebtedness and the making of payments, in each case, in respect of the convertible note, among other matters, and (ii) the Second Amendment to Series B Preferred Stock Warrant, dated May 8, 2020, providing for the removal of certain restrictive exercise provisions in the Series B Preferred Stock Purchase Warrant. In June 2020, in connection with completion of our IPO, the Note was converted into 1,250,000 shares of common stock and all obligations under the convertible note were extinguished.
In December 2020, in connection with a private offering of the convertible notes pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act, we issued a total of $168.5 million principal amount of our convertible notes (the "Convertible Notes"). The Convertible Notes were issued pursuant to, and are governed by, an indenture ("Indenture"), dated as of December 7, 2020, by and between the Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee. The Convertible Notes are due on December 1, 2025, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted, and accrue interest at a rate per annum equal to 7.25% payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, with the initial payment on June 1, 2021.
The Convertible Notes are our senior, unsecured obligations and are (i) equal in right of payment with our existing and future senior, unsecured indebtedness; (ii) senior in right of payment to our existing and future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated to the Notes; (iii) effectively subordinated to our existing and future secured indebtedness, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing that indebtedness; and (iv) structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, and (to the extent we are not a holder thereof) preferred equity, if any, of our subsidiaries.
At any time, noteholders may convert their Convertible Notes at their option into shares of our common stock, together, if applicable, with cash in lieu of any fractional share, at the then-applicable conversion rate. The initial conversion rate is 278.0094 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes, which represents an initial conversion price of approximately $3.60 per share of common stock. Noteholders that convert their Notes before December 1, 2022 will, in certain circumstances, be entitled to an additional cash payment representing the present value of any remaining interest payments on the Convertible Notes through December 1, 2022. The conversion rate and conversion price are subject to customary adjustments upon
the occurrence of certain events. In addition, if certain corporate events that constitute a Make-Whole Fundamental Change (as defined in the Indenture) occur, then the conversion rate will, in certain circumstances, be increased for a specified period of time.
The Convertible Notes are redeemable, in whole and not in part, at our option at any time on or after December 1, 2023, at a cash redemption price equal to the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date, but only if the last reported sale price per share of the our common stock exceeds 130% of the conversion price on (i) each of at least 20 trading days, whether or not consecutive, during the 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the trading day immediately before the date we send the related redemption notice; and (ii) the trading day immediately before the date we send such notice. In addition, calling the Convertible Notes will constitute a Make-Whole Fundamental Change, which will result in an increase to the conversion rate in certain circumstances for a specified period of time.
The Convertible Notes have customary provision relating to the occurrence of Events of Default (as defined in the Indenture), which include the following: (i) certain payment defaults on the Convertible Notes (which, in the case of a default in the payment of interest on the Convertible Notes, will be subject to a 30-day cure period); (ii) our failure to send certain notices under the Indenture within specified periods of time; (iii) our failure to comply with certain covenants in the Indenture relating to the Company’s ability to consolidate with or merge with or into, or sell, lease or otherwise transfer, in one transaction or a series of transactions, all or substantially all of our assets and assets of our subsidiaries, taken as a whole, to another person; (iv) a default by us in our other obligations or agreements under the Indenture or the Convertible Notes if such default is not cured or waived within 60 days after notice is given in accordance with the Indenture; (v) certain defaults by us or any of our subsidiaries with respect to indebtedness for borrowed money of at least $7,500,000; (vi) the rendering of certain judgments against us or any of our subsidiaries for the payment of at least $7,500,000, where such judgments are not discharged or stayed within 60 days after the date on which the right to appeal has expired or on which all rights to appeal have been extinguished; and (vii) certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency and reorganization involving us or any of our significant subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all such covenants.
In October 2021, we entered into privately negotiated agreements with certain holders of Convertible Notes to exchange an aggregate of $20.2 million principal amount for 8,513,850 shares of our common stock. In addition, we issued an aggregate of 427,804 shares of common stock to certain investors in consideration for a waiver of certain contractual lock-up provisions to which we agreed to in connection with prior offerings of its securities.
In addition to the transaction discussed above, holders of Convertible Notes exchanged an aggregate of $15.6 million principal amount for 4,336,938 shares of our common stock during the year ended December 31, 2021.
PIPE Financings
In February 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement for a private placement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which the purchasers purchased an aggregate of 4,370,629 units representing (i) 4,370,629 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, and (ii) warrants to purchase up to 4,370,629 shares of common stock. The purchase price for each unit was $5.72, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $25.0 million. The transaction closed on February 25, 2021. The warrants are exercisable for cash at an exercise price of $6.86 per share, subject to adjustments as provided under the terms of the warrants. The warrants are immediately exercisable for cash and expire on the fifth anniversary of the date of issuance. If exercised for cash, the warrants would result in additional gross proceeds to us of approximately $30.0 million.
In June 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement for a private placement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which the purchasers have agreed to purchase an aggregate of 16,194,332 units representing (i) 16,194,332 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (or pre-funded warrants in lieu thereof), and (ii) warrants to purchase up to 16,194,332 shares of common stock. The purchase price for each unit was $2.47, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $40.0 million. The transaction closed on June 14, 2021. The warrants are immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $2.84 per share, subject to adjustments as provided under the terms of the warrants, and expire on the fifth anniversary of the date of issuance. The pre-funded warrants are exercisable at an exercise price of $0.001 per share and have no expiration date. If exercised for cash, the warrants would result in additional gross proceeds to us of approximately $46 million.
Registered Offerings
In August 2021, we issued and sold an aggregate of (i) 40,000,000 shares of common stock and (ii) warrants to purchase 40,000,000 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering. Each share was sold together with one warrant to purchase one share of common stock at a combined public offering price of $1.00 per share of the common stock and the accompanying warrant. We received approximately $37.4 million in net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by the Company. The warrants have an exercise price of $1.00 per share, are exercisable at any time, and will expire
five years following the date of issuance. The agreement also allowed for the purchase of up to an additional 6,000,000 shares at the option of the underwriters, which was partially exercised for warrants to purchase an aggregate of 1,932,000 shares of common stock.
In October 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors relating to the offering and sale of 13,333,334 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.50 per share in a registered direct offering. We received approximately $18.7 million in net proceeds, after deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by the Company.
At-The-Market Sales Agreement and Offering
In November 2021, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement ("Sale Agreement") with B. Riley Securities, Inc., BTIG, LLC, and H.C. Wainwright & Co. LLC ("Agents"), pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $90,000,000, from time to time, in “at the market” offerings through the Agents. Sales of the shares of common stock, if any, will be made at prevailing market prices at the time of sale, or as otherwise agreed with the Agents. The Agents will receive a commission from the Company of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds of any shares of common stock sold under the Sale Agreement. During the three months ended December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of $4.6 million, after deducting commissions and other offering expenses, from the sale of 1,763,754 shares under the Sale Agreement. We sold such shares at a weighted average purchase price of $2.84 per share.
Mortgages
In January 2014, we executed a mortgage with Comerica Bank for $1.8 million for the purpose of acquiring a facility located in Ann Arbor, Michigan, which was previously leased by us and is used primarily for laboratory testing and research purposes. The outstanding balance was $1.3 million as of December 31, 2020. The remaining mortgage was paid off in November 2021. We previously had a mortgage with American Bank of Commerce (originally executed in February 2008) outstanding on Avero Diagnostic’s property located in Lubbock, Texas, which was used primarily for laboratory testing. The outstanding balance was $1.7 million as of December 31, 2020, and is included in liabilities held for sale on the consolidated balance sheet. The mortgage was paid off in December 2021 prior to the sale of Avero.
Cash Flows
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our operations and research and development as we continue to grow our business. We expect to continue to incur operating losses in future periods as our operating expenses increase to support the growth of our business. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase as we focus on developing innovative products, including our preeclampsia test and our precision medicine product candidates, through preclinical studies and clinical trials. We also expect our investment in research and development to increase as we pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates and as we seek to expand our pipeline of product candidates. We expect selling and marketing and general and administrative expenses to decrease as a result of the closure of our Laboratory Operations and the sale of our Avero affiliate. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to a $247.4 million net loss, adjusted for a $68.9 million loss from discontinued operations and non-cash charges, primarily driven by an $18.4 million change in the derivative liability fair value, offset by a $54.2 million change in the warrant liability fair value, $12.0 million of stock-based compensation expense and an $11.3 million inducement loss. The net cash outflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was attributable to a $22.9 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities and an $8.7 million decrease in accounts payable, offset by a $4.4 million increase in other long-term liabilities. Additionally, net cash used in operating activities from discontinued operations contributed $27.2 million of outflows.
Net cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to a $192.5 million net loss, adjusted for an $87.4 million loss from discontinued operations and non-cash charges, primarily driven by $33.5 million of non-cash revenue reserve, $13.9 million change in the derivative liability fair value, $11.0 million loss on extinguishment of convertible notes and $8.2 million of stock-based compensation expense. The net cash outflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to a $61.8 million decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities and $3.0 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, offset by $2.8 million increase in accounts payable. Additionally, net cash used in operating activities from discontinued operations contributed $72.8 million of outflows.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was attributable to $0.9 million in purchases of property and equipment and $0.4 million from discontinued operations. Net cash used in investing for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to $3.9 million in purchases of property and equipment and $1.1 million from discontinued operations.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to $79.4 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock warrants, $46.8 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, and $46.0 million in net proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants, partially offset by $3.8 million in payments for insurance financing and $1.3 million in principal payments on mortgages payable. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to $116.4 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, $99.7 million in net proceeds from issuance of convertible notes and $21.3 million in net proceeds from the issuance of Series B Preferred Stock, partially offset by $6.7 million in payments for insurance financing.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts of assets and liabilities reported, disclosures about contingent assets and liabilities, and reported amounts of revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on management’s best estimates and judgment. Management regularly evaluates its estimates and assumptions using historical experience and other factors; however, actual results could differ materially from these estimates and could have an adverse effect on our financial statements.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements elsewhere in this annual report, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below are most critical to understanding and evaluating our historical and future performance.
Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations
Assets classified as held for sale are reported at the lower of their carrying value or fair value less costs to sell. Depreciation and amortization of assets ceases upon designation as held for sale. Discontinued operations comprise activities that were disposed of, discontinued or held for sale at the end of the period, represent a separate major line of business that can be clearly distinguished for operational and financial reporting purposes and represent a strategic business shift having a major effect on the Company’s operations and financial results according to Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205, Presentation of Financial Statements. We have included all of our revenues and expenses for the Progenity genetics laboratory and Avero, together referred to as the Laboratory Operations, as discontinued operations and all assets and liabilities as held for sale.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is primarily derived from providing molecular laboratory tests to customers. We invoice and collect from third-party payors, laboratory services intermediaries, and self-paying individuals. Third-party payors include commercial payors, such as health insurance companies, health maintenance organizations and government payors, such as Medicare and Medicaid in the United States. We bill for these tests rendered upon completion of the testing process and delivery of test results to the customer.
In accordance with ASC 606, we follow a five-step process to recognize revenue: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognize revenue when the performance obligations are satisfied. We have evaluated our contracts with healthcare insurers, government payors, laboratory partners, and patients and identified a single performance obligation in those contracts, the delivery of a test result. We satisfy our performance obligation at a point in time upon the delivery of the test result, at which point control is transferred to the customer, and we can bill for the tests. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the amount
of consideration to which we expect to be entitled, or the transaction price, and considers the effects of variable consideration, which is discussed below.
The transaction price is an estimate and may be fixed or variable. Variable consideration includes reimbursement from healthcare insurers, government payors, and patients and is adjusted for estimates of disallowed cases, discounts, and refunds using the expected value approach. Tests billed to healthcare insurers and directly to patients can take up to six months to collect and we may be paid less than the full amount billed or not be paid at all. For insurance carriers and government payors, we utilize the expected value approach using a portfolio of relevant historical data for payors with similar reimbursement experience. The portfolio estimate is developed using historical reimbursement data from payors and patients, as well as known current reimbursement trends not reflected in the historical data. Such variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainties with respect to the amount are resolved. We monitor these estimates at each reporting period based on actual cash collections in order to assess whether a revision to the estimate is required. Both the initial estimate and any subsequent revision to the estimate contain uncertainty and require the use of judgment in the estimation of the transaction price and application of the constraint for variable consideration. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known. The consideration expected from laboratory partners is generally a fixed amount.
Common Stock Warrant Liability
We account for the common stock warrants issued as part of the August 2021 financing as freestanding liability instruments in accordance with applicable accounting guidance based on the specific terms of the warrant agreement. As these warrants are classified as liabilities, they are remeasured each period until settled or until classified as equity. Any resulting gain or loss related to the change in the fair value of the warrant liability is recorded to gain (loss) on warrant liability on the consolidated statements of operations. Changes in our inputs and assumptions, such as our stock price and the estimated volatility of common stock, could result in material changes in the valuation in future periods.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is calculated using the average of the published interest rates of U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with maturities that are commensurate with the expected term.
Expected Volatility-Given the limited period of time our stock has been traded in an active market, the expected volatility is estimated by taking the average historical volatility for industry peers, consisting of several public companies in the Company’s industry that are similar in size, stage, or financial leverage, over a period of time commensurate with the expected term of the awards.
Fair Value of Common Stock-The fair value of our common stock is the closing price of our common stock on the date of valuation.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the remaining contractual term of the warrant.
At December 31, 2021, the fair value of warrant liability of $18.7 million, was estimated using the Black-Scholes Model with the following inputs and assumptions:
Embedded Derivative Related to Convertible Notes
In December of 2020, we issued Convertible Notes due in December 2025 that have a conversion option which was required to be bifurcated upon issuance and then periodically remeasured to fair value separately as an embedded derivative. The conversion option includes additional interest payments payable to the noteholders if converted prior to December 1, 2022. We utilize a Monte Carlo simulation model to determine the fair value of the embedded features, which incorporates inputs including the common stock price, volatility of common stock, and time to maturity. The embedded feature will be remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet date with a resulting gain or loss related to the change in the fair value being recorded to other income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the embedded derivative was zero, as presented in our consolidated balance sheet. Changes in our assumptions used to value the embedded derivative, such as our stock price and the estimated volatility of common stock, could result in material changes in the valuation in future periods.
Stock-Based Compensation
We calculate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing valuation model, which incorporates various assumptions including assumptions including volatility, expected term, and risk-free interest rate. Compensation related to service-based awards are recognized starting on the grant date on a straight-line basis over the vesting period, which is typically four years.
Determining the grant date fair value of options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires management to make assumptions and judgments. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model change significantly, stock-based compensation for future awards may differ materially compared with the awards granted previously. The Company’s key inputs and assumptions are as follows:
Fair Value of Common Stock-Prior to the IPO, our common stock was not publicly traded, therefore we estimated the fair value of common stock. Following the IPO, the fair value of our common stock for awards with service-based vesting is the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant or other relevant determination date.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We determines the expected term using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life. For stock options granted to non-employees, the expected term equals the remaining contractual term of the option from the vesting date. For the ESPP, the expected term is the period of time from the offering date to the purchase date.
Expected Volatility-Given the limited period of time our stock has been traded in an active market, the expected volatility is estimated by taking the average historical volatility for industry peers, consisting of several public companies in the Company’s industry that are similar in size, stage, or financial leverage, over a period of time commensurate with the expected term of the awards.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is calculated using the average of the published interest rates of U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with maturities that are commensurate with the expected term.
Dividend Rate-The dividend yield assumption is zero, as the Company has no plans to pay dividends.
The following assumptions were used for the Black-Scholes option valuation model:
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is an asset representing the future economic benefits arising from other assets acquired in a business combination that are not individually identified and separately recognized. Goodwill is not amortized but instead is tested annually for impairment at the reporting unit level, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that fair value of the reporting unit has been reduced to less than its carrying value. We may choose to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative assessment.
If a quantitative assessment is deemed necessary, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. An impairment loss will be recognized if the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, to the extent that it does not exceed the total carrying amount of goodwill.
Intangible assets consist of identifiable intangible assets acquired through acquisitions. Identifiable intangible assets include payor relationships, trade names, and noncompete agreements. We amortize intangible assets using the straight-line method over their useful lives. We amortize noncompete covenants using the straight-line method over the terms of the related agreements. We review for impairment of intangible assets with estimable useful lives whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. No impairment existed as of December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020. There are no intangible assets remaining as of December 31, 2021 as they were included as part of the sale of Avero.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for information on recently issued accounting pronouncements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period and, as a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We also intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended.