Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto which are included in “Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on September 3, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On November 8, 2021, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Blade Therapeutics, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Blade”), Blade Merger Subsidiary, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Blade Merger Sub”), Biotech Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, in the capacity as the representative from and after the closing of the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement (the “Closing”) of the shareholders of the Company as of immediately prior to the Closing and their successors and assignees (in such capacity, the “BAC Representative”), and Jean-Frédéric Viret in the capacity as the representative of the Earnout Participants (as defined in the Merger Agreement) from and after the Closing (in such capacity, the “Blade Representative”).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, (i) prior to the Closing, the Company will transfer by way of continuation out of the Cayman Islands and into the State of Delaware to re-domicile and become a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication”) and (ii) at the Closing, and following the Domestication and the PIPE Investment (defined below), Blade Merger Sub will merge with and into Blade (the “Merger”), with Blade continuing as the surviving entity and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and with each Blade stockholder receiving ordinary shares of the Company at the Closing. Simultaneously with entering into the Merger Agreement, the Company entered into the Blade Subscription Agreements (as defined below) with investors (the “PIPE Investors”) pursuant the investors will purchase a total of 2,430,000 shares of the Company’s ordinary shares in a “private investment in public equity” transaction (the “PIPE”) for a purchase price equal to $10.00 per share and aggregate gross proceeds to the Company equal to $24,300,000. The PIPE Investors include certain existing Blade shareholders.
The total consideration received by Blade security holders from the Company at the Closing will have an aggregate value equal to $280,000,000 less the value of certain contingent payments that may become payable to Blade’s current Series C-1 Preferred Shareholders (the “Merger Consideration”), payable, in the case of Blade shareholders, solely in newly issued shares of the Company’s ordinary shares and, in the case of Blade option holders, by assumption of such options by the Company (valued based on the net spread of such options), plus the additional contingent right to receive the Earnout Shares (as defined below) after the Closing, as described below. All preferred stock of Blade and all convertible promissory notes of Blade will be required to be converted into shares of Blade common stock prior to the Closing, and will share in the Merger Consideration. All warrants of Blade will be required to be exercised in full on a cash or cashless basis or terminated without exercise, as applicable and in accordance with their respective terms, prior to the Closing.
In addition to the Merger Consideration set forth above, the Earnout Participants will also have a contingent right to receive up to an additional 3,500,000 shares of the Company’s ordinary shares (the “Earnout Shares”) after the Closing based on the stock price performance of the post-Closing Company’s common stock (the “Earnout Period”). The Earnout Shares will become issuable if, during the Earnout Period, the closing price of the post-Closing Company’s common stock is equal to or greater than $15.00 per share for any 20 trading days within any 30 trading day period (the “Price Earnout Milestone”) or, prior to the occurrence of a Price Earnout Milestone, (A) the Company consummates a sale, merger, consolidation, liquidation, exchange offer or other similar transaction that results in the stockholders of the post-Closing Company immediately prior to such transaction having beneficial ownership of less than fifty percent (50%) of the outstanding voting securities of the Company or the surviving entity in such transaction, directly or indirectly, immediately following such transaction, (B) the Company consummates a “going private transaction” or otherwise ceases to be subject to the reporting obligations under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) or (C) the post-Closing Company’s common stock ceases to be listed on a national securities exchange. Unlike the Merger Consideration, the Earnout Shares will be allocated among Blade’s security holders on a fully-diluted basis as of the Closing, without treating assumed Blade options on a net exercise basis, and with holders of unvested Blade options receiving restricted stock units for a number of shares of common stock of the post-Closing Company equal to such portion of the Earnout Shares otherwise issuable to such Earnout Participant in respect of such unvested Blade options.
Simultaneously with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Company and Blade entered into subscription agreements (collectively, the “Blade Subscription Agreements”) with PIPE Investors for an aggregate purchase of 2,430,000 shares of the Company’s ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share (the “PIPE Shares”), at a price of $10.00 per share, for an aggregate of $24,300,000, in a private placement to be consummated simultaneously with the Closing (the “PIPE Investment”). The consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Blade Subscription Agreements is conditioned on the concurrent Closing and other customary closing conditions. Among other things, each PIPE Investor agreed in its respective Blade Subscription Agreement that it and its affiliates will not have any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to any monies in the Company’s trust account held for its public shareholders, and agreed not to, and waived any right to, make any claim against the trust account (including any distributions therefrom).
Results of Operations
We classify the warrants issued in connection with our IPO and concurrent private placement as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrant liability to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each consolidated balance sheet date until all the warrants are exercised or expired, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $6,864,581, which consisted of operating and formation expenses of $1,570,165, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,795,400, and transaction costs allocable to warrant liabilities associated with the initial public offering of $520,319, offset by the interest earned from operating bank accounts of $65 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $21,238.
For the period from September 3, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,000, which consisted of formation expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 28, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 23,000,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, which included the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in the amount of 3,000,000 units, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 6,000,000 private placement warrants to our sponsor at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $6,000,000.
Following the initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $13,114,249 in transaction costs, including $4,000,000 of underwriting fees, $8,650,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $464,249 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,465,214. Our net loss of $6,864,581 was affected by noncash charges (income) related to the change in fair value of the warrant liabilities of $4,795,400, transaction costs associated with our IPO of $520,319, and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $21,238. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $104,886 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from September 3, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, there was no cash used in operating activities. Our net loss of $5,000 was offset by the formation cost paid by our sponsor in exchange for our issuance of founder shares.
At December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $230,021,238. We are using substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commission and income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $91,407 held outside of the trust account. We are using the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or our officers, or directors or any of their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the private placement warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. In such circumstances, our sponsor or our officers or directors or any of their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us additional funds as may be required. However, the terms of any such loans have not been determined, except to the extent described in the preceding paragraph. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
We have until January 28, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 28, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space and administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on January 26, 2021. On January 20, 2022, our sponsor agreed to cause the return to us of the 11 months of prior payments that we had made under this agreement, totaling $110,000, and we have since received such amount. Our sponsor has informed us that we will continue to be provided with office space and administrative and support services, but that we are no longer being charged for them.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of (i) 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial 20,000,000 units sold in our IPO, or $7,000,000, and (ii) 5.5% of the gross proceeds from the units sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, representing a total deferred fee of $8,650,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value in respect of each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until the warrants are exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The private placement warrants and the public warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a lattice model, specifically a binomial lattice model incorporating the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein methodology. For periods subsequent to the severability of the public warrants from the units, the public warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ (deficit) equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Loss per Common Share
Net loss per ordinary shares is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering, and (ii) the private placement since the exercise of the dilutive warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. Additionally, the private placement warrants are excluded from the calculation due to being not-in-the-money, therefore, anti-dilutive as of December 31, 2021. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 17,500,000 Class A ordinary shares in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary shares is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.