Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A, above.
Overview
Allbirds is a global lifestyle brand that innovates with naturally derived materials to make better footwear and apparel products in a better way, while treading lighter on our planet.
We began our journey in 2015 with three fundamental beliefs about the emerging generation of consumers: first, these consumers recognize that climate change is an existential threat to the human race; second, these consumers connect their purchase decisions with their impact on the planet, demanding more from businesses; and third, these consumers do not want to compromise between looking good, feeling good, and doing good. We became a public benefit corporation, or PBC, under Delaware law and earned our B Corporation, or B Corp, certification in 2016, codifying how we take into account the impact our actions have on all of our stakeholders, including the environment, our flock of employees, communities, consumers, and investors. We have achieved our rapid growth through a digitally-led vertical retail distribution strategy. We market directly to consumers via our localized multilingual digital platform and our physical footprint of 35 stores as of December 31, 2021. By serving consumers directly, we cut out the layers of costs associated with traditional wholesalers, creating a more efficient cost structure and higher gross margin. Our direct distribution model allows us to control our sales channels and build deep relationships with our customers by delivering high-quality products
through a seamless and immersive brand experience, whether shopping on our website, on our app, or in one of our Allbirds stores. We believe our differentiated vertical retail model enables a margin structure that allows us to provide high-quality material and product while pricing lower compared to a traditional wholesale model. Designing and creating innovative, sustainable materials is a challenging process for both our internal R&D teams as well as our supply chain partners. We have invested time and resources to train our manufacturers to use our natural materials, which we believe makes it difficult to replicate our novel manufacturing processes at our product quality.
Today, we are a high-growth company with a loyal and expanding customer base that has earned our brand the permission to expand beyond our casual footwear origins and enter adjacent categories, such as performance running shoes and apparel. Our strong brand equity is fueled by our differentiated products created by sustainability-driven innovation. Our purpose and mission, coupled with innovation and a vertically integrated business model, allow us to meet the call of our consumers across the globe.
Initial Public Offering
On November 2, 2021, we priced our initial public offering, or IPO, and our Class A common stock began trading on The Nasdaq Global Select Market on November 3, 2021 under the symbol “BIRD.” In connection with the completion of the IPO on November 5, 2021, 23,221,152 shares of our Class A common stock were issued and sold at a public offering price of $15.00 per share, which consisted of 16,850,799 shares offered by us and 6,370,353 shares offered by certain existing stockholders. We received aggregate proceeds of $237.0 million from the IPO, net of the underwriting discounts and commissions of $15.8 million and before offering costs of $5.4 million. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares of our Class A common stock by the selling stockholders.
Recent Financial Performance
•We achieved 26.5% year-over-year net revenue growth in 2021 compared to 2020 and 13.2% year-over-year net revenue growth in 2020 compared to 2019.
•We increased gross margin by 145 basis points from 51.4% in 2020 to 52.9% in 2021 due to favorable channel and geography mix, sales of higher gross margin products, a modest price increase in certain of our products, and cost savings through achieving economies of scale with manufacturers and key service providers, partially offset by higher warehouse and logistics costs.
•We reported net losses of $(45.4) million in 2021 as compared to $(25.9) million in 2020. The increase in net loss was primarily due to higher selling, general, and administrative expense and increased other expense.
•We reported adjusted EBITDA of $(11.7) million and $(15.4) million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in adjusted EBITDA, despite the increase in net loss, was primarily driven by increases in other expense, stock-based compensation, and the provision for income tax, partially offset by $4.0 million in additional expenses as a result of becoming a public company.
Adjusted EBITDA is a measure that is not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. See the section titled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” further below for the definition of adjusted EBITDA, as well as a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our financial and operating conditions have been, and will continue to be, affected by a number of factors, including the following:
Ability to Increase Brand Awareness and Drive Efficient Customer Acquisition
The ability to communicate our mission of making better things in a better way is integral to our success in engaging new customers and introducing them to our products and brand. Allbirds is still relatively unknown, underscoring a large opportunity to scale our customer base and drive future growth. Our continued focus on elevating our product offerings combined with our differentiated brand approach and authenticity is critical to attracting new customers and increasing closet share. Further, we must continue to emphasize our commitment to people, the planet, and our investors in order to further increase our reach and highlight the integrity of our brand.
As we continue to scale and build our global brand awareness, our goal is to acquire new customers in a cost-effective way. We will continue to invest in customer acquisition while the underlying customer unit economics indicate the return on investment is strong. The continued execution of our customer acquisition strategy is key to acquiring more customers and driving growth and profitability for our business. Our ability to acquire more customers depends significantly on a number of factors, including the level and pattern of consumer spending in the product categories in which we operate and our ability to expand our brand awareness. Starting in 2022, we will selectively enter into retail partnerships with third parties to distribute our products on a limited basis, in an effort to build brand awareness and establish greater customer credibility in the market for our performance products.
Continued Growth Within Existing Customer Base and Increasing Closet Share
In addition to seeking to acquire new customers, we continuously seek ways to engage with our large and growing base of over four million existing customers. We aim to grow our closet share within our existing customer base, especially as we expand into new product categories and line extensions. We believe we must continue to innovate with new products in order to drive consumer engagement, increase closet share, and expand beyond the footwear category to move up the body with apparel. At the same time, it is critical that we maintain our long-trusted commitment to offering the most comfortable, high performance, and sustainable products. Our continued growth within our existing customer base will depend in part on our ability to continue to innovate with new products appealing to our existing customers.
Execution of Our Vertical Retail Distribution Strategy and Continued Growth of Our Store Fleet
Our long-term growth strategy relies on our ability to grow across various channels, including digitally and in our stores. We believe this seamless consumer buying experience is important to meeting the needs of our growing customer base while also growing revenue.
We believe that growing our store footprint in the United States and internationally will help grow brand awareness, allow us to be in closer proximity to new customers, and drive profitable growth. With strong pre-COVID-19 store unit economics, our store operations have historically been highly profitable, capital-efficient, and provided strong investment returns. Beginning in 2020, our retail operations were disrupted by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect our stores to rebound to pre-COVID levels over time following the broader reopening of the economy. Based on this pre-COVID performance, we believe our new stores will be highly profitable, have attractive payback periods, serve as good capital investments, and be positioned well to take advantage of physical retail’s recovery from the pandemic. We also expect net revenue and gross margin to benefit from increased sales through our physical retail channel, which benefits from a lower return rate and decreased shipping costs. We have also seen a corresponding increase in digital traffic and digital sales as a result of store builds in new markets. Furthermore, as we grow our store footprint, we believe we will be able to expand our valuable multi-channel customer base.
We believe our omni-channel growth strategy will continue to require investment in store build outs, field infrastructure and technology to ensure that our model reaches new customers, runs in a cost-efficient manner, and provides continued innovation in the customer buying experience. Our store count by primary geographical market is presented in the table below, as of the dates presented:
Growing Our Product Innovation Platform
Innovation has been core to the Allbirds brand since our inception in 2015. Our future innovation and product pipeline will depend, in part, on our ability to apply our expertise in materials science to source and commercialize materials that are sustainable, durable, and comfortable. Our success in leveraging these materials in our products is partially reliant on the ability of our manufacturing and supply chain partners to produce and distribute these materials at scale. It also takes months of testing before we commercialize new materials and products, which could cause delays in our existing growth
plans. In addition, these initiatives may require ongoing investments which may lead to additional expenses that could delay our ability to achieve near-term profitability.
Ability to Scale Infrastructure for Profitable Growth
To grow our business, we intend to continue to improve our operational efficiency and thoughtfully optimize our infrastructure. Our ability to scale relies upon our supply chain infrastructure. Our investments in direct and meaningful relationships with all of our partners, from raw materials suppliers to Tier 1 manufacturers and logistics providers, allowed us to improve gross margin despite a difficult cost climate due to the COVID-19 pandemic, ongoing supply chain shortages and delays, and increase in inflation. We will continue to make similar investments in developing partnerships across the full supply chain. Most importantly, we are firmly committed to reducing our carbon footprint and our environmental impact. This commitment may require current and future investments, which may result in higher expenses.
Macroeconomic Trends
Consumers are increasingly becoming more conscious of the products they purchase and are seeking brands that are responsible and purpose-driven. Consumers’ increasing care in the products and brands they trust have contributed to significant demand for our products. Our status as a PBC and a B Corp highlight our commitment to sustainability and our purpose while providing an objective reference point for consumers. As a purpose-native company, we believe we are well-positioned at the intersection of key macro trends impacting our industry. However, changes in macro-level consumer spending trends, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and increase in inflation, could result in fluctuations in our results of operations. For example, in August 2021, we implemented a slight price increase in certain of our products, and we expect to have further price increases in 2022. It is uncertain if we will have to consider additional future price increases in our products as a result of increases in the cost of raw materials and supplies, partially due to the current inflationary environment. If we continue increasing the prices of our products, this may adversely impact demand for our products by our customers.
Seasonality
Our business is affected by general seasonal trends common to the retail footwear and apparel industry, with sales peaking during the end-of-year holiday period that typically falls within our fourth quarter.
Impact of COVID-19
Beginning in January 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused general business disruption worldwide. Nevertheless, we have remained agile in both strategy and execution throughout this period and our results to date have reflected these efforts, as evidenced below. The possible sustained spread or resurgence of the pandemic, and any government response thereto, increases the uncertainty regarding future economic conditions that will impact our business in the future. See the section titled “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business, Brand, Products, and Industry-The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and may in the future continue to have, a material adverse impact on our business” in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors, for further details.
Topline Growth
Despite the challenging backdrop for the footwear category, our sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 26.5% compared to 2020, which is more than double our sales growth of 13.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019.
Store Closures and Limited Operating Hours
The COVID-19 pandemic created significant disruptions for our physical stores, the majority of which were closed between late March 2020 and July 2020. Across all of 2020, our stores were closed for approximately 20% of the total number of days we expected to operate, and our open stores had reduced operating hours and restricted guest occupancy levels. In 2021, a majority of our stores were open throughout the year, with certain regions experiencing closures on a periodic basis, such as Europe, where some of our stores were closed for a portion of the quarter ended March 31, 2021, and New Zealand, where our store was closed for a portion of the quarter ended December 31, 2021.We have also occasionally closed stores for a few days at a time when an employee has tested positive for COVID-19. In addition, our decision to support our retail employees through the pandemic and store closures created significant strains on operating margins during the period.
As a digitally-native brand, we were able to avoid massive disruptions to our business performance through the pandemic due to the strength of our digitally-led vertical retail strategy, but the performance of our retail stores same-store sales in the year ended December 31, 2021 remained below 2019 performance for the same period. We resumed our store rollout strategy in 2021, opening 13 new stores in both U.S. and international locations.
Gross Margin
Despite headwinds in manufacturing, shipping, and logistics, we were able to expand our gross margin by approximately 145 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, driven by favorable channel and geography mix, sales of higher gross margin products such as apparel, a modest price increase in certain of our products, and cost savings through achieving economies of scale with manufacturers and key service providers, partially offset by higher warehouse and logistics costs.
This expansion highlights our business’ resiliency and flexibility. We believe that as we continue to scale, our upfront investments in materials science and sustainable manufacturing processes will result in greater economies of scale which will ultimately improve our gross profitability.
Product Development
Despite volatile sourcing and logistics headwinds as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and global supply chain shortages and delays, we were able to continue our innovation cycle without material delays by launching several new product styles during the year ended December 31, 2021. We debuted our performance apparel line in August 2021, expanded our lifestyle apparel line in November 2021, and introduced new shoes, such as the Sugar Rover, Wool Piper Mids, and Trail Runner SWT during the year. Our expanded performance and lifestyle lines also fit with growing consumer trends towards more comfortable, versatile products.
Components of Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We generate net revenue primarily through sales of our products in our directly owned digital and physical retail channels. The digital channel includes direct sales to consumers through our websites and mobile app, and the physical retail channel includes sales through our owned stores. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, a majority of our sales are through directly owned channels. Net revenue consists of sales of our products and shipping revenue, net of allowances for returns, discounts, and any taxes collected from customers.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of the cost of purchased inventory, inbound and outbound shipping costs, import duties, and distribution center and related equipment costs. Shipping costs to receive products from our suppliers are included in the cost of inventory and recognized as cost of revenue upon sale of products to our customers.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit represents net revenue less cost of revenue. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of net revenue. Our gross margin may in the future fluctuate from period to period based on a number of factors, including business outcomes, the mix of products we sell, the channels through which we sell our products, price increases, the innovation initiatives we undertake in each product category, cost drivers, such as product promotions, commodity prices and transportation rates, and manufacturing costs, among other factors. Our expectation is that the combination of our strategy and growth initiatives will result in both a topline expansion and operational leverage, leading to a strong gross margin profile.
Operating Expense
Selling, general, and administrative expense
Selling, general, and administrative expense consists of salaries, stock-based compensation, benefits, payroll taxes, bonuses, and other related costs, which we refer to as personnel and related expenses (including for store employees), as well as third-party consulting and contractor expenses, including non-employee stock-based compensation. Selling, general, and administrative expense also includes rent expense and associated utilities for office and retail locations, depreciation and amortization expense, software costs, third-party professional fees, and costs related to other office
functions. We anticipate that we will incur additional costs for personnel and related expenses and third-party professional fees operating as a public company and expect our selling, general, and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our business.
Marketing expense
Marketing expense consists of advertising costs incurred to acquire new customers, retain existing customers, and build our brand awareness. We expect marketing expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our brand awareness, introduce new product innovations across multiple product categories, and implement new marketing strategies.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest expense associated with our credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., or the “Credit Agreement”.
Other Expense
Other expense consists of gains or losses on foreign currency driven by our international operations and changes in the fair value of our preferred stock warrant liability. The change in fair value related to mark to market accounting for our preferred stock warrant liability, and fluctuated as the value of the underlying preferred equity increased or decreased.
In November 2021, immediately prior to the completion of the IPO, and upon the issuance of shares of Class B common stock, pursuant to the terms of our outstanding convertible preferred stock warrants, our preferred stock warrants were automatically exchanged for Class B common stock on a one-to-one basis and the preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital. Therefore, subsequent to November 2021, there will no longer be an impact to other expense as a result of changes in the fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability.
Income Tax (Provision) Benefit
Our provision for income taxes consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We record deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between the book and tax bases of assets and liabilities. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated by applying enacted tax rates and laws to taxable years in which such differences are expected to reverse. Because we have a recent history of pre-tax book losses and are expected to be in a pre-tax book loss position in the near term, a valuation allowance was maintained against the deferred tax assets in the United States, China, Hong Kong, and Vietnam as of December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated:
________________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense of $9.7 million, $6.6 million, and $4.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
(2)Includes depreciation and amortization expense of $9.8 million, $7.1 million, and $3.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations as a percentage of net revenue for the periods presented:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased $58.2 million, or 26.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Our sales growth was driven by a $57.7 million increase in the volume of units sold as a result of strong consumer demand across geographies and channels and a strong response to new product launches during the year, with the remaining $0.5 million due to an increase in our average selling price per unit driven by modest price increases in certain of our products and product mix.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $24.3 million, or 22.8%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in the volume of units sold. Gross profit increased by $33.9 million, or 30.1%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit was driven by a $29.9 million increase in the volume of units sold, with the remaining $4.0 million due to an increase in gross margin rate. Our gross margin improved from 51.4% to 52.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to favorable channel and geography mix, sales of higher gross margin products such as apparel, cost savings through achieving economies of scale with
manufacturers and key service providers, and a modest price increase in certain of our products, partially offset by higher distribution center and logistics costs.
Operating Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expense
Selling, general, and administrative expense increased $35.5 million, or 41.0%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $13.3 million in personnel and related expenses as a result of higher headcount, an increase of $4.7 million in stock-based compensation and common stock warrant expense, an increase of $3.7 million in rent expense as a result of an increased number of stores in operation, and an increase of $2.7 million of depreciation and amortization. The remaining $11.1 million increase was composed of other miscellaneous operating and third-party professional expenses and fees, including $4.0 million in additional expenses as a result of becoming a public company.
Marketing expense
Marketing expense increased $2.1 million, or 3.7%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased digital advertising expense in 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $0.1 million, or (40.1)%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by less borrowing under the Credit Agreement in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Other Expense
Other expense increased $11.1 million, or 2445.6%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a mark to market adjustment to reflect the increase in fair value of our preferred stock warrant liability as a result of the increase in the value of the underlying preferred equity. As noted above, in connection with our IPO in November 2021, the preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital. Therefore, subsequent to November 2021, there will no longer be an impact to other expense related to the preferred stock warrant liability.
Income Tax (Provision) Benefit
Income tax (provision) benefit decreased by $4.9 million, or (119.7)%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an income tax provision, primarily due to the fact that the 2020 tax benefit reflected the carryback of net operating losses under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, which is nonrecurring. In the prior year ended December 31, 2020, we elected to carry back 2018 and 2019 net operating losses to prior tax years.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased $25.6 million, or 13.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our sales growth year-over-year was primarily driven by increases in average order value and number of orders from our digital channel. This was partially offset by a decrease in retail net revenue driven by temporary closures as a result of COVID-19, as well as reduced operating hours and restricted guest occupancy levels.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $11.7 million, or 12.4%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in the total number of orders in 2020 compared to 2019. Our gross margin improved by approximately 40 basis points in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to favorable product mix and improved product margin. This was partially offset by headwinds in manufacturing, shipping, and logistics costs as a result of COVID-19.
Operating Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expense
Selling, general, and administrative expense increased $23.2 million, or 36.6%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increases in personnel and related expenses of $13.8 million, depreciation and amortization of $3.7 million, and rent expense of $2.5 million, as a result of an increased number of employees and an increased number of retail stores in operation.
Marketing expense
Marketing expense increased $10.9 million, or 24.6%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increased digital advertising expenses as a result of the more competitive, higher-media cost environment and the consumer migration to digital due to physical retail restrictions.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $0.2 million, or 209.4%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increased interest expense related to our Credit Agreement, partially offset by an increase in interest income.
Other Expense
Other expense decreased $1.3 million, or 74.1%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by decreased warrant liability expense of $2.1 million, partially offset by increased losses on foreign currency translation of $0.8 million.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
Income tax benefit (provision) increased by $7.8 million, or 211.9%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting in an income tax benefit, primarily due to a decrease in the current tax provision of $4.4 million and a decrease in the deferred tax provision of $3.4 million. In 2019, we established a valuation allowance in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions. This resulted in a negative impact of 50.95% to the effective tax rate, or ETR, and an increase to tax expense of $5.5 million. In 2020, our ETR was impacted by the CARES Act. Specifically, we applied the net operating loss carryback provision, resulting in a positive impact of 6.22% to the ETR and a tax benefit of $1.8 million. The CARES Act is nonrecurring, and the valuation allowance could reverse in future periods depending on future positive earnings.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We include adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because they are important measures upon which our management assesses our operating performance and because we believe they facilitate operating performance comparisons from period to period by excluding differences primarily caused by the impact of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, other expense (consisting of changes in fair value of our preferred stock warrant liability, gains or losses on foreign currency, and gains or losses on sales of property, plant, and equipment), interest expense, and provision for income taxes. Because adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin facilitate internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we also use these measures for our business planning purposes. In addition, we believe adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin are widely used by investors, securities analysts, ratings agencies, and other parties in evaluating companies in our industry as measures of operational performance.
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin should not be considered as alternatives to net loss, net loss margin, or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with United States generally
accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of adjusted EBITDA rather than net loss, and the use of adjusted EBITDA margin rather than net loss margin. Some of these limitations are that adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin:
•do not reflect stock-based compensation expense, including common stock warrant expense, and therefore do not include all of our compensation costs;
•do not reflect depreciation and amortization expense and, although this is a non-cash expense, the assets being depreciated may have to be replaced in the future, increasing our cash requirements;
•do not reflect interest expense, or the cash required to service our debt, which reduces cash available to us;
•do not reflect other expense that may decrease cash available to us; and
•do not reflect income tax expense or benefit that reduce cash available to us.
Further, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures. Because of these limitations, we consider, and you should consider, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin together with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to its most comparable GAAP measure, net loss:
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $3.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in adjusted EBITDA, despite the increase in net loss, was primarily driven by increases in stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, other expense, and income tax provision, partially offset by $4.0 million in additional expenses as a result of becoming a public company.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $14.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by higher selling, general, and administrative expense and increased marketing expense.
We define adjusted EBITDA margin as adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenue. The following table presents net loss and adjusted EBITDA as percentages of net revenue:
Adjusted EBITDA margin improved from (7.0)% to (4.2)% in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 and declined from (0.7)% to (7.0)% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The changes were primarily driven by the same factors as noted in the adjusted EBITDA discussion above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $288.6 million. Our operations have been funded primarily through cash flows from the sale of our products and net proceeds from private sales of equity securities. We completed our IPO in November 2021 and received aggregate proceeds of $237.0 million, net of the underwriting discounts and commissions of $15.8 million and before offering costs of $5.4 million.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalent balances, cash flow from operations, and amounts available for borrowing under our Credit Agreement will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements over the next 12 months. We believe we will meet longer-term expected future cash requirements and obligations through a combination of our existing cash and cash equivalent balances, cash flow from operations, amounts available for borrowing under our Credit Agreement and issuances of equity securities or debt offerings.
Our material cash requirements for future capital expenditures, expected to be between $25 million and $30 million in 2022, may vary materially from those currently planned and will depend on many factors, including our revenue growth rate, our ability to scale across categories and geographies and increase retail stores, our human capital costs which are not accurately estimable, our ability to execute on new marketing initiatives, the timing and extent of spending to support investments in growth and technology initiatives, the market adoption of new products, ESG initiatives to reduce and offset our carbon emissions, and overall market conditions. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of additional debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. There can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital when needed or on terms acceptable to us. The inability to raise capital if needed would adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives.
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations:
Debt
In February 2019, we entered into the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement is an asset-based loan with a revolving line of credit of up to $40.0 million and an optional accordion of up to $35.0 million. The Credit Agreement has a maturity date of February 20, 2024. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding balances under the Credit Agreement. See Note 9, Long-Term Debt, of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, for more information regarding the Credit Agreement.
Operating Leases
We lease various office and retail spaces for our operations with lease terms ranging from 1 year to 12 years, certain of which contain renewal provisions. As of December 31, 2021, we had operating lease commitments of $106.4 million, with
$13.6 million payable within 12 months. See Note 15, Commitments and Contingencies, of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, for more information regarding our operating lease commitments.
Inventory Purchase Obligations
Inventory purchase obligations relate to a supplier agreement that requires us, through our manufacturers, to purchase a minimum quantity of materials in the next year. As of December 31, 2021, we had inventory purchase obligations of $4.4 million, with $4.4 million payable within 12 months. See Note 15, Commitments and Contingencies, of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, for more information regarding our inventory purchase obligations.
Cash Flows
Net Cash (Used In) Provided By Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash are cash payments received from customers for sales of our products. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel and related expenses, selling and marketing expenses, and third-party professional fees. We have generated negative operating cash flows and have supplemented working capital through net proceeds from the sale of equity securities, including proceeds from our IPO in November.
Net cash used in operating activities mainly consists of our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, and changes in operating assets and liabilities during each year.
During 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $50.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $45.4 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $31.8 million and a net change of $37.3 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $48.5 million in inventory due to a combination of higher in-transit inventory, resulting from extended lead times and higher inbound freight costs. Additionally, the change in operating assets and liabilities was due to an increase in $11.5 million in prepaid and other current assets largely due to an increase in accounts and other receivables, offset by an increase of $25.2 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to timing of payments and an increase of other long-term liabilities of $5.3 million due to an increase in deferred rent liabilities.
During 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $34.6 million, which consisted of a net loss of $25.9 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $13.1 million and a net change of $21.9 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $13.9 million in inventory to support our growth and product expansion, an increase of $11.2 million in prepaid and other current assets largely due to an increase in taxes receivable, an increase of $1.2 million in accounts payable due to the timing of payments, and an increase of $1.9 million in other long-term liabilities primarily due to an increase in deferred rent liabilities.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities primarily relates to capital expenditures to support our growth and investment in property, plant, and equipment for expansion of our business.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $25.6 million, $16.3 million, and $15.2 million, respectively, and consisted primarily of cash outflows for the purchases of property, plant, and equipment, primarily to support the opening of retail stores across the United States and internationally.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 was $238.2 million, which consisted primarily of $237.0 million of offering proceeds from our IPO in November 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 and 2019 was $102.2 million and $25.7 million, respectively, primarily due to the net proceeds from issuances of our convertible preferred stock.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the following accounting estimates involve a high degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of our operations. See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, for a description of our other significant accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Our primary source of revenue is from sales of shoes and apparel products. We determine revenue recognition in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or Topic 606. We recognize revenue when control passes to the customer. This occurs at the time products are shipped to customers for orders placed online, and at the point of sale for retail sales in the store, which is when the performance obligation is satisfied. As customers may return products, we record a reserve for estimated product returns in each reporting period as a reduction of net revenue, which is based on historical return trends. We record the expected customer refund liability as a reduction to revenue, and the expected inventory right of recovery as a reduction of cost of revenue. We believe revenue recognition is subject to uncertainty as actual return costs can differ from previous estimates based on the amount of customer returns or exchanges, which would result in adjustments to the amount of liability and corresponding revenue in the period in which such differences occur. In making such estimates, we analyze historical returns, current economic trends and changes in customer demand and acceptance of our products.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards, including stock options and restricted stock units, or RSUs, granted to employees, directors, and non-employees, and stock purchase rights granted under the 2021 ESPP, or ESPP Rights, to employees, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. The fair value of each stock option and ESPP Right granted is estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of each RSU award is based on the estimated fair value of our common stock on the date of grant.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used to determine the fair value of the option awards represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment over the assumptions listed below. The related stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards. We account for forfeitures as they occur instead of estimating the number of awards expected to be forfeited.
These assumptions and estimates are as follows:
Fair value of common stock-As our common stock was not publicly traded prior to November 2021, the fair value was determined by our board of directors, with input from management and valuation reports prepared by third-party valuation specialists. Stock-based compensation for financial reporting purposes is measured based on updated estimates of fair value when appropriate, such as when additional relevant information related to the estimate becomes available in a
valuation report issued as of a subsequent date. After our IPO, the fair value of our common stock is determined by the closing price, on the grant date, of our common stock, which is traded on Nasdaq.
Expected dividend yield-We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. As a result, an expected dividend yield of zero percent was used.
Expected volatility-As we did not have a trading history for our common stock prior to November 2021, the expected volatility was estimated by taking the average historic price volatility for industry peers, consisting of several public companies in our industry which are either similar in size, stage of life cycle, or financial leverage, over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards.
Expected term-The expected term of options represents the period of time that options are expected to be outstanding. Our historical stock option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate an expected term due to a lack of sufficient data. For stock options granted to employees, we estimate the expected term by using the simplified method. The simplified method calculates the expected term as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. For stock options granted to non-employees, the expected term equals the contractual term of the option.
Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the options was based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant.
The assumptions for expected volatility and expected term are the two assumptions that most significantly affect the grant date fair value of stock options and ESPP Rights. Changes in expected risk-free rate of return do not significantly impact the calculation of fair value and determining this input is not highly subjective.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimation process, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense. Changes in these subjective assumptions can materially affect the estimate of the fair value of stock options and ESPP Rights and, consequently, the related amount of stock-based compensation expense recognized in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Fair Value of Common Stock
Prior to our IPO, given the absence of a public trading market of our common stock and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of fair value of our common stock, including:
•independent third-party valuations of our common stock;
•the prices at which our common and convertible preferred stock were sold to outside or existing investors;
•the rights, preferences, and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•our results of operations, financial position, and capital resources;
•industry outlook;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock;
•the fact that the option grants involve illiquid securities in a private company;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our company, given prevailing market conditions;
•the history and nature of our business, industry trends, and competitive environment; and
•general economic outlook including economic growth, inflation and unemployment, interest rate environment, and global economic trends.
In valuing our common stock, our board of directors determined the equity value of our business using various valuation methods including the sale of preferred stock to unrelated third parties, combinations of income, and market approaches with input from management. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly traded companies in our industry or similar business operations as of each valuation date and is adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in our cash flows. For each valuation, the equity value determined by the income and market approaches was then allocated to the common stock using either the option pricing method, or OPM, or a hybrid method. The hybrid method is a hybrid of the probability weighted expected return method, or PWERM, and the OPM.
The OPM is based on a Black-Scholes option pricing model, which allows for the identification of a range of possible future outcomes, each with an associated probability. The OPM is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is difficult to predict and thus creates highly speculative forecasts. PWERM involves a forward-looking analysis of the possible future outcomes of the enterprise. This method is particularly useful when discrete future outcomes can be predicted at a relatively high confidence level with a probability distribution. Discrete future outcomes considered under the PWERM include an initial public offering, as well as non-initial public offering market-based outcomes. Determining the fair value of the enterprise using the PWERM requires us to develop assumptions and estimates for both the probability of an initial public offering liquidity event and stay private outcomes, as well as the values we expect those outcomes could yield. Our common stock valuations prior to March 2021 were based on the OPM. Beginning in March 2021 and prior to our IPO in November 2021, we valued our common stock based on a hybrid method of the PWERM and the OPM.
In addition, we considered any secondary transactions involving our capital stock. In our evaluation of those transactions, we considered the facts and circumstances of each transaction to determine the extent to which they represented a fair value exchange. Factors considered include transaction volume, timing, whether the transactions occurred among willing and unrelated parties, and whether the transactions involved investors with access to our financial information.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
For valuations after the completion of our IPO, our board of directors determines the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on The Nasdaq Stock Market as reported on the date of grant. Future expense amounts for any particular period could be affected by changes in our assumptions or market conditions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or JOBS Act, and we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We may take advantage of these exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, as a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We may take advantage of these exemptions up until December 31, 2026, the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering or such earlier time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We would cease to be an emerging growth company if we have more than $1.07 billion in annual gross revenue, we have more than $700.0 million in market value of our Class A stock held by non-affiliates (and we have been a public
company for at least 12 months and have filed one annual report on Form 10-K) or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt securities over a three-year period.