ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to help you understand our Company, our operations and our current operating environment. For an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance, the MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of our Annual Report. Our MD&A consists of the following sections:
•
Overview - a brief description of our business, financial highlights for 2021, key performance indicators, known and anticipated trends, and a COVID-19 pandemic update
•
Results of Operations - an analysis of our Consolidated Statements of Operations for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources - an analysis of cash flows, including capital expenditures, share issuance and repurchase activity, dividends, contractual obligations and commitments, and known trends that may impact liquidity
•
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - a discussion of accounting policies that require critical judgments and estimates, including new accounting standards
OVERVIEW
As of February 24, 2022, we owned and operated 211 restaurants located in 29 states as described in Item 2 - Properties - “Restaurant Locations” in this Form 10-K. Our restaurants are typically open every day of the year except for Thanksgiving and Christmas. All of our restaurants currently offer take-out and delivery services. Additionally, all of our restaurants offer a call-ahead or online wait list, on-line ordering for dine-in, guest pick-up or curbside delivery and reservations for large parties.
Our menu features BJ’s award-winning, signature deep-dish pizza, our proprietary craft and other beers, as well as a wide selection of appetizers, entrées, pastas, sandwiches, specialty salads and desserts, including our Pizookie® dessert. Our proprietary craft beer is produced at several of our locations, our Temple, Texas brewpub locations and by independent third-party brewers using our proprietary recipes.
Financial Highlights for Fiscal 2021
While fiscal 2021 was a challenging year, we met these challenges with sales building initiatives, raising $30 million (before commissions and other fees) from the sale of our common stock through an at-the-market (“ATM”) offering program, amending our credit agreement, opening new restaurants and investing back into our existing restaurants. Notable 2021 financial highlights compared to fiscal 2020 include:
•
Total revenues increased 39.6% to $1.1 billion
•
Total restaurant operating weeks increased 1.3%
•
Comparable restaurant sales increased 38.3%
•
Net loss of $3.6 million compared to net loss of $57.9 million
•
Diluted net loss per share of $0.16 compared to net loss per share of $2.74
Key Performance Indicators and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Key measures that we use in evaluating our restaurants and assessing our business include the following:
Comparable Restaurant Sales. In calculating comparable restaurant sales, we include a restaurant in the comparable base once it has been open for 18 months. This measure highlights the performance of existing restaurants, while excluding the impact of new restaurant openings and closures. Comparable restaurant sales increased 38.3% for fiscal 2021 with much of this improvement being due to lower sales in 2020 resulting from effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Restaurant Level Operating Margin. This non-GAAP financial measure is equal to the revenues generated by our restaurants, less their direct operating costs which consist of cost of sales, labor and benefits, and occupancy and operating costs. This performance measure primarily includes the costs that restaurant level managers can directly control and excludes other operating costs that are essential to conduct the Company’s business. We use restaurant level operating margin as a supplemental measure of restaurant performance and believe restaurant level operating margin is useful to investors in that it highlights trends in our core business that may not otherwise be apparent to investors when relying solely on GAAP financial measures. Because other companies may calculate restaurant level operating margin differently than we do, our restaurant level operating margin calculation may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. A reconciliation of (loss) income from operations to restaurant level operating margin for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 is set forth below:
Adjusted EBITDA. This non-GAAP financial measure represents the sum of net (loss) income adjusted for expenses and gains/losses from interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, other income, loss on disposal and impairment of assets, and certain legal settlements and lease transactions. We use Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure of our operating performance and believe this measure is useful to investors in that it highlights cash flow and trends in our business operations that may not otherwise be apparent to investors when relying solely on GAAP financial measures. Because other companies may calculate this measure differently than we do, our Adjusted EBITDA calculation may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. A reconciliation of net
(loss) income to adjusted EBITDA for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 is set forth below:
Weekly Sales Average. We calculate each restaurant’s average weekly revenue to understand and manage the business trends and expectations. Our weekly sales average was approximately $99,000, $72,000 and $109,000 for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Known or Anticipated Trends
Sales Growth. While most of our established restaurants operate close to full capacity during peak demand periods, we will continue to focus on ways to build sales, positively impact guest traffic and grow average check and weekly sales averages. In 2021 we conducted an in-depth consumer research project to discover and better understand our guest preferences. Utilizing the insights from this research, we have launched a series of sales building initiatives to create more guest loyalty, increase the frequency of guest visits, further build our off-premise sales channel, better optimize our menu sales mix and develop other incremental opportunities to allow guests to utilize BJ’s. We believe that all of these efforts combined with new restaurant openings offer significant growth opportunities and upside for weekly sales averages and comparable restaurant sales. Although we currently expect our weekly sales averages during the first half of fiscal 2022 to remain challenging due to residual pandemic-related staffing and inflationary pressure, we do expect to begin experiencing a more favorable operating and sales building environment toward the latter half of the year.
Restaurant Opening. Newly opened restaurants typically experience inefficiencies in the form of higher cost of sales, labor and direct operating and occupancy costs for several months after their opening relative to our more mature, established restaurants. Accordingly, the number and timing of new restaurant openings have had, and are expected to continue to have, an impact on restaurant opening expenses, cost of sales, labor and occupancy and operating expenses. Additionally, restaurant openings in new markets may experience even greater inefficiencies for several months, if not longer, due to lower initial sales volumes, which results from initially low consumer awareness levels, and a lack of supply chain and other operating cost leverage until additional restaurants can be opened in those markets.
Impacts of Inflation. Inflation on food, labor, energy and occupancy costs can significantly affect the profitability of our restaurant operations. Our profitability is dependent, among other things, on our ability to anticipate and react to changes in the cost of key operating resources, including food and other raw materials, labor, energy and other supplies and services. Substantial increases in costs and expenses could impact our operating results to the extent that such increases cannot be passed along to our restaurant customers. While we have taken steps to enter into agreements for some of the commodities used in our restaurant operations, there can be no assurance that future supplies and costs for such commodities will not fluctuate due to weather or other market conditions outside of our control. We are currently unable to contract for certain commodities, such as fluid dairy, fresh meat or seafood, and most fresh produce items, for long periods of time. Consequently, such commodities can be subject to unforeseen supply and cost fluctuations. While we have not had significant disruptions in our supply chain, we have experienced some product shortages and higher costs and inflationary pressures, which have affected our average per-guest check. During fiscal 2021, our average per-guest check increased to approximately $19.00 from $18.00. While this increase was primarily due to changes in our sales mix and higher item incidence per guest, we also increased our menu prices to help mitigate higher costs due to inflationary pressures.
A general shortage in the availability of qualified restaurant managers and hourly workers in certain geographic areas in which we operate, which has been exacerbated by continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the labor market, has caused increases in the costs of recruiting and compensating such team members. Many of our restaurant team members are paid hourly rates subject to federal, state or local minimum wage requirements. Numerous state and local governments have their own minimum wage and other regulatory requirements for team members that are generally greater than the federal minimum wage and are subject to annual increases based on changes in their local consumer price indices. Additionally, certain operating and other costs, including health benefits in compliance with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, taxes, insurance, COVID-19 pandemic related benefits, and other outside services continue to increase with the general level of inflation and
may also be subject to other cost and supply fluctuations outside of our control.
While we have been able to partially offset inflation and other changes in the costs of key operating resources by gradually increasing prices of our menu items, coupled with more efficient purchasing practices, productivity improvements and greater economies of scale, there can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to do so in the future. From time to time, competitive conditions will limit our menu pricing flexibility. In addition, macroeconomic conditions that impact consumer discretionary spending for food away from home could make additional menu price increases imprudent. There can be no assurance that all of our future cost increases can be offset by higher menu prices or that higher menu prices will be accepted by our restaurant customers without any resulting changes in their visit frequencies or purchasing patterns. Many of the leases for our restaurants provide for contingent rent obligations based on a percentage of sales. As a result, rent expense will absorb a proportionate share of any menu price increases in our restaurants. There can be no assurance that we will continue to generate increases in comparable restaurant sales in amounts sufficient to offset inflationary or other cost pressures.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
In early March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic was declared to be a National Public Health Emergency, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, as well as state and local legislative bodies and health departments, began issuing orders related to social distancing requirements, reduced restaurant seating capacity and other restrictions which resulted in a significant reduction in traffic at our restaurants. As of mid-March 2020, the ordinances tightened, and dine-in capacity was eliminated or severely restricted. By April 2020, at the request of most state and local legislative bodies, we closed all of our dining rooms and began to operate in a take-out and delivery only capacity. In early May 2020, states began allowing the re-opening of dining rooms in a limited capacity and by the end of June 2020, we had re-opened dining rooms in approximately 95% of our restaurants, while adhering to social distancing restrictions, which limited the number of guests we could serve in our restaurants at one time. During November 2020, rising case rates resulted in certain jurisdictions implementing restrictions that again reduced dining room capacity or mandated the re-closure of dining rooms. As a result, we began fiscal 2021 with significant limitations on our operations, which over the course of the fiscal year varied widely from time to time, state to state and city to city; however, nonetheless negatively impacted our sales. Once COVID-19 vaccines were approved and moved into wider distribution in the United States in early to mid-2021, public health conditions improved and almost all of the COVID-19 restrictions on businesses eased.
While cases continue to decline, and staffing continues to improve, overall consumer and business activity remains muted in certain markets as consumer behaviors have changed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and some businesses have yet to bring employees back into their offices. Our restaurant operations have been and could again in the future be disrupted by team member staffing issues because of illness, exclusion, fear of contracting COVID-19 or caring for family members due to COVID-19, legal requirements for employee vaccinations or COVID testing, lack of labor supply, competitive labor pressures, or for other reasons. Furthermore, inflation has been and is elevated across our business, including food costs, due in part to the supply chain impacts of the pandemic. We remain in regular contact with our major suppliers and while, to date, we have not experienced significant disruptions in our supply chain due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we could see significant future disruptions should the impacts of the pandemic continue. Currently, national, state and local jurisdictions have removed their capacity restrictions on businesses and, therefore, our restaurants are serving customers in our dining rooms without social distancing requirements. However, it is possible additional outbreaks could lead to restrictive measures that could impact our guest demand and dining room capacity.
Our normal restaurant hours of operations are generally from 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday; however, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have been closing approximately one hour earlier than normal.
Accounting Terms and Characteristics
Revenues. Our revenues are comprised of food and beverage sales from our restaurants. Revenues from restaurant sales are recognized when payment is tendered. Amounts paid with a credit card are recorded in accounts and other receivables until payment is collected from the credit card processor. We sell gift cards which do not have an expiration date, and we do not deduct non-usage fees from outstanding gift card balances. Gift card sales are recorded as a liability and recognized as revenues upon redemption in our restaurants. Based on historical redemption rates, a portion of our gift card sales are not expected to be redeemed and will be recognized as gift card “breakage” over time. Estimated gift card breakage is recorded as revenue and recognized in proportion to our historical redemption pattern, unless there is a legal obligation to remit the unredeemed gift cards to government authorities. The estimated gift card breakage is based on when the likelihood of redemption becomes remote, which has typically been 24 months after the original gift card issuance date.
Guest Loyalty Program. Our program enables participants to earn points for qualifying purchases that can be redeemed for food and beverages in the future. We allocate the transaction price between the goods delivered and the future
goods that will be delivered, on a relative standalone selling price basis, and defer the revenues allocated to the points until such points are redeemed.
Comparable Sales and Guest Traffic. All of our restaurants are Company-owned. In calculating comparable restaurant sales, we include a restaurant in the comparable base once it has been open for 18 months. Guest traffic for our restaurants is estimated based on guest checks.
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales is comprised of food and beverage costs, including the cost to produce and distribute our proprietary craft beer, soda and ciders. The components of cost of sales are variable and typically fluctuate directly with sales volumes, but may be impacted by changes in commodity prices, a shift in sales mix to higher cost proteins or other higher cost items, or varying levels of promotional activities.
Labor and Benefits. Labor and benefit costs include direct hourly and management wages, bonuses, payroll taxes, fringe benefits and stock-based compensation and workers’ compensation expense that is directly related to restaurant level team members.
Occupancy and Operating. Occupancy and operating expenses include restaurant supplies, credit card fees, third-party delivery company commissions, marketing costs, fixed rent, percentage rent, common area maintenance charges, utilities, real estate taxes, repairs and maintenance and other related restaurant costs. During fiscal 2020 and 2021, occupancy and operating expense also include COVID-19 related costs such as temporary patios and safety related items.
General and Administrative. General and administrative costs include all corporate administrative functions that support existing operations and provide infrastructure to facilitate our future growth. Components of this category include corporate management, field supervision and corporate hourly staff salaries and related team member benefits (including stock-based compensation expense and cash-based incentive compensation), travel and relocation costs, information systems, the cost to recruit and train new restaurant management team members, corporate rent, certain brand marketing-related expenses and legal, professional and consulting fees.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization are composed primarily of depreciation of capital expenditures for restaurant and brewing equipment and leasehold improvements.
Restaurant Opening. Restaurant opening expenses, which are expensed as incurred, consist of the costs of hiring and training the initial hourly work force for each new restaurant, travel, the cost of food and supplies used in training, grand opening promotional costs, the cost of the initial stock of operating supplies and other direct costs related to the opening of a restaurant, including rent during the construction and in-restaurant training period.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth, for the years indicated, our Consolidated Statements of Operations both in dollars and as percentages of total revenues. All fiscal years presented consist of 52 weeks. Percentages below may not reconcile due to rounding.
52 WEEKS ENDED DECEMBER 28, 2021 (FISCAL 2021) COMPARED TO THE 52 WEEKS ENDED DECEMBER 29, 2020 (FISCAL 2020)
Revenues. Total revenues increased by $308.5 million, or 39.6%, to $1.1 billion during fiscal 2021, compared to $778.5 million during fiscal 2020. The increase in revenues primarily consisted of a 38.3%, or $294.6 million, increase in comparable restaurant sales, coupled with a $13.4 million increase in sales from new restaurants not yet in our comparable restaurant sales base. The increase in comparable restaurant sales was the result of an increase in guest traffic of approximately 25.0%, coupled with an increase in average check of approximately 13.3%. The increase in guest traffic was primarily due to the re-opening of our dining rooms, which were closed or restricted in operation during the same period in 2020.
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales increased by $92.5 million, or 47.3%, to $288.1 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $195.6 million during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to the increase in revenues, commodity cost increases and costs related to our two new restaurants and one re-opened restaurant during fiscal 2021. As a percentage of revenues, cost of sales increased to 26.5% for fiscal 2021 from 25.1% for the prior fiscal year. This increase was primarily due to overall menu mix and an increase in meat and seafood costs.
Labor and Benefits. Labor and benefit costs for our restaurants increased by $95.8 million, or 31.3%, to $401.4 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $305.6 million during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to the re-opening of our dining rooms, which were closed or restricted in operation during the majority of the same period in 2020, coupled with higher incentive compensation, higher training and overtime costs due to the full re-opening of our dining rooms, and expenses related to the two new restaurants and one re-opened restaurant during fiscal 2021, partially offset by our Employee Retention Tax Credit in conjunction with the CARES Act. As a percentage of revenues, labor and benefit costs decreased to 36.9% for fiscal 2021 from 39.3% for the prior fiscal year. This decrease was primarily due to our ability to leverage management and hourly wages, as well as taxes and benefits, over our comparable sales increases during fiscal 2021. Included in labor and benefits for fiscal 2021 and 2020 was approximately $2.7 million and $2.8 million, respectively, or 0.3% and 0.4%, of revenues, respectively, of stock-based compensation expense related to equity awards granted in accordance with our Gold Standard Stock Ownership Program for certain restaurant management team members.
Occupancy and Operating. Occupancy and operating expenses increased by $47.0 million, or 21.3%, to $267.9 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $220.9 million during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to costs related to the re-opening of our dining rooms, which were closed or restricted in operation during the majority of the same period in 2020. As a result,
we incurred increased supply costs, janitorial service costs, repair and maintenance costs, and utilities, coupled with expenses related to the two new restaurants and one re-opened restaurant during fiscal 2021. Additionally, as a result of increased revenues, we incurred increased merchant card fees, higher commissions to third-party delivery companies and percentage rent. Included in occupancy and operating expenses for fiscal 2021 and 2020 was approximately 1.4% and 1.7%, respectively, of marketing expenditures, as a percentage of revenues. We expect our marketing expenditures to be 1.5% to 2.0% of our revenues in 2022. As a percentage of revenues, occupancy and operating expenses decreased to 24.6% for fiscal 2021 from 28.4% for the prior fiscal year. This decrease was primarily due to our ability to leverage certain fixed operating and occupancy costs over a higher revenue base.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $13.3 million, or 24.3%, to $68.0 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $54.7 million during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to increased personnel costs, including higher incentive compensation, salaries and general corporate and office expenses. Included in general and administrative costs for fiscal 2021 and 2020 was approximately $7.6 million and $7.0 million, respectively, or 0.7% and 0.9% of revenues, respectively, of stock-based compensation expense. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expenses decreased to 6.3% for fiscal 2021 from 7.0% for the prior fiscal year. This decrease was primarily due to a higher revenue base.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization decreased by $0.4 million, or 0.5%, to $72.8 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $73.1 million during fiscal 2020. This slight decrease is primarily related to the impairment and reduction of carrying value related to five restaurants in 2020 and one restaurant in 2021, offset by depreciation expense related to the two new restaurants opened in fiscal 2021. As a percentage of revenues, depreciation and amortization decreased to 6.7% for fiscal 2021 from 9.4% for the prior fiscal year. This decrease was primarily due to a higher revenue base.
Restaurant Opening. Restaurant opening expense increased by $0.3 million, or 23.6%, to $1.5 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $1.2 million during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to the re-opening of one restaurant, which was temporarily closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We opened two new restaurants and re-opened one restaurant in fiscal 2021, compared to two new restaurants in fiscal 2020.
Loss on Disposal and Impairment of Assets. Loss on disposal and impairment of assets was $3.9 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $17.1 million during fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, these costs were primarily related to the impairment and reduction in the carrying value of the long-lived and operating lease assets related to one of our restaurants, coupled with the disposals of assets in conjunction with initiatives to keep our restaurants up to date and the disposal of certain unproductive restaurant assets. In fiscal 2020, these costs primarily related to the impairment and reduction in the carrying value of the long-lived and operating lease assets related to five of our restaurants, coupled with a charge to reserve for beer spoilage due to the sudden decrease in draft beer sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and routine asset disposals.
Gain on Lease Transactions, Net. Gain on lease transactions, net, was $3.3 million during fiscal 2020 and it related to the sale of the land underlying two of our restaurants.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net, decreased by $2.1 million to $5.0 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $7.1 million during fiscal 2020. This decrease was primarily due to lower average debt balance during fiscal 2021, compared to fiscal 2020.
Gain from Legal Settlements. Gain from legal settlements of $2.3 million during fiscal 2020 related to a settlement with credit card providers pertaining to interchange fees and a settlement related to a maintenance agreement to repair our handheld tablets.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net increased by $1.1 million to $2.3 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $1.3 million during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to an insurance receivable related to property destroyed in a kitchen fire at one of our restaurants.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense. Our effective income tax rate for fiscal 2021 reflected an 81.2% tax benefit compared to a 35.6% tax benefit for fiscal 2020. The effective tax rate benefit for fiscal 2021 was different than the statutory tax rate primarily due to FICA tax tip credits. The prior year effective tax rate was different than the statutory tax rate primarily due to FICA tax tip credits and the incremental benefit arising from the ability to carryback the 2020 loss to prior years when the tax rate was at 35%.
52 WEEKS ENDED DECEMBER 29, 2020 (FISCAL 2020) COMPARED TO THE 52 WEEKS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019 (FISCAL 2019)
For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 refer to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our fiscal 2020 Form 10-K, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on March 1, 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table provides, for the periods indicated, a summary of our key liquidity measurements (dollar amounts in thousands):
As a result of uncertainties in the near-term outlook for our business caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to focus on cash flow generation. Currently, we have no intention to repurchase shares or pay dividends until it is determined by our Board of Directors that it is in the best interest of the Company and its shareholders. We will review and, when appropriate, adjust our overall approach to capital allocation as we know more about the ultimate duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and how the post-pandemic recovery will unfold and affect our cash flow from operating activities.
We are taking what we believe to be reasonably necessary and appropriate measures to control costs and maximize liquidity. Our $70 million (before commission and other fees) private placement of common stock completed in May 2020 and our $30 million sale (before commission and other fees) of common stock through our ATM offering program, completed in January 2021, have strengthened our financial position. As of December 28, 2021, we have approximately $38.5 million of cash on our balance sheet, with an additional $147.8 million of borrowings available under our Credit Facility. See Note 8 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our Credit Facility. Based on the current level of operations, we believe that our current cash and cash equivalents will be adequate to meet our capital expenditure and working capital needs for at least the next twelve months. Our future operating performance will be subject to future economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
Similar to many restaurant chains, we typically utilize operating lease arrangements (principally ground leases) for the majority of our restaurant locations. We believe our operating lease arrangements provide appropriate leverage for our capital structure in a financially efficient manner. However, we are not limited to the use of lease arrangements as our only method of opening new restaurants and from time to time have purchased the underlying land for new restaurants. We typically lease our restaurant locations for periods of 10 to 20 years under operating lease arrangements. Our rent structures vary from lease to lease, but generally provide for the payment of both minimum and contingent (percentage) rent based on sales, as well as other expenses related to the leases (for example, our pro-rata share of common area maintenance, property tax and insurance expenses). Many of our lease arrangements include the opportunity to secure tenant improvement allowances to partially offset the cost of developing and opening the related restaurants. Generally, landlords recover the cost of such allowances from increased minimum rents. However, there can be no assurance that such allowances will be available to us on each project. From time to time, we may also decide to purchase the underlying land for a new restaurant if that is the only way to secure a highly desirable site. Currently, we own the underlying land for one of our restaurants that will be opened in fiscal 2022 and our Texas brewpub locations. We also own two parcels of land adjacent to two of our restaurants. It is not our current strategy to own a large number of land parcels that underlie our restaurants. Therefore, in many cases we have subsequently entered into sale-leaseback arrangements for land parcels that we previously purchased. We disburse cash for certain site-related work, buildings, leasehold improvements, furnishings, fixtures and equipment to build our leased and owned premises. We own substantially all of the equipment, furniture and trade fixtures in our restaurants and currently plan to do so in the future.
CASH FLOWS
The following tables set forth, for the years indicated, our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities (dollar amounts in thousands):
Operating Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities was $64.3 million during fiscal 2021, representing a $23.7 million increase from the $40.5 million provided during fiscal 2020. The increase over the prior year is primarily due to a lower net loss, offset by higher operating lease obligation payments as a result of prior year rent deferrals.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash used in investing activities was $42.2 million during fiscal 2021, representing a $6.5 million increase from the $35.7 million used in fiscal 2020. The increase over prior year is primarily due to lower proceeds from sale of assets.
The following table provides, for the years indicated, the components of capital expenditures (dollar amounts in thousands):
During fiscal 2021, we opened two new restaurants and re-opened our Richmond, Virginia restaurant, our only restaurant location that remained temporarily closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently plan to open as many as eight restaurants in fiscal 2022, and we have entered into signed leases, land purchase agreements or letters of intent for all of our 2022 new restaurant locations. Our new restaurant unit economics continue to warrant an appropriate allocation of our available capital, and we will continue to balance new restaurant growth with quality and hospitality.
We currently anticipate our total capital expenditures for fiscal 2022 to be approximately $80 million to $90 million. This estimate includes costs to open up to eight new restaurants and remodel several existing locations. Total capital expenditures exclude anticipated proceeds from tenant improvement allowances and sale-leasebacks. We expect to fund our net capital expenditures with our current cash balance on hand, cash flows from operations and our line of credit. Our future cash requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace of our expansion, conditions in the retail property development market, construction costs, the nature of the specific sites selected for new restaurants, and the nature of the specific leases and associated tenant improvement allowances available, if any, as negotiated with landlords.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash used by financing activities was $35.3 million during fiscal 2021, representing a $59.7 million decrease from the $24.4 million provided in fiscal 2020. This decrease was primarily due to the pay down of our Line of Credit and lower proceeds from the issuance of common stock.
See Note 8 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our Credit Facility. At the onset of the pandemic in 2020, we took the necessary steps to maximize our liquidity by drawing down on our Line of Credit and selling $70 million of our common stock. Additionally, in January 2021, we completed the sale of an aggregate of 703,399 shares of common stock for proceeds of $30 million (before commission and other fees) through an ATM offering program. See Note 9 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our ATM offering. We believe that we have sufficient liquidity for the next twelve months as a result of the actions we undertook, the improving operating environment and our current capital position. However, given the uncertainty resulting from the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and the post-pandemic recovery, we will continue to monitor and evaluate all financing alternatives as these unprecedented events evolve.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to fund our operations and meet our short-term and long-term obligations. The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments under existing contractual obligations as of December 28, 2021, including estimated cash payments due by period (in thousands).
(1)
For a more detailed description of our operating leases, refer to Note 6 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)
The CARES Act allowed employers to defer the deposit and payment of the employer’s portion of social security tax through December 31, 2020. Half of the deferred amount was due on December 31, 2021, and the other half is due on December 31, 2022.
(3)
Amounts represent non-cancelable commitments for the purchase of goods and other services.
(4)
We have assumed $50.0 million remains outstanding under our Credit Facility until the maturity date of November 3, 2026, using the interest rate in effect on December 28, 2021, which was approximately 2.1%.
Additionally, we have entered into lease agreements related to future restaurants with commencement dates subsequent to December 28, 2021. Our aggregate future commitment relating to these leases is $14.4 million and is not included in operating leases above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities (“VIEs”), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow limited purposes. As of December 28, 2021, we are not involved in any off-balance sheet arrangements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, Item 15. Judgments or uncertainties regarding the application of these policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We assess the potential impairment of our long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. The assets are generally reviewed for impairment on a restaurant level basis, and inclusive of property and equipment and lease right-of-use assets; or at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. Factors considered include, but are not limited to, significant underperformance by the restaurant relative to expected historical or projected future operating results; significant changes in the manner of use of the assets or the strategy for the overall business; significant negative industry or economic trends; or our expectation to dispose of long-lived assets before the end of their previously estimated useful lives. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of these assets and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Self-Insurance Liability
Our estimated liability is based on information provided by a third-party actuary, combined with our judgments regarding a number of assumptions and factors, including the frequency and severity of claims, our loss development factors, loss costs, history, case jurisdiction, related legislation, and our claims settlement practice. Significant judgment is required to estimate IBNR claims as parties have yet to assert such claims. Should a greater number of claims occur compared to what was estimated, or should medical costs increase beyond what was expected, accruals might not be sufficient, and additional expense may be recorded.
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently adopted accounting standards.