ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Summary
We are a customer-focused energy solutions provider that invests in our communities’ safety, sustainability and growth with a mission of Improving Life with Energy and a vision to be the Energy Partner of Choice. The Company’s core mission- and our primary focus - is to provide safe, reliable and cost-effective electric and natural gas service to 1.3 million utility customers in over 800 communities in eight states, including Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, South Dakota and Wyoming.
We conduct our business operations through two operating segments: Electric Utilities and Gas Utilities. Certain unallocated corporate expenses that support our operating segments are presented as Corporate and Other. The Company conducts its utility operations under the name Black Hills Energy predominantly in rural areas of the Rocky Mountains and Midwestern states. The Company considers itself a domestic electric and natural gas utility company.
The Company has provided energy and served customers for 138 years, since the 1883 gold rush days in Deadwood, South Dakota. Throughout our history, the common thread that unites the past to the present is our commitment to serve our customers and communities. By being responsive and service focused, we can help our customers and communities thrive while meeting rapidly changing customer expectations.
An important component of our strategy involves sustainable operations and supporting the Energy Transition. How we operate our company for the social good has never been more important. We are committed to cleaner energy and a low carbon future, integrating the Energy Transition and more renewable energy into our overall strategy and decision making. For this important work, we are Ready to serve. In addition, we are committed to a more sustainable future by better managing our impacts to the planet, whether that is water usage, recycling, biodiversity, or other important measures, and remaining focused on our human capital through diversity and inclusion.
Our emphasis is on consistently outperforming utility industry averages in key safety metrics; modernizing utility infrastructure; transforming the customer experience; growing our electric and natural gas customer load; and pursuing operating efficiencies. These areas of focus will present the company with significant investment needs as we harden our infrastructure systems, meet customer growth and fulfill customer expectations for cleaner energy services. It will also allow us to better understand our customer and community needs while providing more intuitive and cost-effective solutions.
Key Elements of our Business Strategy
Modernize and operate utility infrastructure to provide customers with safe, reliable, cost-effective electric and natural gas service. Our utilities own and operate large electric and natural gas infrastructure systems with a geographic footprint that spans nearly 1,600 miles. Our Electric Utilities own and operate 1,481.5 MW of generation capacity and 8,900 miles of transmission and distribution lines and our Gas Utilities own and operate 47,000 miles of natural gas transmission and distribution pipelines.
A key strategic focus is to modernize and harden our utility infrastructure to meet customers’ and communities’ varied energy needs, ensure the continued delivery of safe, reliable and cost-effective energy and reduce GHG emissions intensity. In addition, we invest in the expansion, capacity and integrity of our systems to meet customer growth.
We rigorously comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations and strive to consistently meet industry best practice standards. A key component of our modernization effort is the development of programs by our Electric and Gas Utilities to systematically and proactively replace aging infrastructure on a system-wide basis.
To meet our electric customers’ continued expectations of high levels of reliability, a key strength of the Company, our Electric Utilities utilize an integrity program to ensure the timely repair and replacement of aging infrastructure. In alignment with this program, in November 2021, Wyoming Electric announced its Ready Wyoming electric transmission expansion initiative. The 285-mile, multi-phase transmission expansion project will serve the growing needs of customers enhancing the resiliency of its overall electric system and expanding access to power markets and renewable energy resources. The project will enable Wyoming Electric to maintain top-quartile reliability and support further economic growth in the Cheyenne area. Wyoming Electric plans to file an application with the WPSC seeking approval for the project in the first quarter of 2022. Following approval, construction would commence in early 2023.
Our Gas Utilities utilize a programmatic approach to system-wide pipeline replacement, particularly in high consequence areas. Under the programmatic approach, obsolete, at-risk and vintage materials are replaced in a proactive and systematic time frame. We have removed all cast- and wrought-iron from our natural gas transmission and distribution systems and continue to replace aging infrastructure through programs that prioritize safety and reliability for our customers. Our Gas Utilities are authorized to use system safety, integrity and replacement cost recovery mechanisms that provide for customer rate adjustments, between rate reviews, which allow timely recovery of costs incurred in repairing and replacing the gas delivery systems with a return on the investment.
As of December 31, 2021, we estimate our five-year capital investment to be approximately $3.2 billion, with most of that investment targeted toward upgrading existing utility infrastructure supporting customer and community growth needs, and complying with safety requirements. Our actual 2021 and forecasted capital expenditures for the next five years from 2022 through 2026 are as follows (in millions):
____________________
(a) Includes accruals for property, plant and equipment as disclosed as supplemental cash flow information in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(b) These represent projects that are being evaluated by our segments for timing, cost and other factors.
Efficiently plan, construct and operate power generation facilities to serve our Electric Utilities. We best serve customers and communities when generation is vertically integrated into our Electric Utilities. This business model remains a core strength and strategy today as we invest in and operate efficient power generation resources to supply cost-effective electricity to our customers. These generation assets can be rate-based or non-regulated assets within our Electric Utilities segment. However, we believe that generation assets that are rate-based provide long-term benefits to customers. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we revised our operating segments to align with our vertically integrated business model for our Electric Utilities. Our power generation and mining businesses, which were previously presented as separate operating segments, are now part of our vertically integrated Electric Utilities segment.
Our power production strategy focuses on low-cost construction and efficient operation of our generating facilities. Our low power production costs result from a variety of factors including low fuel costs (operations located near energy hubs), efficiency in converting fuel into energy and low per unit operating and maintenance costs. In addition, we operate our plants with high levels of Availability as compared to industry benchmarks.
Rate Base Generation: We continue to believe that customers are best served when the power generation facilities are owned and rate-based by our Electric Utilities. Rate-based generation assets offer several advantages for customers and shareholders, including:
•When generating assets are included in the utility rate base and reviewed and approved by government authorities, customer rates are more stable and predictable, and typically less expensive in the long run; especially when compared to power otherwise purchased from the open market through wholesale contracts or PPAs that are periodically re-priced to reflect current and varying market conditions;
•Regulators participate in a planning process where long-term investments are designed to match long-term energy demand;
•The lower-risk profile of rate-based generation assets contributes to stronger credit ratings which, in turn, can benefit both customers and investors by lowering the cost of capital; and
•Investors are provided a long-term and stable return on their investment.
Integrated Generation: Our Electric Utilities segment also contains a power generation business that owns non-regulated generating facilities that are contracted through long-term power purchase agreements with our electric utilities. Our power generation business has an experienced staff with significant expertise in planning, building and operating power plants. This team also provides shared services to our Electric Utilities’ generation facilities, resulting in efficient management of all of the company’s generation assets. This business competitively bids for energy and capacity through requests for proposals by our Electric Utilities for energy resources necessary to serve customers. This business can bid competitively due to construction expertise, fuel supply advantages and by co-locating new plants at our existing Electric Utilities’ energy complexes, reducing infrastructure and operating costs. All power plants within this business, except Top of Iowa, are contracted to our Electric Utilities under long-term contracts and are located at our utility-generating complexes, including Busch Ranch, Pueblo Airport Generation, and the Gillette, Wyoming energy complex, and are physically integrated into our Electric Utilities’ operations.
Generation Fuel Supply: Our generating facilities are strategically located close to energy hubs that help reduce fuel supply costs. Our Colorado and Wyoming gas-fired generating facilities are located close to major natural gas energy hubs that provide trading liquidity and transparent pricing. Due to their location in the resource rich areas of Colorado and Wyoming, natural gas supply to fuel our gas-fired generation can be sourced at competitive prices. Our only coal-fired power plants, all located at the Gillette energy complex in northeastern Wyoming, are supplied by our adjacent coal mine. We operate and own majority interests in four of the five power plants and own 20% of the fifth power plant. The small coal mine provides approximately 3.5 million tons of low-sulfur coal directly to these power plants via a conveyor belt system, minimizing transportation costs. On average, the fuel can be delivered to the adjacent power plants at less than $1.00 per MMBtu, providing very cost competitive fuel to our power plants when compared to alternatives. Nearly all the mine’s production is sold to these on-site generation facilities under long-term supply contracts. Approximately one-half of our production is sold under cost-plus contracts with affiliates. A small portion of the mine’s production is sold to off-site industrial customers and delivered by truck.
Supporting the Energy Transition by proactively integrating alternative and renewable energy into our utility energy supply while mitigating customer rate impacts. In November 2020, we announced clean energy goals to reduce GHG emissions intensity for our Electric Utilities of 40% by 2030 and 70% by 2040 and achieve GHG reductions of 50% by 2035 for our Gas Utilities. Our goals are based on existing technology and computed from 2005 baseline levels of GHG emissions intensity for our electric operations and natural gas distribution system. Since 2005, we have reduced GHG emissions intensity from our Gas Utilities by more than 33% and achieved a 30% reduction from our Electric Utilities (an additional 5% reduction since announcing our goal in 2020 for our Electric Utilities). Additionally, our Electric Utilities have reduced nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide emissions by more than 75% since 2005. Our electric utility in Colorado has achieved a nearly 50% reduction in GHG emissions since 2005 and is on track to reach the State of Colorado’s 80% carbon reduction goal by 2030. Our goals are based on prudent and proven solutions to reduce our emissions while minimizing cost impacts to our customers. This keeps our customers at the forefront of our decision-making, which is central to our values.
More of our customers, particularly our larger customers, are demanding cleaner sources of energy to meet their sustainability goals. In addition, there is more interest from consumers, regulators and legislators to increase the use of renewable and other alternative energy sources. To support this interest:
•We created the Renewable Ready program for South Dakota and Wyoming customers. In support of this program, we created and received approvals for new, voluntary renewable energy tariffs to serve certain commercial, industrial and governmental customer requests for renewable energy resources. To meet the renewable energy commitments under the new tariffs, on November 30, 2020, we completed construction and placed into service the Corriedale wind project, a 52.5 MW wind energy project near Cheyenne, Wyoming.
•In June 2021, South Dakota Electric and Wyoming Electric submitted an IRP to the SDPUC and WPSC. The IRP outlines a range of options for the two electric utilities over a 20-year planning horizon to meet long-term forecasted energy needs while strengthening reliability and resiliency of the grid. The analysis focused on the least-cost resource needs to best meet customers’ future peak energy needs while maintaining system flexibility and achieving the Company’s generation emissions reduction goals. The IRP’s preferred options for the near-term planning period through 2026 propose the addition of 100 MW of renewable generation, the conversion of Neil Simpson II to natural gas in 2025 and consideration of up to 20 MW of battery storage.
Many states have enacted, and others are considering, mandatory renewable energy standards, requiring utilities to meet certain thresholds of renewable energy generation. In addition, some states have either enacted or are considering legislation setting GHG emission reduction targets. Federal legislation for renewable energy standards and GHG emission reductions has been considered and may be implemented in the future. Mandates for the use of renewable energy or the reduction of GHG emissions will likely drive the need for significant investment in our Electric Utilities and Gas Utilities segments. These mandates will also likely increase prices for electricity and/or natural gas for our utility customers. As a regulated utility we are responsible for providing safe, reliable and cost-effective sources of energy to our customers. Accordingly, we employ a customer-focused strategy for complying with standards and regulations that balances our customers’ rate concerns with environmental considerations and administrative and legislative mandates. We attempt to strike this balance by prudently and proactively incorporating renewable energy into our resource supply, while seeking to minimize the magnitude and frequency of rate increases for our utility customers.
Explore opportunities as an energy solutions provider. Another strategic initiative is to grow our business through creative energy solutions with new customers and partnerships. We see value creation by recruiting new customers and expanding existing partnerships with data centers, crypto miners and other blockchain opportunities; exploring energy markets such as RTOs; and expanding our transmission capabilities. As an example, we have supported enabling legislation in Wyoming for the growing blockchain and digital currency businesses while implementing our own Blockchain Interruptible Service Tariff to serve these customers. We are also re-focusing on our product and services offerings to our natural gas customers.
Additionally, we are pursuing two important initiatives in the form of sustainable energy solutions for electric vehicles and renewable natural gas. These two programs support our near-term sustainable strategy and contribute to the achievement of our aspirational greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals.
•Electric Vehicles (EV): We expect EV market share to increase over the next one to three years, commensurate with a significant uptick in vehicle range and product offerings and marked decrease in EV purchase prices. In addition to future load growth opportunities, we will investigate behind-the-meter solutions for customers. In January 2022, the CPUC approved a transportation electrification plan for Colorado Electric including the implementation of EV and charger rebates and EV rates.
•Renewable Natural Gas (RNG): Our teams are developing RNG/carbon offset offerings for our retail customers, evaluating multiple RNG investment opportunities and exploring value generation with our natural gas storage assets. We also continue to expand our RNG interconnections, with several projects actively injecting RNG into our natural gas system.
Execute disciplined capital allocation and explore small strategic opportunities. We are planning a disciplined capital investment program of approximately $600 million annually over the next two years to improve our cash flows and reduce our debt to total capitalization ratio. By carefully managing capital, we plan to continue to strengthen our balance sheet and enhance our liquidity. With this goal in mind, we will continue to evaluate smaller scale acquisitions of private utility infrastructure systems and small municipal systems that can be easily incorporated into our existing utility systems.
Deliver a competitive total return to investors and maintain an investment grade credit rating. We are proud of our track record of annual dividend increases for shareholders. 2021 represented our 51st consecutive year of increasing dividends. In January 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.595 per share, equivalent to an annual dividend of $2.38 per share. We intend to continue our record of annual dividend increases with a targeted dividend payout ratio of 50% to 60%.
We require access to the capital markets to fund our planned capital investments or acquire strategic assets that support prudent and earnings-accretive business growth. We have demonstrated our ability to cost-effectively access the debt and equity markets, while maintaining our investment-grade issuer credit rating.
Recent Developments
Winter Storm Uri
In February 2021, a prolonged period of historic cold temperatures across the central United States covered all of our Utilities’ service territories, caused a substantial increase in heating and energy demand and contributed to unforeseeable and unprecedented market prices for natural gas and electricity. As a result of Winter Storm Uri, we incurred significant incremental natural gas and fuel costs.
On February 24, 2021, we entered into a nine-month, $800 million unsecured term loan to provide additional liquidity and to meet our cash needs related to the incremental fuel, purchased power and natural gas costs from Winter Storm Uri. Proceeds from the August 26, 2021 debt transaction were used to repay amounts outstanding under this term loan. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
During the second quarter, our Utilities submitted cost recovery applications with the utility commissions in our state jurisdictions to recover incremental costs associated with Winter Storm Uri. To date, several of our Utilities have received interim or final Commission Orders and have begun recovering costs from customers. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our regulatory activity.
COVID-19 Pandemic
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not experience significant impacts to our financial results, liquidity or operational activities due to COVID-19. We continue to monitor loads, customers’ ability to pay, the potential for supply chain disruption or inflation that may impact our capital and maintenance project plans, the availability of third-party resources to execute our business plans and the capital markets to ensure we have the liquidity necessary to support our financial needs. State Orders lifting temporarily suspended disconnections have been issued in all of our jurisdictions.
As we look forward, our operating results could be affected by COVID-19 as discussed in detail in our Risk Factors.
Business Segment Highlights and Corporate Activity
Electric Utilities
•On January 26, 2022, Colorado Electric agreed to join SPP’s Western Energy Imbalance Service Market. Colorado Electric, PRPA, and the Colorado subsidiary of Xcel Energy Inc. will join the market in April 2023 and will continue to study long-term solutions for joining or developing an organized wholesale market. The expansion allows the utilities to participate in a real-time market to dispatch energy at lower costs.
•On January 5, 2022, South Dakota Electric and Wyoming Electric set new winter peak loads. This is the fourth new winter peak for Wyoming Electric since 2015. Wyoming Electric’s new winter peak load of 253 MW surpasses the previous peak of 247 MW set in December 2019. South Dakota Electric’s new winter peak of 327 MW surpasses the previous winter peak of 326 MW set in February 2021.
•In November 2021, Wyoming Electric announced its Ready Wyoming electric transmission expansion initiative. See Key Elements of our Business Strategy above for further information.
•On October 5, 2021, our Electric Utilities and several other utilities in the western United States formed the Western Markets Exploratory Group to research the potential for an organized wholesale market in the western interconnect, including expanding transmission systems and other grid-related services. The group plans to identify market solutions that can help achieve carbon reduction goals while supporting reliable, cost-effective services for customers.
•On September 19, 2021, Wygen I experienced an unplanned outage that continued until mid-December 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the outage had an $11 million negative impact to Operating income. We are currently assessing insurance recovery opportunities.
•On August 24, 2021, Wyoming Electric issued a request for proposals under its Blockchain Interruptible Service tariff. We have narrowed the bidder’s list and selected finalists for contract negotiations.
•On July 28, 2021, Wyoming Electric set a new all-time and summer peak load of 274 MW, exceeding the previous peak of 271 MW set in July 2020.
•On July 27, 2021, South Dakota Electric set a new all-time and summer peak load of 397 MW, exceeding the previous peak of 378 MW set in August 2020.
•On June 30, 2021, South Dakota Electric and Wyoming Electric submitted an IRP to the SDPUC and WPSC. See Key Elements of our Business Strategy above for further information.
•On February 19, 2021, Colorado Electric entered into a PPA with TC Colorado Solar, LLC (TC Solar) to purchase up to 200 MW of renewable energy upon construction of a new solar facility, to be owned by TC Solar. On January 31, 2022, TC Solar provided termination notice of the PPA to Colorado Electric. Colorado Electric has disputed TC Solar’s right to termination and pursuant to the agreement, has initiated discussions with TC Solar.
Gas Utilities
•See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for recent regulatory activity for our Gas Utilities in Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas and Nebraska.
Corporate and Other
•On August 26, 2021, we completed a public debt offering which consisted of $600 million, 1.037% 3-year senior unsecured notes due August 23, 2024. The proceeds from the offering were used to repay amounts outstanding under our term loan entered into on February 24, 2021. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
•On July 19, 2021, we amended and restated our corporate Revolving Credit Facility. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Results of Operations
Our discussion and analysis for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 as well as discussion and analysis of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, is included herein. For further discussion and analysis that remains unchanged for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, please refer to Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we integrated our power generation and mining businesses within the Electric Utilities segment. The alignment is consistent with the current way our CODM evaluates the performance of the business and makes decisions related to the allocation of resources. Comparative periods presented reflect this change. See further segment information in Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Segment information does not include intercompany eliminations and all amounts are presented on a pre-tax basis unless otherwise indicated. Minor differences in amounts may result due to rounding.
Consolidated Summary and Overview
2021 Compared to 2020
The variance to the prior year included the following:
•Electric Utilities’ operating income decreased $8.3 million primarily due to Colorado Electric’s TCJA-related bill credits to customers (which is offset by reduced tax expense), unfavorable impacts from an unplanned outage at Wygen I and higher depreciation as a result of additional plant placed in service, partially offset by increased power marketing and wholesale revenues, increased rider revenues, increased commercial and industrial demand, a prior year expense related to the early retirement of certain non-regulated generation assets, residential customer growth and increased usage, and prior year COVID-19 impacts;
•Gas Utilities’ operating income decreased $4.7 million primarily due to Winter Storm Uri costs incurred by Black Hills Energy Services, lower heating demand from milder weather (primarily in the fourth quarter of 2021), Nebraska Gas TCJA-related bill credits to customers and higher operating expenses partially offset by new rates and customer growth;
•Corporate and Other expenses increased $5.8 million primarily due to higher employee costs driven by a prior year favorable true-up;
•Interest expense increased $8.9 million primarily due to higher debt balances partially offset by lower rates;
•A prior year $6.9 million pre-tax non-cash impairment in 2020 of our investment in equity securities of a privately held oil and gas company;
•Other income increased $3.7 million primarily due to lower non-service pension costs driven by a lower discount rate, lower costs for our non-qualified benefit plans which were driven by market performance and recognition of death benefits from Company-owned life insurance; and
•Income tax expense decreased $26 million primarily due to lower pre-tax income and a lower effective tax rate driven primarily by tax benefits from Colorado Electric and Nebraska Gas TCJA-related bill credits (which is offset by reduced revenue), flow-through tax benefits related to repairs and gain deferral and increased tax benefits from federal production tax credits associated with new wind assets.
2020 Compared to 2019
The variance to the prior year included the following:
•COVID-19 related impacts to consolidated results included $3.6 million of lower Electric and Gas Utility margin driven primarily by lower volumes and waived customer late payment fees, $2.6 million of costs due to sequestration of essential employees and $3.3 million of additional bad debt expense which were partially offset by $3.8 million of lower travel, training, and outside services related expenses;
•Electric Utilities’ operating income decreased $6.7 million due to higher depreciation and amortization expense as a result of additional plant placed in service including new wind assets, expense from the early retirement of certain non-regulated assets, lower commercial and industrial demand and COVID-19 impacts partially offset by increased revenue from our non-regulated power generation and mining businesses, benefits from the release of TCJA revenue reserves and increased rider revenues;
•Gas Utilities’ operating income increased $26 million primarily due to new customer rates in Wyoming and Nebraska and increased rider revenues, customer growth, mark-to-market gains on non-utility natural gas commodity contracts and a 2019 amortization of excess deferred income taxes partially offset by higher depreciation and amortization expense as a result of additional plant placed in service, COVID-19 impacts and unfavorable weather;
•Corporate and Other expenses decreased $3.0 million primarily due to an unallocated favorable true-up of employee costs;
•A $6.9 million pre-tax non-cash impairment in 2020 of our investment in equity securities of a privately held oil and gas company compared to a similar $20 million impairment in 2019;
•Interest expense increased $5.8 million primarily due to higher debt balances partially offset by lower rates;
•Other expense decreased $3.4 million due to the 2019 expensing of $5.4 million of development costs related to projects we no longer intend to construct partially offset by increased pension non-service costs in 2020; and
•Income tax expense increased $3.3 million primarily due to higher pre-tax income partially offset by a lower effective tax rate.
Segment Operating Results
A discussion of operating results from our business segments follows.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
The following discussion includes financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP, as well as another financial measure, Electric and Gas Utility margin, that is considered a “non-GAAP financial measure.” Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance, financial position or cash flows that excludes (or includes) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Electric and Gas Utility margin (revenue less cost of sales) is a non-GAAP financial measure due to the exclusion of operation and maintenance expenses, depreciation and amortization expenses, and property and production taxes from the measure.
Electric Utility margin is calculated as operating revenue less cost of fuel and purchased power. Gas Utility margin is calculated as operating revenue less cost of natural gas sold. Our Electric and Gas Utility margin is impacted by the fluctuations in power and natural gas purchases and other fuel supply costs. However, while these fluctuating costs impact Electric and Gas Utility margin as a percentage of revenue, they only impact total Electric and Gas Utility margin if the costs cannot be passed through to our customers.
Our Electric and Gas Utility margin measure may not be comparable to other companies’ Electric and Gas Utility margin measures. Furthermore, this measure is not intended to replace operating income as determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of operating performance.
Electric Utilities
Operating results for the years ended December 31 for the Electric Utilities were as follows (in thousands):
2021 Compared to 2020
Electric Utility margin decreased over the prior year as a result of:
____________________
(a) In February and April 2021, Colorado Electric delivered TCJA-related bill credits to its customers. These bill credits were offset by a reduction in income tax expense and resulted in a minimal impact to Net income.
(b) As a result of Winter Storm Uri, our Electric Utilities incurred $2.1 million of incremental fuel costs that are not recoverable through our fuel cost recovery mechanisms which were mostly offset by $1.7 million of increased Electric Utility margin realized under Black Hills Wyoming’s Economy Energy PSA.
Operations and maintenance expense decreased primarily due to a $3.1 million prior year expense related to the early retirement of certain non-regulated generation assets, $2.7 million of lower overburden, production taxes and other operating expenses on decreased mining volumes, $2.0 million of prior year COVID-19 expenses and $1.7 million of decreased bad debt expense associated with lower expected credit losses, partially offset by $2.7 million of increased expenses related to planned and unplanned outages at our generation facilities and $1.0 million of increased operating expenses from new wind assets.
Depreciation and amortization increased primarily due to higher asset base driven by prior and current year capital expenditures.
2020 Compared to 2019
Electric Utility margin increased in 2020 over 2019 as a result of:
____________________
(a) Primarily driven by revenue from Busch Ranch II, which was placed in service in November 2019.
(b) In July 2020, regulatory proceedings resolved the last of the Company's open dockets seeking approval of its TCJA plans. As a result, the Company reversed certain TCJA-related liabilities, which resulted in an increase to Electric Utility margin of $2.2 million. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
(c) The impacts to Electric Utility margin from COVID-19 were primarily driven by reduced commercial volumes and waived customer late payment fees partially offset by higher residential usage.
Operations and maintenance expense increased primarily due to a $3.1 million expense related to the early retirement of certain non-regulated assets, $2.0 million of higher maintenance expense from new wind assets and $2.0 million of unfavorable net impacts from COVID-19 which included $2.6 million of expenses related to the sequestration of essential employees and $0.8 million of additional bad debt expense which were partially offset by $1.4 million of lower travel, training and outside services related expenses. Additionally, lower employee costs of $1.9 million were partially offset by $1.0 million of higher property taxes due to a higher asset base driven by capital expenditures.
Depreciation and amortization increased primarily due to higher asset base driven by capital expenditures.
Operating Statistics
____________________
(a) Primarily related to transmission revenues from the Common Use System.
(b) Includes Integrated Generation and non-regulated services to our retail customers under the Service Guard Comfort Plan and Tech Services.
(c) Includes company uses and line losses.
____________________
(a) Degree days are calculated based on a weighted average of total customers by state.
____________________
(a) Availability and Wind Capacity Factor are calculated using a weighted average based on capacity of our generating fleet.
(b) 2021 included planned outages at Neil Simpson II, Wygen II, and Wygen III and unplanned outages at Wygen I, Neil Simpson II and Wyodak Plant.
(c) 2020 included a planned outage at Cheyenne Prairie and unplanned outages at Pueblo Airport Generation and Lange CT. 2019 included planned outages at Neil Simpson CT and Lange CT.
Gas Utilities
Operating results for the years ended December 31 for the Gas Utilities were as follows (in thousands):
2021 Compared to 2020
Gas Utility margin increased over the prior year as a result of:
____________________
(a) In certain jurisdictions, we have Commission approval to recover carrying costs on Winter Storm Uri regulatory assets which offset increased interest expense.
(b) Black Hills Energy Services offers fixed contract pricing for non-regulated gas supply services to our regulated natural gas customers. The increased cost of natural gas sold during Winter Storm Uri is not recoverable through a regulatory mechanism.
(c) In June 2021, Nebraska Gas delivered TCJA-related bill credits to its customers. These bill credits were offset by a reduction in income tax expense and resulted in a minimal impact to Net income.
Operations and maintenance expense increased primarily due to $9.6 million of higher employee costs, $3.3 million of higher property taxes due to a higher asset base driven by prior and current year capital expenditures and $2.0 million of higher outside services expenses. The increase in expense was partially offset by $4.4 million of decreased bad debt expense associated with lower expected credit losses.
Depreciation and amortization increased primarily due to a higher asset base driven by prior and current year capital expenditures partially offset by lower depreciation rates approved in the Nebraska Gas and Colorado Gas rate reviews.
2020 Compared to 2019
Gas Utility margin increased in 2020 over 2019 as a result of:
____________________
(a) The impacts to Gas Utility margin from COVID-19 were primarily driven by reduced volumes from certain transport customers and waived customer late payment fees.
Operations and maintenance expense increased primarily due to higher property taxes due to a higher asset base driven by capital expenditures. Lower employee costs were mostly offset by various other 2020 expenses. COVID-19 impacts to operations and maintenance expense included $2.5 million of additional bad debt expense which was partially offset by $2.4 million of lower travel, training, and outside services related expenses.
Depreciation and amortization increased primarily due to a higher asset base driven by capital expenditures.
Operating Statistics
____________________
(a) Includes Black Hills Energy Services and non-regulated services under the Service Guard Comfort Plan, Tech Services and HomeServe.
____________________
(a) Arkansas and Kansas have weather normalization mechanisms that mitigate the weather impact on Gas Utility margins.
(b) Heating degree days are calculated based on a weighted average of total customers by state excluding Kansas due to its weather normalization mechanism. Arkansas Gas is partially excluded based on the weather normalization mechanism in effect from November through April.
Corporate and Other
Corporate and Other operating results for the years ended December 31 were as follows (in thousands):
2021 Compared to 2020
The variance in Operating income (loss) was primarily due to a prior year favorable true-up of employee costs which was allocated to our subsidiaries in the current year. This allocation was offset in our business segments and had no impact to consolidated results.
2020 Compared to 2019
The variance in Operating income (loss) was primarily due to a 2020 unallocated favorable true-up of employee costs.
Consolidated Interest Expense, Impairment of Investment, Other Income (Expense) and Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
2021 Compared to 2020
Interest expense, net
The increase in Interest expense, net was due to higher debt balances driven by the August 2021 senior unsecured notes and February 2021 term loan, partially offset by lower interest rates.
Impairment of investment
In the prior year, we recorded a pre-tax non-cash write-down of $6.9 million in our investment in equity securities of a privately held oil and gas company. The impairment was triggered by continued adverse changes in future natural gas prices and liquidity concerns at the privately held oil and gas company.
Other income (expense), net
The variance in Other income (expense), net was primarily due to lower non-service pension costs driven by a lower discount rate, lower costs for our non-qualified benefit plans which were driven by market performance and recognition of death benefits from Company-owned life insurance.
Income tax benefit (expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the effective tax rate was 2.8% compared to 11.9% in 2020. The lower effective tax rate is primarily due to $10 million of increased tax benefits from Colorado Electric and Nebraska Gas TCJA-related bill credits to customers (which is offset by reduced revenue), $6.6 million of increased flow-through tax benefits related to repairs and gain deferral, $4.6 million of increased tax benefits from federal production tax credits associated with new wind assets, $2.9 million of increased tax benefits from amortization of excess deferred income taxes and $2.6 million from various statutory rate changes. These current year tax benefits were greater than prior year tax benefits from one-time research and development tax credits and the reversal of accrued excess deferred income taxes as part of resolving the last of the Company’s open dockets seeking approval of its TCJA plans. See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
2020 Compared to 2019
Interest expense, net
The increase in Interest expense, net was driven by higher debt balances partially offset by lower interest rates.
Impairment of investment
In 2020, we recorded a pre-tax non-cash write-down of $6.9 million in our investment in equity securities of a privately held oil and gas company, compared to a $20 million write-down in 2019. The impairments in both years were triggered by continued adverse natural gas prices and liquidity concerns at the privately held oil and gas company.
Other income (expense), net
The variance in Other income (expense), net was primarily due to the 2019 expensing of $5.4 million of development costs related to projects we no longer intend to construct which was partially offset by higher 2020 non-service defined benefit plan costs primarily driven by lower discount rates.
Income tax benefit (expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the effective tax rate was 11.9% compared to 12.2% in 2019. The lower effective tax rate is primarily due to increased tax benefits from federal production tax credits associated with new wind assets and one-time research and development tax credits partially offset by a 2019 tax benefit from a federal tax loss carry-back claim including interest. See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
OVERVIEW
Our company requires significant cash to support and grow our businesses. Our primary sources of cash are generated from our operating activities, five-year Revolving Credit Facility, CP Program, ATM and ability to access the public and private capital markets through debt and equity securities offerings when necessary. This cash is used for, among other things, working capital, capital expenditures, dividends, pension funding, investments in or acquisitions of assets and businesses, payment of debt obligations and redemption of outstanding debt and equity securities when required or financially appropriate.
We experience significant cash requirements during peak months of the winter heating season due to higher natural gas consumption, during periods of high natural gas prices, and during the construction season which typically peaks in spring and summer.
We believe that our cash on hand, operating cash flows, existing borrowing capacity and ability to complete new debt and equity financings, taken in their entirety, provide sufficient capital resources to fund our ongoing operating requirements, regulatory liabilities, debt maturities, anticipated dividends, and anticipated capital expenditures discussed in this section.
In response to Winter Storm Uri, we took steps to maintain adequate liquidity to operate our businesses and fund our capital investment program as discussed in the Recent Developments section above.
The following table provides an informational summary of our financial position as of December 31 (dollars in thousands):
____________________
(a) Carrying value of long-term debt is net of deferred financing costs.
CASH FLOW ACTIVITIES
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
2021 Compared to 2020
Operating Activities:
Net cash used in operating activities was $606 million higher than in 2020. The variance to the prior year was primarily attributable to:
•Cash earnings (income from continuing operations plus non-cash adjustments) were $21 million lower than prior year driven primarily by negative impacts from the unplanned outage at Wygen I, lower Electric and Gas Utility margin from Winter Storm Uri and unfavorable weather, higher operating expenses and higher interest expenses;
•Net outflows from changes in certain operating assets and liabilities were $593 million higher than prior year, primarily attributable to:
•Cash outflows increased by approximately $508 million primarily as a result of changes in our regulatory assets and liabilities primarily driven by incremental fuel, purchased power and natural gas costs due to Winter Storm Uri;
•Cash inflows decreased by approximately $71 million primarily as a result of changes in accounts receivable and other current assets driven by decreased collections of accounts receivable and increased purchases of natural gas in storage;
•Cash inflows decreased by approximately $14 million as a result of changes in accounts payable and other current liabilities driven by payment timing related to payroll taxes;
•Cash outflows decreased by $13 million due to pension contributions made in the prior year; and
•Cash inflows decreased $4.5 million for other operating activities.
Investing Activities:
Net cash used in investing activities was $97 million lower than in 2020. This variance to the prior year was primarily attributable to:
•Capital expenditures of approximately $677 million in 2021 compared to $767 million in 2020. Lower current year expenditures are driven by lower programmatic safety, reliability and integrity spending at our Gas Utilities segments and the prior year Corriedale wind project at our Electric Utilities segment; and
•Cash inflows increased $7.5 million for other investing activities primarily driven by the sales of transmission assets and facilities, none of which were individually significant.
Financing Activities:
Net cash provided by financing activities was $515 million higher than in 2020. This variance to the prior year was primarily attributable to:
•Cash inflows increased $502 million due to long and short-term borrowings in excess of repayments;
•Cash inflows increased $20 million due to higher issuances of common stock;
•Cash outflows increased $10 million due to increased dividends paid on common stock; and
•Cash outflows decreased by $3.0 million for other financing activities.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Short-term Debt
Revolving Credit Facility and CP Program
We have a $750 million Revolving Credit Facility that matures on July 19, 2026 with two one-year extension options (subject to consent from lenders). This facility includes an accordion feature that allows us to increase total commitments up to $1.0 billion with the consent of the administrative agent, the issuing agents and each bank increasing or providing a new commitment. We also have a $750 million, unsecured CP Program that is backstopped by the Revolving Credit Facility. Amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility and the CP Program, either individually or in the aggregate, cannot exceed $750 million.
The Revolving Credit Facility prohibits us from paying cash dividends if a default or an event of default exists prior to, or would result after, paying a dividend. Although these contractual restrictions exist, we do not anticipate triggering any default measures or restrictions.
The Revolving Credit Facility contains cross-default provisions that could result in a default under such agreements if BHC or its material subsidiaries failed to 1) make timely payments of debt obligations; or 2) triggered other default provisions under any debt agreement totaling, in the aggregate principal amount of $50 million or more that permit the acceleration of debt maturities or mandatory debt prepayment.
Our Revolving Credit Facility and CP Program had the following borrowings, outstanding letters of credit, and available capacity (in millions):
____________________
(a) Letters of credit are off-balance sheet commitments that reduce the borrowing capacity available on our corporate Revolving Credit. For more information on these letters of credit, see Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The weighted average interest rate on short-term borrowings at December 31, 2021 was 0.30%. Short-term borrowing activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 was:
See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on our Revolving Credit Facility and CP Program.
Term Loan
See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information related to our term loan.
Utility Money Pool
As a utility holding company, we are required to establish a cash management program to address lending and borrowing activities between our utilities and the Company. We have established utility money pool agreements which address these requirements. These agreements are on file with the FERC and appropriate state regulators. Under the utility money pool agreements, our utilities may, at their option, borrow and extend short-term loans to our other utilities via a utility money pool at market-based rates. While the utility money pool may borrow funds from the Company (as ultimate parent company), the money pool arrangement does not allow loans from our utility subsidiaries to the Company (as ultimate parent company) or to non-regulated affiliates.
Long-term Debt
Our Long-term debt and associated interest payments due by year are shown below (in thousands). For more information on our long-term debt, see Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
____________________
(a)Long-term debt amounts do not include deferred financing costs or discounts or premiums on debt. Estimated interest payments on variable rate debt are calculated by utilizing the applicable rates as of December 31, 2021.
Covenant Requirements
The Revolving Credit Facility and Wyoming Electric’s financing agreements contain covenant requirements. We were in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2021. See additional information in Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Equity
Shelf Registration
We have a shelf registration statement on file with the SEC under which we may issue, from time to time, senior debt securities, subordinated debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, warrants and other securities. Although the shelf registration statement does not limit our issuance capacity, our ability to issue securities is limited to the authority granted by our Board of Directors, certain covenants in our financing arrangements and restrictions imposed by federal and state regulatory authorities. The shelf registration expires in August 2023. Our articles of incorporation authorize the issuance of 100 million shares of common stock and 25 million shares of preferred stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 65 million shares of common stock outstanding and no shares of preferred stock outstanding.
ATM
Our ATM allows us to sell shares of our common stock with an aggregate value of up to $400 million. The shares may be offered from time to time pursuant to a sales agreement dated August 4, 2020. Shares of common stock are offered pursuant to our shelf registration statement filed with the SEC. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we issued a total of 1,812,197 shares of common stock under the ATM for $119 million, net of $1.1 million in issuance costs.
For additional information regarding equity, see Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Future Financing Plans
We will continue to assess debt and equity needs to support our capital investment plans and other key strategic objectives. In 2022, we expect to fund our capital plan and strategic objectives by using cash generated from operating activities, our Revolving Credit Facility and CP Program, and issuing $100 million to $120 million of common stock under the ATM.
CREDIT RATINGS
Financing for operational needs and capital expenditure requirements, not satisfied by operating cash flows, depends upon the cost and availability of external funds through both short and long-term financing. In order to operate and grow our business, we need to consistently maintain the ability to raise capital on favorable terms. Access to funds is dependent upon factors such as general economic and capital market conditions, regulatory authorizations and policies, the Company’s credit ratings, cash flows from routine operations and the credit ratings of counterparties. After assessing the current operating performance, liquidity and credit ratings of the Company, management believes that the Company will have access to the capital markets at prevailing market rates for companies with comparable credit ratings. We note that credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating agency. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
The following table represents the credit ratings, outlook and risk profile of BHC at December 31, 2021:
____________________
(a) On October 20, 2021, S&P reported BBB+ rating and maintained a Stable outlook.
(b) On December 20, 2021, Moody’s reported Baa2 rating and maintained a Stable outlook.
(c) On September 17, 2021, Fitch reported BBB+ rating and maintained a Stable outlook.
Certain fees and interest rates under our Revolving Credit Facility are based on our credit ratings at all three rating agencies. If all of our ratings are at the same level, or if two of our ratings are the same level and one differs, these fees and interest rates will be based on the ratings that are at the same level. If all of our ratings are at different levels, these fees and interest rates will be based on the middle level. Currently, our Fitch and S&P ratings are at the same level, and our Moody’s rating is one level below. Therefore, if Fitch or S&P downgrades our senior unsecured debt, we will be required to pay higher fees and interest rates under our Revolving Credit Facility.
The following table represents the credit ratings of South Dakota Electric at December 31, 2021:
____________________
(a) On July 1, 2021, S&P reported A rating.
(b) On September 17, 2021, Fitch reported A rating.
We do not have any trigger events (i.e., an acceleration of repayment of outstanding indebtedness, an increase in interest costs, or the posting of additional cash collateral) tied to our stock price and have not executed any transactions that require us to issue equity based on our credit ratings.
CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures are a substantial portion of our cash requirements each year and we continue to forecast a robust capital expenditure program during the next five years. See above in Key Elements of our Business Strategy for forecasted capital expenditure requirements. A significant portion of our capital expenditures are for safety, reliability and integrity of our system and is included in utility rate base and eligible for recovery from our utility customers with regulatory approval. Those capital expenditures also earn a rate of return authorized by the commissions in the jurisdictions in which we operate.
Our capital expenditures for the three years ended December 31 were as follows (in thousands):
____________________
(a) Includes accruals for property, plant and equipment as disclosed as supplemental cash flow information in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Repayments of Indebtedness
For information relating to repayments of our short- and long-term debt and associated interest payments, see the Capital Resources section above and Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unconditional Purchase Obligations
We have unconditional purchase obligations which include the energy and capacity costs associated with our PPAs, transmission services agreements, and natural gas capacity, transportation and storage agreements. Additionally, our Gas Utilities have commitments to purchase physical quantities of natural gas under contracts indexed to various forward natural gas price curves. For additional information. see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
We have one defined benefit pension plan, the Black Hills Retirement Plan (Pension Plan). The unfunded status of the Pension Plan is defined as the amount the projected benefit obligation exceeds the plan assets. The unfunded status of the plan is $20 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $40 million as of December 31, 2020. While we do not have required contributions, we expect to make $3.9 million in contributions to our Pension Plan in 2022. See further information in Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Common Stock Dividends
Future cash dividends, if any, will be dependent on our results of operations, financial position, cash flows, reinvestment opportunities and other factors, and will be evaluated and approved by our Board of Directors.
Additionally, there are certain statutory limitations that could affect future cash dividends paid. Federal law places limits on the ability of public utilities within a holding company structure to declare dividends. Specifically, under the Federal Power Act, a public utility may not pay dividends from any funds properly included in a capital account. The utility subsidiaries’ dividends may be limited directly or indirectly by state regulatory commissions or bond indenture covenants. See additional information in Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On January 26, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.595 per share, equivalent to an annual dividend rate of $2.38 per share. The table below provides our dividends paid (in thousands), dividend payout ratio and dividends paid per share for the three years ended December 31:
Our three-year compound annualized dividend growth rate was 5.9%.
Collateral Requirements
Our Utilities maintain wholesale commodity contracts for the purchases and sales of electricity and natural gas which have performance assurance provisions that allow the counterparty to require collateral postings under certain conditions, including when requested on a reasonable basis due to a deterioration in our financial condition or nonperformance. A significant downgrade in our credit ratings, such as a downgrade to a level below investment grade, could result in counterparties requiring collateral postings under such adequate assurance provisions. The amount of credit support that we may be required to provide at any point in the future is dependent on the amount of the initial transaction, changes in the market price, open positions and the amounts owed by or to the counterparty. At December 31, 2021, we had sufficient liquidity to cover collateral that could be required to be posted under these contracts. The cash collateral we were required to post at December 31, 2021 was not material.
Guarantees
We provide various guarantees, which represent off-balance sheet commitments, supporting certain of our subsidiaries under specified agreements or transactions. For more information on these guarantees, see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in application. There are also areas which require management’s judgment in selecting among available GAAP alternatives. We are required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based upon the information available. We continue to closely monitor the impacts of COVID-19 and Winter Storm Uri on our critical accounting estimates including, but not limited to, collectibility of customer receivables, recoverability of regulatory assets, impairment risk of goodwill and long-lived assets, valuation of pension assets and liabilities and contingent liabilities. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Actual results may differ from our estimates and to the extent there are material differences between these estimates, judgments or assumptions and actual results, our financial statements will be affected. We believe the following accounting estimates are the most critical in understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. We have reviewed these critical accounting estimates and related disclosures with our Audit Committee.
The following discussion of our critical accounting estimates should be read in conjunction with Note 1, “Business Description and Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Regulation
Our regulated Electric and Gas Utilities are subject to cost-of-service regulation and earnings oversight from federal and state utility commissions. This regulatory treatment does not provide any assurance as to achievement of desired earnings levels. Our retail electric and gas utility rates are regulated on a state-by-state basis by the relevant state regulatory commissions based on an analysis of our costs, as reviewed and approved in a regulatory proceeding. The rates that we are allowed to charge may or may not match our related costs and allowed return on invested capital at any given time.
Management continually assesses the probability of future recoveries associated with regulatory assets and future obligations associated with regulatory liabilities. Factors such as the current regulatory environment, recently issued rate orders and historical precedents are considered. As a result, we believe that the accounting prescribed under rate-based regulation remains appropriate and our regulatory assets are probable of recovery in current rates or in future rate proceedings.
To some degree, each of our Electric and Gas Utilities are permitted to recover certain costs (such as increased fuel and purchased power costs) outside of a base rate review. To the extent we are able to pass through such costs to our customers, and a state regulatory commission subsequently determines that such costs should not have been paid by the customers, we may be required to refund such costs.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had total regulatory assets of $797 million and $278 million, respectively, and total regulatory liabilities of $503 million and $533 million, respectively. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Goodwill
We perform a goodwill impairment test on an annual basis or upon the occurrence of events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the asset might be impaired. Our annual goodwill impairment testing date is as of October 1, which aligns with our financial planning process.
Accounting standards for testing goodwill for impairment require the application of either a qualitative or quantitative assessment to analyze whether or not goodwill has been impaired. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. Under either the qualitative or quantitative assessment, the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is compared with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount exceeds fair value, then an impairment loss would be recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units and determining the fair value of the reporting unit. We have determined that the reporting units for goodwill impairment testing are our operating segments, or components of an operating segment, that constitute a business for which discrete financial information is available and for which the Chief Operating Decision Maker (CODM) regularly reviews the operating results. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using a combination of an income approach, which estimates fair value based on discounted future cash flows, and a market approach, which estimates fair value based on market comparables within the utility and energy industries. These valuations require significant judgments, including, but not limited to: 1) estimates of future cash flows, based on our internal five-year business plans and adjusted as appropriate for our view of market participant assumptions, with long range cash flows estimated using a terminal value calculation; 2) estimates of long-term growth rates for our businesses; 3) the determination of an appropriate weighted-average cost of capital or discount rate; and 4) the utilization of market information such as recent sales transactions for comparable assets within the utility and energy industries. Varying by reporting unit, weighted average cost of capital in the range of 4.9% to 5.1% and long-term growth rate projections of 1.75% were utilized in the goodwill impairment test performed as of October 1, 2021. Although 1.75% was used for a long-term growth rate projection, the short-term projected growth rate is higher with planned recovery of capital investments through rider mechanisms and rate reviews. Under the market approach, we estimate fair value using multiples derived from comparable sales transactions and enterprise value to EBITDA for comparative peer companies for each respective reporting unit. These multiples are applied to operating data for each reporting unit to arrive at an indication of fair value. In addition, we add a reasonable control premium when calculating fair value utilizing the peer multiples, which is estimated as the premium that would be received in a sale in an orderly transaction between market participants.
The estimates and assumptions used in the impairment assessments are based on available market information and we believe they are reasonable. However, variations in any of the assumptions could result in materially different calculations of fair value and determinations of whether or not an impairment is indicated. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, there were no impairment losses recorded. At December 31, 2021, the fair value substantially exceeded the carrying value at all reporting units.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
As described in Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have one defined benefit pension plan, one defined post-retirement healthcare plan and several non-qualified retirement plans. A Master Trust holds the assets for the pension plan. A VEBA trust for the funded portion of the post-retirement healthcare plan has also been established.
Accounting for pension and other postretirement benefit obligations involves numerous assumptions, the most significant of which relate to the discount rates, healthcare cost trend rates, expected return on plan assets, compensation increases, retirement rates and mortality rates. The determination of our obligation and expenses for pension and other postretirement benefits is dependent on the assumptions determined by management and used by actuaries in calculating the amounts. Although we believe our assumptions are appropriate, significant differences in our actual experience or significant changes in our assumptions may materially affect our pension and other postretirement obligations and our future expense.
The 2022 pension benefit cost for our non-contributory funded pension plan is expected to be $2.2 million compared to $0.8 million in 2021. The increase in the expected 2022 pension benefit cost is driven primarily by lower expected asset returns and a higher discount rate.
The effect of hypothetical changes to selected assumptions on the pension and other postretirement benefit plans would be as follows in thousands of dollars:
____________________
(a) Projected benefit obligation (PBO) for the pension plan and accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO) for OPEB plans.
(b) Impact on service cost, interest cost and amortization of gains or losses.
Income Taxes
The Company and its subsidiaries file consolidated federal income tax returns. Each entity records income taxes as if it were a separate taxpayer for both federal and state income tax purposes and consolidating adjustments are allocated to the subsidiaries based on separate company computations of taxable income or loss.
The Company uses the asset and liability method in accounting for income taxes. Under the asset and liability method, deferred income taxes are recognized at currently enacted income tax rates, to reflect the tax effect of temporary differences between the financial and tax basis of assets and liabilities as well as operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Such temporary differences are the result of provisions in the income tax law that either require or permit certain items to be reported on the income tax return in a different period than they are reported in the financial statements.
In assessing the realization of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized and provides any necessary valuation allowances as required. If we determine that we will be unable to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be made in the period such determination was made. These adjustments may increase or decrease earnings. Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretations of tax laws and the resolution of current and any future tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements.
See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.