Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business, our liquidity and capital resources and the other non-historical statements are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in "Risk Factors" and "Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information." Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by the forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled "Risk Factors," "Selected Historical Financial Data," "Liquidity and Capital Resources" and the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Except as otherwise indicated or unless the context otherwise requires, all references to "Black Knight," the "Company," "we," "us" or "our" are to Black Knight, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its subsidiaries ("BKI").
Overview
Black Knight is a premier provider of integrated, innovative, mission-critical, high-performance software solutions, data and analytics to the U.S. mortgage and real estate markets. Our mission is to transform the markets we serve by delivering innovative solutions that are integrated across the homeownership lifecycle and that result in realized efficiencies, reduced risk and new opportunities for our clients to help them achieve greater levels of success.
We believe businesses leverage our robust, integrated solutions across the entire homeownership lifecycle to help retain existing clients, gain new clients, mitigate risk and operate more efficiently. Our clients rely on our proven, comprehensive, scalable solutions and our unwavering commitment to delivering exceptional client support to achieve their strategic goals and better serve their customers.
We have a focused strategy of continuous innovation across our business supported by strategic acquisitions - and even more importantly, the integration of those innovations and acquisitions into our broader ecosystem. Our scale allows us to continually invest in our business, both to meet ever-changing industry requirements and to maintain our position as a leading provider of platforms for the mortgage and real estate markets.
Deep business and regulatory expertise and an unparalleled, holistic view of the markets we serve allow us the privilege of being a trusted advisor to our clients, who range from the nation’s largest lenders and mortgage servicers to institutional portfolio managers and government entities, to individual real estate agents and mortgage brokers. Clients leverage our software ecosystem across a range of real estate and housing finance verticals through multiple digital channels, using our offerings to drive more business, reduce risk and deliver a best-in-class customer experience, all while operating more efficiently and cost-effectively.
The table below summarizes active first and second lien mortgage loans on our mortgage loan servicing software solution and the related market data, reflecting our leadership in the mortgage loan servicing software solutions market (in millions):
(1) Estimates according to the Black Knight Mortgage Monitor Reports as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 for U.S. first lien mortgage loans. These estimates are subject to change.
(2) Estimates according to the January 2022 Equifax National Consumer Credit Trends Reports as of December 2021 and 2020 for U.S. second lien mortgage loans. These estimates are subject to revision.
We have long-standing relationships with our clients - a majority of whom enter into long-term contracts that include multiple, integrated products embedded into mission-critical, client-side workflow and decision processes. This speaks to the confidence our clients, which include some of the largest financial institutions in the world, have in our solutions and our commitment to serve them. The contractual nature of our revenues and stickiness of our client relationships make our revenues both highly visible and recurring in nature. Our scale and integrated ecosystem of solutions drive significant operating leverage and cross-sell opportunities, enabling our clients to continually benefit from new and greater operational efficiencies while simultaneously allowing us to generate strong margins and cash flows.
Our Markets
The Black Knight ecosystem stretches across four core “pillar” verticals: mortgage loan servicing, mortgage origination, capital markets and real estate; with our data and analytics flowing throughout and between the interconnected ecosystem of solutions. As we integrate our innovations and acquired technologies, we are committed to continually improving the end consumer experience, driving further efficiencies for our clients and helping them to win new customers and retain existing customers.
Recent Developments
On September 15, 2020, we completed a series of transactions and completed the acquisition of Optimal Blue, LLC (“Optimal Blue”). In connection with the acquisition of Optimal Blue, we contributed $762.0 million in cash and our Compass Analytics business to a newly formed entity, Optimal Blue Holdco, LLC (“Optimal Blue Holdco”), which was formed for the purpose of acquiring Optimal Blue and certain affiliates. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we owned 60% of Optimal Blue Holdco.
On February 15, 2022, we acquired the remaining Class A units of Optimal Blue Holdco from Cannae Holdings, LLC (“Cannae”) and affiliates of Thomas H. Lee Partners, L.P. (“THL”) in exchange for aggregate consideration of approximately 36.4 million shares of Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. (“DNB”) common stock and $433.5 million in cash, funded with borrowings on our revolving credit facility. The aggregate consideration and number of shares of DNB common stock paid to Cannae and THL was based on the 20-day volume-weighted average price of DNB common stock for the period ending on February 14, 2022. Refer to Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 3 - Business Acquisitions to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Business Trends and Conditions
Market Trends
Market trends that have spurred lenders and servicers to seek software, data and analytics solutions are as follows:
Integral role of technology in the U.S. mortgage loan industry. Over the past few years, the homebuyer’s processes have become more digital, and banks and other lenders and servicers have become increasingly focused on automation and workflow management to operate more efficiently and meet their regulatory requirements as well as using technology to enhance the
consumer experience during the mortgage loan origination, closing and servicing processes. Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, our clients have become increasingly aware that digital solutions are integral to their ability to stay connected with their customer base in times when face-to-face interactions are not possible. We believe technology providers must be able to support the complexity and dynamic nature of the market, display extensive industry knowledge and possess the financial resources to make the necessary investments in technology and software to support lenders and servicers. This includes an enhanced digital experience along with the application of artificial intelligence, robotic process automation and adaptive learning.
Heightened demand for enhanced transparency and analytic insight. As U.S. mortgage loan market participants work to minimize the risk in lending, servicing and capital markets, they rely on the integration of data and analytics with solutions that enhance the decision-making process. These industry participants rely on large comprehensive third-party databases coupled with enhanced analytics to achieve these goals. The pandemic is putting pressure on the U.S. economy, affecting millions of American jobs and creating a high-level of uncertainty in the volume of work that our clients are facing with possible delinquent mortgage loans. Mortgage loan market participants are eager for timely data and insights to help them plan and react to the changing environment.
Regulatory changes and oversight. Most U.S. mortgage loan market participants are subject to a high level of regulatory oversight and regulatory requirements as federal and state governments have enacted various new laws, rules and regulations. It is our experience that mortgage lenders have become more focused on minimizing the risk of non-compliance with regulatory requirements and are looking toward solutions that assist them in complying with their regulatory requirements. We expect this trend to continue as additional governmental programs and regulations have been recently enacted to address the economic concerns resulting from the pandemic, and our clients have had to adapt their systems and processes in record time to the shifting landscape. In addition, our clients and our clients’ regulators have elevated their focus on privacy and data security while many of our clients’ employees are working from home and in light of an increased level of cybersecurity incidents. We expect the industry focus on privacy and data security to continue to increase.
Lenders increasingly focused on core operations. As a result of regulatory scrutiny, a decline in refinance origination volumes due to a rising interest rate environment and the higher cost of doing business, we believe lenders have become more focused on their core operations and customers. We believe lenders are increasingly shifting from in-house solutions to third-party solutions that provide a more comprehensive and efficient solution. Lenders require these providers to deliver best-in-class solutions and deep domain expertise and to assist them in maintaining regulatory compliance.
COVID-19 Pandemic and the Effect on Our Business
COVID-19 and the U.S.’s response to the pandemic are significantly affecting the mortgage and real estate industries. A moratorium on mortgage loan foreclosures and evictions and mortgage loan forbearance programs for certain borrowers that allowed mortgage loan payments to be suspended for up to 12 months were put in place. The federal moratoriums expired on July 31, 2021. However, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) amended the federal mortgage servicing regulations to support the housing market’s smooth and orderly transition as federal foreclosure protections expire. The amendments established temporary safeguards to help prevent a surge of foreclosures and ensured that borrowers had time before foreclosure to explore their options. In addition, many states implemented additional guidance that extended their moratorium on mortgage loan foreclosures and evictions, and additional extensions of these moratoriums may be implemented in the future.
The extraordinary effects of the broad-based response to the COVID-19 pandemic have delayed the timing of certain revenues. Specifically, the mortgage loan foreclosure moratorium and forbearance plans have reduced the number of foreclosures being processed on our BankruptcySM/ForeclosureSM and InvoicingSM software solutions for which revenue is recognized as transactions occur. The ultimate effect of the pandemic is uncertain and subject to change. We cannot currently predict the full extent of the effects on the economy, the markets we serve, our business or our operations.
Our Business Segments
Our business is organized into two segments: Software Solutions and Data and Analytics.
Software Solutions
Our Software Solutions segment offers software solutions that support loan servicing, loan origination and settlement services. Our software solutions revenues were 85%, 84% and 86% of our consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table summarizes our software solutions revenues (in millions):
Our servicing software solutions primarily include our core servicing software solution that automates loan servicing, including loan setup and ongoing processing, customer service, accounting, reporting to the secondary mortgage market and investors and web-based workflow information systems. Our servicing software solutions primarily generate revenues based on the number of active loans outstanding on our system, which has been very stable; however, we have some exposure to foreclosure and bankruptcy loan volumes, which can fluctuate based on economic cycles and other factors.
As a result of the effects of the broad-based response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen lower foreclosure-related transactional revenues due to the mortgage loan foreclosure moratorium. We expect higher foreclosure-related transactional revenues in 2022 as a result of the expiration of the federal foreclosure moratorium. As of February 15, 2022, Black Knight’s McDashSM Flash Forbearance Tracker estimated 0.8 million homeowners, or 1.5% of all U.S. mortgage loans, were in COVID-19 mortgage loan forbearance plans.
Our origination software solutions primarily include our solutions that automate and facilitate the origination of mortgage loans and provide an interconnected network allowing the various parties and systems associated with lending transactions to exchange data quickly and efficiently. Our exposure to origination volumes is limited as our loan origination system revenues are based on closed loan volumes subject to minimum base software fees that are contractually obligated, and our secondary marketing technologies’ revenues are primarily subscription-based. Some of our origination software solutions are exposed to variances in origination volumes, primarily related to refinance volumes due to the nature of the services provided. While we have seen elevated refinance origination volumes for a prolonged period of time, we expect to see lower refinance origination volumes in 2022 due to record volumes in prior years and a rising interest rate environment. We expect the effect of lower refinance origination volumes to be partially offset by higher purchase origination volumes based on the most recent Mortgage Bankers Association forecast for 2022. Our origination software solutions that are more sensitive to origination volumes were approximately 5% of our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Data and Analytics
Our Data and Analytics segment offers data and analytics solutions to the mortgage, real estate and capital markets verticals. These solutions include property ownership data, lien data, servicing data, automated valuation models, collateral risk scores, behavioral models, a multiple listing service software solution and other data solutions. Our data and analytics business is predominantly based on longer-term strategic data licenses, other data licenses and subscription-based revenues. Our data and analytics revenues were 15%, 16% and 14% of our consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our data and analytics solutions that are more sensitive to fluctuations in home buying activity and origination volumes were approximately 4% of our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 and relate to services where we provide data necessary for title insurance and other settlement service activities.
Regulatory Requirements
There continues to be a high level of legislative and regulatory focus on consumer protection practices. As a result, federal and state governments have enacted various new laws, rules and regulations. This has led banks and other lenders to seek software solutions that assist them in satisfying their regulatory compliance obligations in the face of a changing regulatory environment. We have developed solutions that target this need, which has resulted in additional revenues.
The CFPB has issued guidance that applies to "supervised service providers," which the CFPB has defined to include service providers, like us, to CFPB-supervised banks and non-banks. In addition, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the "Dodd-Frank Act") contains the Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act that imposes additional requirements on lenders and servicers of residential mortgage loans. Future legislative or regulatory changes are difficult to predict, and new laws or regulations that may be implemented by the CFPB or other regulatory bodies may require us to change our business practices or incur increased costs to comply.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures with respect to contingent liabilities and assets at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Certain of our accounting policies and estimates require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Our actual results may differ from those estimates. See Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional description of the significant accounting policies that have been followed in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
The accounting policies described below are those we consider to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations and that require the most complex and subjective management judgment.
Revenue Recognition
At times, revenue recognition requires significant judgment, especially for our complex arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, or deliverables, such as arrangements that include the implementation of several software solutions over a period of time as well as post-implementation subscription fees and support for those solutions. The amount of revenues we recognize in a particular period depends on the value we allocate to the products and services delivered during that period. Our critical judgments for revenue recognition relate to (i) identifying performance obligations within the arrangement, including whether those obligations are distinct or should be combined; (ii) determining the standalone selling price ("SSP") for each performance obligation; and (iii) determining the effect of contract modifications.
Delivery of our primary software solutions is often considered a distinct performance obligation; however, certain agreements that include complex, proprietary implementation-related professional services require judgment to determine if the software solution and related implementation professional services should be combined into one performance obligation.
The SSP for many of our solutions and services is based on observable selling prices. However, when observable selling prices are not available, judgment and analysis is required to establish an estimated SSP through consideration of all reasonably available information, including market conditions, demands, trends, our specific factors and information about the client or class of client. The adjusted market approach is generally used when observable inputs are not available or limited.
Contract modifications require judgment to determine if the modification should be accounted for as (i) a separate contract, (ii) the termination of the original contract and creation of a new contract or (iii) a cumulative catch-up adjustment to the original contract. When evaluating contract modifications, we must identify the performance obligations of the modified contract and determine both the allocation of revenues to the remaining performance obligations and the period of recognition for each identified performance obligation.
Purchase Accounting
We are required to allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values, with the excess recorded as goodwill. We generally engage third-party valuation specialists to assist us in making fair value determinations. The third-party valuation specialists generally use discounted cash flow models, which require internally-developed assumptions, to determine the acquisition fair value of client relationship intangible assets and developed technology software assets. Assumptions for client relationship asset valuations generally include forecasted revenue attributable to existing customer contracts and relationships, estimated annual attrition, forecasted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization margin and estimated weighted average cost of capital and discount rates. Assumptions for software asset valuations generally include forecasted revenue attributable to the software assets, obsolescence rates, estimated royalty rates and estimated weighted average cost of capital and discount rates. The forecasted financial performance used in the discounted cash flow models are critical accounting estimates in determining the fair value of customer relationships and software asset valuations as these estimates are influenced by many factors, including historical financial information and management’s expectation for future operating results as a combined company.
If the initial accounting for a business combination is incomplete by the end of the reporting period during which the combination took place, we are required to record provisional amounts in our financial statements for items for which the accounting has not been completed. Measurement period adjustments to provisional purchase price allocations are recognized in the period in which they are determined, with the effect on earnings of changes in depreciation, amortization or other income resulting from such changes calculated as if the accounting had been completed on the acquisition date. Any new assets or liabilities identified during the measurement period are recognized as of the acquisition date. The measurement period ends the sooner of one year from the acquisition date or when we receive the information we were seeking about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date or learn that more information is not obtainable.
Refer to Note 3 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of our acquisitions during years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if circumstances indicate potential impairment, through a comparison of a reporting unit’s fair value to its carrying value. Goodwill impairment assessments require a significant amount of management judgement, and a meaningful change in one or more of the underlying forecasts, estimates or assumptions used in testing goodwill for impairment could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position. Our impairment test may first consider qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit's carrying amount exceeds its fair value. Qualitative factors include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market changes, our overall financial performance, changes in share price and other events or changes in circumstances that could negatively affect us. If the results of a qualitative assessment indicate a potential for impairment, a quantitative goodwill impairment test is performed. The quantitative process of determining whether or not an asset, such as goodwill, is impaired or recoverable relies on a weighted average of multiple valuation methods, primarily a combination of an income approach and a market approach. The income approach includes the present value of estimated future cash flows, while the market approach uses earnings multiples of similar guideline public companies or of similar guideline transactions. The income approach used to assess goodwill for impairment is a critical estimate because the forecasted growth rate assumptions underlying the estimated future cash flows is subject to management's judgement based upon the best available market information, internal forecasts and operating plans. A deterioration in this assumption could adversely impact our results of operations and financial position.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we performed a qualitative assessment for our annual goodwill impairment test, and we concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of each of our reporting units continued to exceed its respective carrying values.
Results of Operations
See Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021, for a discussion of our consolidated and segment results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019.
Key Performance Metrics
Revenues, EBITDA and EBITDA Margin for the Software Solutions and Data and Analytics segments are presented in conformity with ASC Topic 280, Segment Reporting. These measures are reported to the chief operating decision maker for purposes of making decisions about allocating resources to the segments and assessing their performance. For these reasons, these measures are excluded from the definition of non-GAAP financial measures under the Securities and Exchange Commission’s ("SEC") Regulation G and Item 10(e) of Regulation S-K.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following tables present certain financial data for the periods indicated (dollars in millions):
Segment Financial Results
Revenues
We generate revenues through contractual arrangements we enter into with our clients to provide products or services either individually or in combination with one another as part of an integrated offering of multiple services. These arrangements occasionally include offerings from more than one segment to the same client.
The following table sets forth revenues by segment for the periods presented (in millions):
(1) Revenues for Corporate and Other represent deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustments recorded in accordance with GAAP.
Software Solutions
Our Software Solutions segment revenues are primarily derived from software solutions and professional services. Revenues from software solutions are typically volume-based agreements driven by factors such as the number of accounts processed, transactions processed and system resources utilized. Professional services consist of pre-implementation and post-implementation support and services and are primarily billed on a time and materials basis. Professional services may also include dedicated teams provided as part of agreements with software solutions clients.
Revenues were $1,250.0 million in 2021 compared to $1,040.2 million in 2020, an increase of $209.8 million, or 20%. Our servicing software solutions revenues increased 8%, or $61.2 million, primarily driven by revenues from new clients, higher usage-based revenues on MSP® and sales of new innovative solutions, partially offset by approximately $8 million of lower foreclosure-related revenues due to the foreclosure moratorium as part of the CARES Act. Our origination software solutions revenues increased 57%, or $148.6 million, primarily driven by revenues of $119.4 million related to acquired businesses, revenues from new clients, the network effect in Optimal Blue and innovation sales, partially offset by attrition.
Data and Analytics
Our Data and Analytics segment revenues are primarily derived from property ownership data, lien data, servicing data, automated valuation models, collateral risk scores, behavioral models, a multiple listing service software solution and other data solutions.
Revenues were $225.2 million in 2021 compared to $198.7 million in 2020, an increase of $26.5 million, or 13%. The increase was primarily driven by strong sales execution across nearly all business lines, revenues of $5.4 million related to acquired businesses and revenues from new innovation sales, partially offset by attrition.
EBITDA and EBITDA margin
The following tables set forth EBITDA (in millions) and EBITDA margin by segment for the periods presented:
Software Solutions
EBITDA was $713.7 million in 2021 compared to $604.6 million in 2020, an increase of $109.1 million, or 18%, with an EBITDA margin of 57.1%, a decrease of 100 basis points from the prior year. The EBITDA margin decrease was driven by revenue mix and increased investments in innovation and client support.
Data and Analytics
EBITDA was $80.2 million in 2021 compared to $64.8 million in 2020, an increase of $15.4 million, or 24%, with an EBITDA margin of 35.6%, an increase of 300 basis points from prior year. The EBITDA margin increase was primarily driven by incremental margins on revenue growth.
Consolidated Financial Results
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses primarily include compensation costs, including equity-based compensation and benefits, hardware and software maintenance costs, software subscription costs, cloud computing costs, rent-related costs and professional services.
The following table sets forth operating expenses by segment for the periods presented (in millions):
(1) Operating expenses for Corporate and Other include equity-based compensation, including certain related payroll taxes, of $42.9 million and $40.6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The increase in Operating Expenses was primarily driven by the effect of prior year acquisitions, higher net personnel expense, including higher medical costs, higher incentive compensation expense, including equity-based compensation, and software subscription and maintenance costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense consists of our depreciation related to investments in property and equipment, including hardware, as well as amortization of purchased and developed software and other intangible assets, primarily client relationship assets recorded in connection with acquisitions. It also includes the amortization of deferred contract costs.
The following table sets forth Depreciation and amortization by segment for the periods presented (in millions):
(1) Depreciation and amortization for Corporate and Other primarily represents net incremental depreciation and amortization adjustments associated with the application of purchase accounting recorded in accordance with GAAP.
The increase in Depreciation and amortization is primarily related to the amortization of acquired intangible assets from acquisitions.
Transition and Integration Costs
Transition and integration costs were $13.3 million in 2021 compared to $31.4 million in 2020. Transition and integration costs in 2021 primarily consisted of costs associated with acquisitions, including costs pursuant to purchase agreements, and expense reduction initiatives. Transition and integration costs in 2021 also include the reversal of $2.5 million of certain contingent consideration liabilities associated with prior years’ acquisitions. Transition and integration costs in 2020 primarily consisted of costs associated with acquisitions, including transaction costs of $15.0 million related to the acquisition of Optimal Blue, and expense reduction initiatives.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest expense on our borrowings, payments on our interest rate swaps, amortization of our debt issuance costs and original issue discount, commitment fees on our revolving credit facility and administrative agent fees net of capitalized interest and interest income.
Interest expense, net was $83.6 million in 2021 compared to $62.9 million in 2020, an increase of $20.7 million, or 33%. The increase was primarily driven by our higher average outstanding debt balances primarily related to the Senior Notes issued by our indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary Black Knight InfoServ, LLC (“BKIS”) and due in 2028, partially offset by lower interest rates.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $6.4 million in 2021 compared to Other income, net $16.4 million in 2020. The 2021 amounts primarily related to legal fees and the debt refinancing. The 2020 amounts primarily related to a recognized gain of $18.5 million for the resolution of a legacy legal matter.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense represents federal, state, local and foreign income taxes. Income tax expense was $35.7 million in 2021 compared to $41.6 million in 2020. Our effective tax rate was 16.8% in 2021 compared to 18.9% in 2020. Our effective tax rate for 2021 differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the effect of research and experimentation tax credits and the effect of excess tax benefits related to the vesting of restricted shares of our common stock. Our effective tax rate for 2020 differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the effect of return to provision adjustments, research and experimentation tax credits and the effect of excess tax benefits related to the vesting of restricted shares of our common stock. Refer to Note 18 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information related to the components of our effective tax rate.
Equity in Earnings of Unconsolidated Affiliates, Net of Tax
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates, net of tax primarily represents the effect of our investment in Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. (“DNB”), which is accounted for as an equity-method investment. Equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates, net of tax consists of the following (in millions):
Refer to Note 4 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information related to our investment in DNB.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Requirements
Our primary sources of liquidity are our existing cash balances, cash flows from operations and borrowings on our revolving credit facility. On March 10, 2021, BKIS entered into an amended and restated credit agreement that extended the maturity of the facilities thereunder until March 2026 and delayed mandatory term loan payments until March 2022. Refer to Note 11 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II Item 8 of this Report, which is incorporated by reference into this Part II Item 7. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $77.1 million, outstanding debt principal of $2,414.9 million and available capacity of $744.0 million on our revolving credit facility.
Our primary cash requirements include operating expenses, debt service payments (principal and interest), capital expenditures (including property, equipment and software expenditures) and tax-related payments and may include business acquisitions and share repurchases.
We believe that our cash flows from operations and available cash and cash equivalents are sufficient to meet our liquidity needs, including the repayment of our outstanding debt, for at least the next 12 months. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, it will be funded through borrowings on our revolving credit facility, the incurrence of other indebtedness, equity issuance or a combination thereof. The loss of the largest lender on our revolving credit facility would reduce our borrowing capacity by $90.0 million. Additionally, our liquidity and our ability to meet our obligations and fund our capital requirements are also dependent on our future financial performance, which is subject to general economic, financial and other factors that are beyond our control. Accordingly, we cannot be assured that our business will generate sufficient cash flows from operations or that future borrowings will be available from additional indebtedness or otherwise to meet our liquidity needs. Although we have no specific current plans to do so, if we decide to pursue one or more significant acquisitions, we may incur additional debt or sell additional equity to finance such acquisitions.
The CARES Act allows us to defer certain payments of our share of social security taxes until December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we have deferred $7.6 million of payments related to employer social security taxes.
DNB Investment
DNB is a leading global provider of business decisioning data and analytics. As of December 31, 2021, we owned 54.8 million shares of DNB common stock. As of December 31, 2021, our ownership interest in DNB was 12.8%, DNB’s closing share price was $20.49 and the fair value of our investment in DNB was $1,123.9 million before tax. As of December 31, 2021, assuming a statutory tax rate of 25.3%, the estimated after-tax value of our investment in DNB is $964.2 million.
On February 15, 2022, we exchanged approximately 36.4 million shares of DNB common stock for a portion of the remaining Class A units in Optimal Blue Holdco we acquired from Cannae and THL. Following this transaction, we own 4.3%
of DNB’s outstanding common stock with a fair value of $352.8 million based on the February 14, 2022 closing price of $19.10. Refer to Note 4 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II Item 8 of this Report, which is incorporated by reference into this Part II Item 7.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities (in millions):
Operating Activities
The $34.5 million increase in cash provided by operating activities in 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily related to higher earnings before non-cash adjustments, partially offset by higher commission payments, payments of previously deferred payroll taxes under the CARES Act and higher income tax payments.
Investing Activities
The $1,659.4 million decrease in cash used in investing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily related to the Optimal Blue acquisition and our investment in DNB in 2020, partially offset by our 2021 acquisitions.
Financing Activities
The $1,670.8 million decrease in cash provided by financing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily related to the August 2020 issuance by BKIS of $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of 3.625% senior unsecured notes due 2028, contributions from affiliates of Cannae and THL related to their redeemable noncontrolling interests in Optimal Blue Holdco, LLC and the issuance of shares of common stock in 2020, partially offset by net borrowings on our revolving credit facility and share repurchases in 2021.
Financing
For a description of our financing arrangements, see Note 11 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II Item 8 of this Report, which is incorporated by reference into this Part II Item 7.
Contractual Obligations
Our long-term contractual obligations generally include our debt and related interest payments, data processing and maintenance commitments and operating and finance lease payments for our offices, data centers, property and equipment. These long-term contractual obligations extend through 2028.
(1) Includes finance lease obligations.
(2) These calculations include the effect of our interest rate swaps and assume that (a) applicable margins remain constant; (b) our term A loan and revolving credit facility variable rate debt is priced at the one-month LIBOR rate in effect as of December 31, 2021; (c) only mandatory debt repayments are made; and (d) no refinancing occurs at debt maturity.
(3) Other includes commitment fees on our revolving credit facility and rating agencies fees.
Share Repurchase Program
On February 12, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a three-year share repurchase program (“2020 Repurchase Program”) authorizing us to repurchase up to 10.0 million shares of our outstanding common stock through February 12, 2023, through open market purchases, negotiated transactions or other means, in accordance with applicable securities laws and other restrictions.
A summary of share repurchases under our 2020 Repurchase Program for the periods covered in this report is as follows (in millions, except for per share amounts):
We did not repurchase any shares under the 2020 Repurchase Program during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Indemnifications and Warranties
We often agree to indemnify our clients against damages and costs resulting from claims of patent, copyright, trademark infringement or breaches of confidentiality associated with use of our software through software licensing agreements. Historically, we have not made any payments under such indemnifications, but continue to monitor the conditions that are subject to the indemnifications to identify whether a loss has occurred that is both probable and estimable that would require recognition. In addition, we warrant to clients that our software operates substantially in accordance with the software specifications. Historically, no costs have been incurred related to software warranties and none are expected in the future, and as such, no accruals for warranty costs have been made.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements.