Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements, including the notes to those statements, and the Section entitled "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements," included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in any forward-looking statements, which may be due to factors discussed in "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We evaluate certain operating and financial measures on both an as-reported and constant-currency basis. We calculate constant currency by converting our current-year period operating and financial results for transactions recorded in currencies other than U.S. Dollars using the corresponding prior-year period monthly average exchange rates rather than the current-year period monthly average exchange rates.
Overview
Our mission is to make it easier for everyone to experience the world. We connect consumers who wish to make travel reservations with travel service providers around the world through our online platforms. Consumers can also use our meta-search services to easily compare travel reservation information from hundreds of online travel platforms at once. We also offer various other services to consumers and partners, such as travel-related insurance products and restaurant management services to restaurants.
We offer these services through six primary consumer-facing brands: Booking.com, Priceline, agoda, Rentalcars.com, KAYAK, and OpenTable. We continue to increase the collaboration, cooperation, and interdependency among our brands to provide consumers with the most comprehensive services. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements - Segment Reporting for information on our operating segments.
The results of our business outside of the U.S. consist of the results of Booking.com, agoda, and Rentalcars.com in their entirety and the parts of the KAYAK and OpenTable businesses located outside of the U.S. This classification is independent of where the consumer resides, where the consumer is physically located while using our services, or the location of the travel service provider or restaurant. For example, a reservation made through Booking.com (which is domiciled in the Netherlands) at a hotel in New York by a consumer in the U.S. is part of the results of our businesses outside of the U.S. In 2021, the revenues from our businesses outside of the U.S. (the substantial majority of which is generated by Booking.com through facilitating accommodation reservations) represented approximately 87% of our consolidated revenues. See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more geographic information.
We derive substantially all of our revenues from enabling consumers to make travel service reservations. We also earn revenues from advertising services, restaurant reservations and restaurant management services, and various other services, such as travel-related insurance revenues.
Trends
The COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting implementation of travel restrictions by governments around the world resulted in a significant decline in travel activities and consumer demand for related services in 2020 in particular. Accommodation room nights, which include the impact of cancellations, declined rapidly as the COVID-19 pandemic spread in the first quarter of 2020 and the beginning of the second quarter of 2020. Since the beginning of the second quarter of 2020 and through 2021, accommodation room night declines versus the comparable period in 2019 have generally improved as government-imposed travel restrictions have eased, vaccines and other medical interventions have become more widespread, and consumer demand for travel has started to rebound. However, there have been periods of worsening trends due to spikes in COVID-19 cases and newly implemented travel restrictions, primarily related to new variants.
We have observed an improvement in cancellation rates since the high in April 2020, though we have seen periods of elevated cancellation rates typically coinciding with significant increases in COVID-19 cases and newly imposed restrictions. The cancellation rate in 2021 improved meaningfully when compared to 2020 but remained a few percentage points higher than in 2019. In 2021, a higher share of our room nights were booked with flexible cancellation policies, as compared to 2019 and 2020, which could result in higher than normal cancellation rates in future quarters. Increases in cancellation rates can negatively impact our marketing efficiency and we may see increased customer service costs as we did early in the COVID-19 pandemic.
In 2021, we saw an increase in the share of room nights booked for international travel (travelers booking a stay at a property located outside their own country) versus 2020, however, the share remained well below 2019 levels. Since the second quarter of 2020, the share of room nights booked for international travel has been substantially lower than 2019 levels, as government-imposed travel restrictions have generally limited international travel more than domestic travel (travelers booking a stay within their own country).
We have seen an increase in the share of room nights booked on a mobile device and an increased share of mobile app bookings in 2021 as compared to 2019 and 2020. We also see favorable repeat direct booking behavior from consumers in our apps and they allow us more opportunities to engage directly with consumers. The revenue earned on a mobile transaction may be less than a typical desktop transaction due to different consumer purchasing patterns. For example, accommodation reservations made on a mobile device typically are for shorter lengths of stay, have lower accommodation average daily rates ("ADRs"), and are not made as far in advance.
Our global ADRs increased in 2021 as compared to 2019, due in part to changes in the geographical mix of our business driven primarily by stronger room night performance in North America, which is a high ADR region, and weaker room night performance in Asia, which is a low ADR region. In addition, our global ADRs in 2021 benefited from higher ADRs in Europe and North America as compared to 2019, driven by rate increases across many destination types with notable strength in beach-oriented leisure destinations. Global ADRs in 2020 were meaningfully below 2019 ADRs due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, we observed a trend of declining constant-currency accommodation ADRs partially driven by the negative impact of the changing geographical mix of our business (e.g., lower ADR regions like Asia were generally growing faster than higher ADR regions like Western Europe and North America) as well as pricing pressures within local markets from time to time. Those declining ADR trends we experienced prior to the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in and could in the future result in our gross bookings growing less than our room nights. As the travel market continues to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect travel industry ADRs generally to increase from the pandemic lows in 2020, and as a result our ADRs to increase similarly, however, the pace of recovery and improvement in industry ADRs remains highly uncertain.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced many years of growth in our accommodation reservation services. We believe this growth was the result of, among other things, the broader shift of travel purchases from offline to online, the widespread adoption of mobile devices, and the growth of travel overall. We also believe this growth was the result of the continued innovation and execution by our teams around the world to increase the number and the variety of accommodations we offer consumers, increase and improve content, build distribution, and improve the consumer experience on our online platforms, as well as to consistently and effectively market our brands through performance and brand marketing efforts. As the travel market recovers from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect to see higher than pre-COVID-19 pandemic growth rates until we return to the level of travel market demand that we observed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, after which we expect prior trends to generally resume. However, we believe that we have an opportunity to grow the size of our business beyond pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels in both mature and less mature markets.
We are constantly innovating to grow our business by, among other things, providing a best-in-class user experience with intuitive, easy-to-use online platforms to ensure that we are meeting the needs of online consumers while aiming to exceed
their expectations. As part of these ongoing efforts, we have a long-term strategy to build a more integrated offering of multiple elements of travel connected by a payment platform, which we refer to as the "Connected Trip," and we expect these efforts to increase room night growth and revenue growth over time. We may see a negative impact on our operating margins in the near term as we incur the expenses associated with Connected Trip-related investments. Further, to the extent our non-accommodation services (e.g., airline ticket reservation services) have lower margins and grow faster than our accommodation services, whether as part of the Connected Trip or otherwise, our operating margins may be negatively affected. For more information, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "We may not be able to keep up with rapid technological or other market changes."
As part of our strategy to provide more payment options to consumers and travel service providers, increase the number and variety of accommodations available on Booking.com, and enable our long-term Connected Trip strategy, Booking.com is increasingly processing transactions on a merchant basis, where it facilitates payments from travelers for the services provided. This allows Booking.com to process transactions for travel service providers and to increase its ability to offer secure and flexible transaction terms to consumers, such as the form and timing of payment. We believe that adding these types of service offerings will benefit consumers and travel service providers, as well as our gross bookings, room night, and earnings growth rates. However, this results in additional expenses for personnel, payment processing, chargebacks (including those related to fraud), and other expenses related to these transactions, which are recorded in "Personnel" and "Sales and other expenses" in our Consolidated Statements of Operations, as well as associated incremental revenues (e.g., credit card rebates), which are recorded in "Merchant revenues." To the extent more of our business is generated on a merchant basis, we incur a greater level of these merchant-related expenses, which negatively impacts our operating margins despite increases in associated incremental revenues.
We have established widely used and recognized e-commerce brands through marketing and promotional campaigns. Our marketing expenses, which are comprised of performance marketing and brand marketing expenses, declined significantly as a result of the negative impact on travel demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, our marketing expense increased significantly versus 2020 as a result of the improving demand environment and our own efforts to invest in marketing, but remained below 2019 levels. Our performance marketing expense, which represents a substantial majority of our marketing expense, is primarily related to the use of online search engines (primarily Google), meta-search and travel research services, and affiliate marketing to generate traffic to our platforms. Our brand marketing expense is primarily related to costs associated with producing and airing television advertising, online video advertising (for example, on YouTube and Facebook), online display advertising, and other brand marketing. Total marketing expenses were $3.8 billion, $2.2 billion, and $5.0 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Marketing efficiency, expressed as marketing expense as a percentage of gross bookings, and performance marketing returns on investment ("ROIs") are impacted by a number of factors that are subject to variability and are in some cases outside of our control, including ADRs, costs per click, cancellation rates, foreign currency exchange rates, our ability to convert paid traffic to booking customers, and the timing and effectiveness of our brand marketing campaigns. Marketing efficiency can also be impacted by the extent to which consumers come directly to our platforms for bookings. In 2021, the share of room nights booked by consumers coming directly to our platforms increased as compared to 2020 and 2019, which benefits marketing efficiency.
In recent years, we observed periods of stable or increasing ROIs. In 2021, ROIs were about in line with 2019 levels and increased versus 2020 when ROIs were negatively impacted by a significant increase in cancellation rates early in the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect volatility in our ROIs as the pandemic continues to affect travel, and that ROIs could be negatively impacted in the future by increased levels of competition and other factors. When evaluating our performance marketing spend, we typically consider several factors for each channel, such as the customer experience on the advertising platform, the incremental traffic we receive, and the anticipated repeat rate from a particular platform. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "We rely on marketing channels to generate a significant amount of traffic to our platforms and grow our business." and "Our business could be negatively affected by changes in online search and meta-search algorithms and dynamics or traffic-generating arrangements."
Historically, our growth has primarily been generated by the worldwide accommodation reservation business of our most significant brand, Booking.com, due in part to the availability of a large number of properties through Booking.com. Booking.com included approximately 2.4 million properties on its website at December 31, 2021, consisting of over 400,000 hotels, motels, and resorts, and over 1.9 million homes, apartments, and other unique places to stay, all of which were about in line with the number of properties on its website at December 31, 2020. Booking.com categorizes properties listed on its website as either (a) hotels, motels, and resorts, which groups together more traditional accommodation types (including hostels and inns), or (b) homes, apartments, and other unique places to stay, also referred to as alternative accommodations, which encompasses all other types of accommodations, including bed and breakfasts, villas, apart-hotels, and beyond. We intend to
continue to improve the accommodation choices available for reservation on our platforms but the number of accommodations on our platforms may vary in part as a result of removing or adding accommodations from time to time.
The share of Booking.com’s room nights booked for alternative accommodation properties in 2021 was about 29%, which was about the same as the share of room nights in 2019 and down slightly from 2020. Prior to the pandemic, we observed an overall longer-term trend of an increasing share of room nights booked for alternative accommodation properties as consumer demand for these types of properties has grown, and as we have increased the number and variety of alternative accommodation properties available to consumers on Booking.com. We may experience lower profit margins due to certain additional costs, such as increased customer service costs, related to offering alternative accommodations on our platforms. As our alternative accommodation business has grown, these different characteristics have negatively impacted our profit margins and this trend may continue.
Although we believe that providing an extensive collection of properties, excellent customer service, and an intuitive, easy-to-use consumer experience are important factors influencing a consumer's decision to make a reservation, for many consumers, particularly in certain markets, the price of the travel service is the primary factor determining whether a consumer will book a reservation. Discounting and couponing coupled with a high degree of consumer shopping behavior is particularly common in Asian markets. In some cases, our competitors are willing to make little or no profit on a transaction, or offer travel services at a loss, in order to gain market share. As a result, it is increasingly important to offer travel services, such as accommodation reservations, at a competitive price, whether through discounts, coupons, closed-user group rates or loyalty programs, increased flexibility in cancellation policies, or otherwise. These initiatives have resulted and in the future may result in lower ADRs and lower revenue as a percentage of gross bookings.
Many taxing authorities are increasingly focused on ways to increase tax revenues and have targeted large multinational technology companies in these efforts. As a result, many countries and some U.S. states have implemented or are considering the adoption of a digital services tax or similar tax that imposes a tax on revenue earned from digital advertisements or the use of online platforms, even when there is no physical presence in the jurisdiction. Currently, rates for this tax range from 1.5% to 10% of revenue deemed generated in the jurisdiction. The digital services taxes currently in effect, which we record in "General and administrative" expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, have negatively impacted our results of operations. While the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has been working on multinational tax changes that could require all member parties to remove all digital services taxes, the timing and details are not yet known. For more information, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "We may have exposure to additional tax liabilities."
Many national governments have conducted or are conducting investigations into competitive practices within the online travel industry, and we may be involved or affected by such investigations and their results. Some countries have adopted or proposed legislation that could also affect business practices within the online travel industry. For example, France, Italy, Belgium, and Austria have passed legislation prohibiting parity contract clauses in their entirety. Also, a number of governments are investigating or conducting information-gathering exercises with respect to compliance by online travel companies ("OTCs") with consumer protection laws, including practices related to the display of search results and search ranking algorithms, claims regarding discounts, disclosure of charges and availability, and similar messaging. In December 2020, the European Commission proposed the Digital Markets Act and the Digital Services Act, which are expected to give regulators more instruments to investigate digital businesses and impose new rules on certain digital platforms if they are determined to be "gatekeepers." The proposed legislation is not final and it is not known what the laws will look like in their final forms. If regulators were to determine that we are a gatekeeper under the proposed legislation, we could be subject to additional rules and regulations not applicable to all our competitors and our business could be harmed. For more information on these matters and their potential effects on our business, see Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements and Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "Our business is subject to various competition, consumer protection, and online commerce laws, rules, and regulations around the world, and as the size of our business grows, scrutiny of our business by legislators and regulators in these areas may intensify." In general, increased regulatory focus on online businesses, including online travel businesses like ours, could result in increased compliance costs or otherwise adversely affect our business.
Our businesses outside of the U.S. represent a substantial majority of our financial results, but because we report our results in U.S. Dollars, we face exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates as the financial results and the financial condition of our businesses outside of the U.S. are translated from local currency (principally Euros and British Pounds Sterling) into U.S. Dollars. As a result, both the absolute amounts of and percentage changes in our foreign-currency-denominated net assets, gross bookings, revenues, operating expenses, and net income as expressed in U.S. Dollars are affected by foreign currency exchange rate changes. For example, total revenues from our businesses outside of the U.S. increased by 58% in 2021 as compared to 2020, but without the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, increased year-over-year on a constant-currency basis by approximately 57%. Since our expenses are generally denominated in foreign currencies on a basis similar to our revenues, our operating margins have not been significantly impacted by currency fluctuations. We
designate certain portions of the aggregate principal value of our Euro-denominated debt as a hedge of the foreign currency exposure of the net investment in certain Euro functional currency subsidiaries. Foreign currency transaction gains or losses on the Euro-denominated debt that is not designated as a hedging instrument for accounting purposes are recognized in "Other income (expense), net" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations (see Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements). Such foreign currency transaction gains or losses are dependent on the amount of net assets of the Euro functional currency subsidiaries, the amount of the Euro-denominated debt that is designated as a hedge, and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. For more information, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "We are exposed to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates."
We generally enter into derivative instruments to minimize the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations on our transactional balances denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. We will continue to evaluate the use of derivative instruments in the future. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to our derivative contracts.
Outlook
In December 2021, the spread of the Omicron variant and renewed travel restrictions in certain markets contributed to a 35% decline in room nights relative to December 2019. In January 2022, we saw room nights decline about 22% relative to January 2019, and in the first half of February 2022 room nights were about in line with the first half of February 2019, in each case primarily driven by improving room night trends in Europe. Given these rapid changes, particularly during the last six weeks, we cannot accurately predict the number of room nights that will be booked in the first quarter of 2022. Following from the above, for the first quarter of 2022 we currently expect:
•the change in gross bookings relative to the first quarter of 2019 will be several percentage points better than the change in room nights for the same period primarily due to an increase in accommodation ADRs;
•revenues as a percentage of gross bookings will be lower than it was in the first quarter of 2019; and
•we will have an operating profit in the first quarter of 2022.
Seasonality and Other Timing Factors
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our gross bookings were generally similar in the first three quarters of the year and higher than in the fourth quarter. We generally recognize our marketing activities as the expense is incurred, which is typically in the quarter when the gross bookings for the associated reservations are recognized. However, we would generally recognize revenue from these bookings when the travel begins (at "check-in"), and accommodation check-ins in Europe and North America are generally highest in the third quarter during those regions’ peak summer travel season and lowest in the first quarter. As a result of this timing difference between when we record marketing expense and when we generally recognize associated revenue, we typically experience our highest levels of profitability in the third quarter and our lowest level of profitability in the first quarter. In addition to the typical seasonality effects on our business, our quarterly results and quarterly year-over-year growth rates can be impacted by:
•The length of the booking window (the average time between the booking of a travel reservation and when the travel begins), which impacts the relationship between our gross bookings (recognized at the time of booking) and our revenues (recognized at the time of check-in);
•The level of acceleration or deceleration in the gross bookings growth rate. For example, our operating margins are typically negatively impacted in the near term from gross bookings and related variable marketing expense growth acceleration, as revenue growth is typically less impacted by accelerating gross bookings growth in the near term. Any such acceleration would positively impact revenue growth in subsequent periods as a portion of the revenue recognized from such gross bookings will occur in future quarters. Conversely, in periods where our gross bookings growth rate substantially decelerates, our operating margins typically benefit; and
•The date on which certain holidays (e.g., Easter and Ramadan) fall.
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted the booking window and seasonality of our business in 2020 and 2021. For example, in 2021 we saw a contraction of the booking window as an increased percentage of bookings were made for travel that was to occur close to the time of booking. It is difficult to accurately predict travel patterns given the COVID-19 pandemic, and we may not experience typical seasonality effects on our business throughout the duration of the pandemic, and potentially for some time thereafter. As the travel market recovers from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect to see periods of
gross bookings growth rate acceleration, which will likely result in periods where our operating margins are negatively impacted due to the timing difference of when marketing expense is recorded and when revenue is recognized.
Other Factors
We believe that our future success depends in large part on our ability to continue to profitably grow our brands worldwide, and, over time, to offer other travel and travel-related services. Factors beyond our control, such as terrorist attacks, extreme weather or natural disasters, travel-related health concerns including pandemics and epidemics such as COVID-19, wars and regional hostilities, travel-related accidents, or increased focus on the environmental impact of travel, can disrupt travel, limit the ability or willingness of travelers to visit certain locations, or otherwise result in declines in travel demand, negatively affecting our business and results of operations. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "The COVID-19 pandemic has materially adversely affected, and may further adversely impact, our business and financial performance." and "Declines or disruptions in the travel industry could adversely affect our business and financial performance."
The extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, cash flows and growth prospects is highly uncertain and will ultimately depend on future developments. While we have seen signs of a recovery in travel demand in most parts of the world, we continue to expect that our business will be adversely impacted by surges of COVID-19 case counts, including those driven by variants of COVID-19, as well as any government-imposed travel restrictions in reaction to COVID-19 outbreaks, which could remain a risk for an extended period of time. Over the long term, we intend to continue to invest in marketing and promotion, technology, and personnel within parameters consistent with attempts to improve long-term operating results, even if those expenditures create pressure on operating margins. In recent years, we have experienced pressure on operating margins as we invested in initiatives to drive future growth. We also intend to broaden the scope of our business, including exploring strategic alternatives such as acquisitions.
The competition for technology talent in our industry has intensified, including among established technology companies, startups, and companies transitioning to digital. The competition for talent is exacerbated by an increased willingness of certain companies to offer flexible and remote working policies, which expands the pool of candidates from which our competitors may attract talent. This could continue in the future due to an actual or perceived slower pace of recovery of the travel industry as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic than other industries and other factors beyond our control. As a result of the highly competitive labor market, our personnel expenses to attract and retain key talent are increasing, which may adversely affect our results of operations. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "We rely on the performance of highly skilled employees; and, if we are unable to retain or motivate key employees or attract, retain, and motivate well-qualified employees, our business would be harmed."
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("U.S. GAAP"). Our significant accounting policies and estimates are more fully described in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain of our accounting estimates are particularly important to our financial position and results of operations and require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. We use our judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates and we evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Estimates are based on historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observance of trends in the travel industry, and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Matters that involve significant estimates and judgments of management include the following:
Valuation of Goodwill and other Long-lived Assets
The application of the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions to determine the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Our estimates of the fair value are based upon assumptions that we believe are reasonable. When we deem appropriate, we utilize assistance from third-party valuation firms. The consideration transferred is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their respective fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of the consideration transferred over the net of the amounts allocated to the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill. Goodwill is assigned to reporting units that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination.
A substantial portion of our intangible assets and goodwill relates to the acquisitions of OpenTable, KAYAK, and Getaroom. See Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information related to the acquisition of Getaroom in December 2021.
We review long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. The assessment of possible impairment is based upon the ability to recover the carrying value of the assets from the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, before interest and taxes, of the related asset group. As of December 31, 2021, no impairment indicators were identified for our long-lived assets.
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. We test goodwill at a reporting unit level and our annual goodwill impairment tests are performed as of September 30. As of September 30, 2021, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test and concluded that there was no impairment of goodwill. No additional impairment indicators were identified as of December 31, 2021.
2020 Interim Goodwill Impairment Test
Due to the significant and negative financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic (see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements), we performed an interim period goodwill impairment test at March 31, 2020 and recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $489 million related to the OpenTable and KAYAK reporting unit for the three months ended March 31, 2020, which is not tax-deductible, resulting in an adjusted carrying value of goodwill for OpenTable and KAYAK of $1.5 billion at March 31, 2020. The goodwill impairment was primarily driven by a significant reduction in the forecasted near-term cash flows of OpenTable and KAYAK as well as the significant decline in comparable companies' market values as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The estimated fair value of OpenTable and KAYAK was determined using a combination of standard valuation techniques, including an income approach (discounted cash flows) and a market approach (applying the recent decline in enterprise values of comparable publicly-traded companies to the recently calculated fair value for OpenTable and KAYAK as well as applying comparable company multiples).
The income approach estimates fair value utilizing long-term growth rates and discount rates applied to the cash flow projections. In the cash flow projections, we assumed at the time that OpenTable and KAYAK would experience a significant decline in near-term cash flows with a recovery to 2019 levels of financial performance (including profitability) occurring in 2023. The shape and timing of the recovery was a key assumption in our fair value calculation (both in the income and market approaches).
2020 Annual Goodwill Impairment Test
As of September 30, 2020, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test and recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $573 million for the OpenTable and KAYAK reporting unit for the three months ended September 30, 2020, which is not tax-deductible, resulting in an adjusted carrying value of goodwill for OpenTable and KAYAK of $1.0 billion at September 30, 2020. The goodwill impairment was primarily driven by a significant reduction in the forecasted cash flows of OpenTable and KAYAK, reflecting a longer assumed recovery period to 2019 levels of profitability, mainly due to the continued material adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including its impact on the flight vertical at KAYAK, and the lowered outlook for monetization opportunities in restaurant reservation services.
The estimated fair value of OpenTable and KAYAK was determined using a combination of standard valuation techniques, including an income approach (discounted cash flows) and a market approach (applying comparable company multiples).
The income approach estimates fair value utilizing long-term growth rates and discount rates applied to the cash flow projections. The income approach, applied as of September 30, 2020, reflected a reduction in the forecasted cash flows of OpenTable and KAYAK and a longer assumed recovery period to 2019 levels of profitability, driven primarily by a lowered outlook for monetization opportunities in restaurant reservation services and slower than previously expected recovery trends for airline travel, which is a key vertical for KAYAK. For the interim goodwill impairment test at March 31, 2020, we expected a recovery to 2019 levels of financial performance occurring in 2023 for OpenTable and KAYAK. Based on our evaluation of all relevant information available as of September 30, 2020 for the annual goodwill impairment test, we expected at the time that OpenTable and KAYAK would not return to the 2019 level of profitability within five years from that date, and that it was uncertain whether the shape of the recovery would ultimately match our expectations. An increase or decrease of one
percentage point to the profitability growth rates used in the cash flow projections would have resulted in an increase or decrease of approximately $100 million to the estimated fair value of OpenTable and KAYAK as of September 30, 2020. The discount rate is determined based on the reporting unit’s estimated weighted-average cost of capital and adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in its cash flows, which requires significant judgments. The discount rate used for the annual goodwill impairment test as of September 30, 2020 was higher than the discount rate used for the interim goodwill impairment test as of March 31, 2020. If the discount rate used in the income approach increases or decreases by 0.5%, the impact to the estimated fair value of OpenTable and KAYAK, at September 30, 2020, would have ranged from a decrease of approximately $65 million to an increase of approximately $70 million.
The estimation of fair values of our reporting units reflect numerous assumptions that are subject to various risks and uncertainties, including key assumptions regarding each reporting unit’s expected growth rates and operating margin, expected length and severity of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, the shape and timing of the subsequent recovery and the competitive environment, as well as other key assumptions with respect to matters outside of our control, such as discount rates and market comparables. It requires significant judgments and estimates and actual results could be materially different than the judgments and estimates used to estimate fair value. Future events and changing market conditions may lead us to re-evaluate the assumptions used to estimate the fair values of our reporting units, particularly the assumptions related to the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and the shape and timing of the subsequent recovery, which may result in a need to recognize additional goodwill impairment charges that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
Valuation of Investments in Private Companies
See Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to the investments in private companies. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on fair value measurements, including the three levels of inputs to measure fair value. When inputs that are observable, either directly or indirectly (observable market data), is available at the measurement date and is not significantly adjusted using unobservable inputs, the observable inputs would be classified as Level 2 inputs. When little or no market data is available, the fair value of these investments are measured using unobservable inputs ("Level 3 inputs").
As of December 31, 2020, our investments measured using Level 3 inputs primarily consisted of preferred stock investments in privately-held companies that were classified as either debt securities or equity securities without readily determinable fair values. Fair values of privately held securities are estimated using a variety of valuation methodologies, including both market and income approaches. We have used valuation techniques appropriate for the type of investment and the information available about the investee as of the valuation date to determine fair value. Recent financing transactions in the investee, such as new investments in preferred stock, are generally considered the best indication of the enterprise value and therefore used as a basis to estimate fair value. However, based on a number of factors, such as the proximity in timing to the valuation date or the volume or other terms of these financing transactions, we may also use other valuation techniques to supplement this data, including the income approach. In addition, an option-pricing model ("OPM") is utilized to allocate value to the various classes of securities of the investee, including the class owned by us. The model includes assumptions around the investees’ expected time to liquidity and volatility.
Our investment in preferred shares of Grab Holdings Inc., which was classified as debt securities for accounting purposes at December 31, 2020, had an aggregate estimated fair value of $200 million at December 31, 2020. We measured this investment using Level 3 inputs and management's estimates that incorporated the current market participant expectations of future cash flows considered alongside recent financing transactions of the investee and other relevant information. In December 2021, pursuant to a business combination transaction involving Grab Holdings Inc., Grab Holdings Limited (“Grab”) and Altimeter Growth Corp. (the "Grab Transaction"), the preferred shares were converted to Class A ordinary shares of Grab and such ordinary shares began publicly trading on the NASDAQ Stock Market. As a result, the Company's investment was classified as equity securities with readily determinable fair values (see Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements). At December 31, 2021, the investment had a fair value of $301 million.
For our investment in the equity securities of DiDi Global Inc. ("DiDi"), considering the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic (see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements), we performed an impairment analysis as of March 31, 2020 that resulted in an adjusted carrying value of $400 million at each of March 31, 2020 and December 31, 2020. As a result of DiDi's initial public offering in June 2021, we reclassified our DiDi investment as equity securities with readily determinable fair values. At December 31, 2021, the investment had a fair value of $195 million.
We had $51 million invested in Yanolja Co., Ltd. ("Yanolja") at December 31, 2021 and 2020. In July 2021, Yanolja announced a new round of funding into the company. The new round of funding and certain other transactions in the equity securities of Yanolja were completed in October 2021. As a result of these observable transactions, we recorded an unrealized
gain of $255 million in "Other income (expense), net" in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 that resulted in an adjusted carrying value of $306 million at December 31, 2021 (see Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
The determination of the fair values of investments in private companies, where we are a minority shareholder and have access to limited information from the investee, reflects numerous assumptions that are subject to various risks and uncertainties, including key assumptions regarding the investee’s expected growth rates and operating margin, expected length and severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the investee and the shape and timing of the subsequent recovery, as well as other key assumptions with respect to matters outside of our control, such as discount rates and market comparables. It requires significant judgments and estimates and actual results could be materially different than those judgments and estimates utilized in the fair value estimate. Future events and changing market conditions may lead us to re-evaluate the assumptions reflected in our valuation, particularly the assumptions related to the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and the shape and timing of the recovery and the overall impact on the investee’s business, which may result in a need to recognize an additional impairment charge that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
Income Taxes
We determine our tax expense based on our income and statutory tax rates applicable in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Due to the complex nature of tax legislation and frequent changes with such associated legislation, significant judgment is required in computing our tax expense and determining our tax positions. The U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the "Tax Act") enacted in December 2017 made significant changes to U.S. federal tax law, including a one-time deemed repatriation tax imposed on accumulated unremitted international earnings, to be paid over eight years. We do not intend to indefinitely reinvest our international earnings that were subject to U.S. taxation pursuant to the mandatory deemed repatriation or subject to U.S. taxation as global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI").
We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability considering historical profitability, projected future taxable income, the expected timing of the reversals of temporary differences, and tax planning strategies and record valuation allowances as required.
We are subject to ongoing tax examinations and assessments in various jurisdictions. We have been audited in many jurisdictions and from time to time face challenges regarding the amount of taxes due. These challenges include questions regarding the timing and amount of deductions that we have taken on our tax returns. Although we believe that our tax filing positions are reasonable and comply with applicable law, we regularly review our tax filing positions, especially in light of tax law or business practice changes, and we may change our positions or determine that previous positions should be amended, either of which could result in additional tax liabilities. The final determination of tax audits or tax disputes may be different from what is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals.
The evaluation of tax positions and recognition of income tax benefits require significant judgement and we consult with external tax and legal counsel as appropriate. We consider the technical merits of our tax positions along with the applicable tax statutes, related interpretations and precedents, and our expectation of the outcome of proceedings (or negotiations) with tax authorities. We recognize liabilities when we believe that uncertain positions may not be fully sustained upon audit by the tax authorities, including any related appeals or litigation processes. Liabilities recognized for uncertain tax positions are based on a two-step approach for recognition and measurement. First, we evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained based on its technical merits. Second, we measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Interest and penalties attributable to uncertain tax positions, if any, are recognized as a component of income tax expense. The tax benefits ultimately realized by us may be different than what is recorded in the financial statements due to future events such as our settling the matter with the tax authorities and our success in sustaining our tax positions.
See Notes 15 and 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Contingencies
Loss contingencies (other than income tax-related contingencies disclosed above) arise from actual or possible claims and assessments and pending or threatened litigation that may be brought against us by individuals, governments, or other entities. Based on our assessment of loss contingencies at each balance sheet date, a loss is recorded in the financial statements if it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. If the amount of the loss cannot be reasonably estimated, we disclose information about the contingency in the financial statements. We also disclose information in our financial statements about reasonably possible loss contingencies.
The determination of whether a loss is probable and whether the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated requires significant judgment and evaluation of all the underlying facts and circumstances, including judgments about the potential actions of third-party claimants, regulatory authorities, and courts. Claims, assessments, and litigations involve significant uncertainties such as the complexity of the facts, the legal theories involved, the nature of the claims, the judgment of the courts, the applicable methodology for determining potential damages, and, in the case of class actions, whether a class action can be certified and the extent to which members of a class would or would not file a claim.
On a quarterly basis, we update our analysis and estimates considering all available information, including the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, and advice of legal counsel. Changes in our assessment of whether a loss is probable, our estimate of the loss, or our determination of whether the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position. Changes in our assumptions regarding a particular matter or the effectiveness of our strategies related to legal and other proceedings could also have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position. For all loss contingencies, until a matter is finally resolved, there may be an exposure to loss in excess of the liability accrued for the matter and such amounts could be material.
See Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements - See Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for details, which is incorporated into this Item 7 by reference thereto.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
We evaluate certain operating and financial measures on both an as-reported and constant-currency basis. We calculate constant currency by converting our current-year period operating and financial results for transactions recorded in currencies other than U.S. Dollars using the corresponding prior-year period monthly average exchange rates rather than the current-year period monthly average exchange rates.
Operating and Statistical Metrics
Our financial results are driven by certain operating metrics that encompass the booking and other business activity generated by our travel and travel-related services. Specifically, reservations of room nights, rental car days, and airline tickets capture the volume of units booked through our OTC brands by our travel reservation services customers. Gross bookings is an operating and statistical metric that captures the total dollar value, generally inclusive of taxes and fees, of all travel services booked through our OTC brands by our customers, net of cancellations, and is widely used in the travel business. Our non-OTC brands (KAYAK and OpenTable) have different business metrics from those of our OTC brands, so search queries through KAYAK and restaurant reservations through OpenTable do not contribute to our gross bookings.
Room nights, rental car days, and airline tickets reserved through our services for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Room nights, rental car days, and airline tickets reserved through our services increased significantly in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to the significant improvement in travel demand trends since the second quarter of 2020, which was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The year-over-year increase in airline tickets in 2021 was also driven by strong execution and growth at Priceline, which operates primarily in the U.S. domestic travel market, a market that has recovered significantly faster than the global travel market from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and to a lesser extent by strong growth at Booking.com, which had a relatively small amount of airline tickets booked in 2020.
Gross bookings resulting from reservations of room nights, rental car days, and airline tickets made through our agency and merchant categories for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (numbers may not total due to rounding):
Agency gross bookings are derived from travel-related transactions where we do not facilitate payments from travelers for the services provided, while merchant gross bookings are derived from services where we facilitate payments. Agency and merchant gross bookings increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to the significant improvement in travel demand trends since the second quarter of 2020, which was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Merchant gross bookings increased more than agency gross bookings in 2021 compared to 2020 due to the expansion of merchant accommodation reservation services at Booking.com.
Gross bookings increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to the increase in room nights, accommodation ADRs of approximately 25%, on a constant-currency basis, and the positive impact of foreign exchange rate fluctuations. Gross
bookings resulting from reservations of rental car days and airline tickets also increased due to higher unit growth for both services.
Revenues
Online travel reservation services
Substantially all of our revenues are generated by providing online travel reservation services, which facilitate online travel purchases between travel service providers and travelers.
Revenues from online travel reservation services are classified into two categories:
•Agency. Agency revenues are derived from travel-related transactions where we do not facilitate payments from travelers for the services provided. Agency revenues consist almost entirely of travel reservation commissions from our accommodation, rental car, and airline reservation services. Substantially all of our agency revenue is from Booking.com agency accommodation reservations.
•Merchant. Merchant revenues are derived from travel-related transactions where we facilitate payments from travelers for the services provided, generally at the time of booking. Merchant revenues are derived from transactions where travelers book accommodation, rental car, and airline reservations. Merchant revenues include:
◦travel reservation commissions and transaction net revenues (i.e., the amount charged to travelers less the amount owed to travel service providers) in connection with our merchant reservation services;
◦credit card processing rebates and customer processing fees; and
◦ancillary fees, including travel-related insurance revenues.
Advertising and other revenues
Advertising and other revenues are derived primarily from:
•revenues earned by KAYAK for (a) sending referrals to OTCs and travel service providers and (b) advertising placements on its platforms; and
•revenues earned by OpenTable for (a) restaurant reservation services (fees paid by restaurants for diners seated through OpenTable's online reservation service) and (b) subscription fees for restaurant management services.
Agency and merchant revenues increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to the significant improvement in travel demand trends since the second quarter of 2020, which was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Merchant revenues in 2021 increased more year-over-year than agency revenues due to the expansion of merchant accommodation reservation services at Booking.com.
Advertising and other revenues increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to the significant improvement in travel and restaurant demand trends since the second quarter of 2020, which was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, since the second quarter of 2021 our advertising and other revenues benefited from fees payable by restaurants for diners seated through OpenTable's online reservation service and subscription fees for restaurant management services, as the program that waived those fees ended in March 2021.
Total revenues as a percentage of gross bookings was 14.3% in 2021 compared to 19.2% in 2020. In 2021, revenues as a percentage of gross bookings was negatively impacted by the timing of booking versus travel as a lower amount of gross bookings made in 2020 were related to travel in 2021 than gross bookings made in 2021 related to expected travel in 2022, which is when we expect to recognize the associated revenue. In addition, in 2020, revenues as a percentage of gross bookings was positively impacted by timing of booking versus travel as revenue benefited from travel earlier in the year before the COVID-19 pandemic, while gross bookings were more negatively impacted by a significant increase in cancellations in March and April 2020.
Our businesses outside of the U.S. accounted for approximately $9.5 billion of our total revenues in 2021, a 58% increase compared to 2020. Total revenues attributable to our U.S. businesses increased 83% in 2021 compared to 2020. Revenues attributable to our U.S. businesses in 2021 increased more year-over-year than our businesses outside of the U.S. due mainly to growth at Priceline, which operates primarily in the U.S. domestic travel market, a market that has recovered significantly faster than the global travel market from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Marketing expenses
Marketing expenses consist primarily of the costs of:
•search engine keyword purchases;
•referrals from meta-search and travel research websites;
•affiliate programs;
•offline and online brand marketing; and
•other performance-based marketing and incentives.
We adjust our marketing spend based on our growth and profitability objectives, as well as the travel demand and expected ROIs in our marketing channels. We rely on our marketing channels to generate a significant amount of traffic to our websites. In 2021, our marketing expense, which is substantially variable in nature, increased significantly compared to 2020, due primarily to the improvement in travel demand trends since the second quarter of 2020, which was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Marketing expenses as a percentage of total gross bookings decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to year-over-year increases in performance marketing ROIs and favorable changes in the share of traffic by channel in 2021.
Sales and Other Expenses
Sales and other expenses consist primarily of:
•credit card and other payment processing fees associated with merchant transactions;
•fees paid to third parties that provide call center, website content translations, and other services;
•chargeback provisions and fraud prevention expenses associated with merchant transactions;
•customer relations costs; and
•provisions for expected credit losses, primarily related to accommodation commission receivables and prepayments to certain customers.
In 2021, sales and other expenses, which are substantially variable in nature, increased compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in merchant transaction costs of $215 million and an increase in outsourced call center costs of $100 million. Merchant transactions increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to the significant improvement in travel demand trends since the second quarter of 2020 and the expansion of merchant accommodation reservation services at Booking.com. The increase in merchant transaction and outsourced call center costs were partially offset by a decrease in expected credit loss expenses of $176 million in 2021 as we substantially increased our provision for expected credit losses in the first quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Personnel
Personnel expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries;
•stock-based compensation;
•bonuses;
•payroll taxes; and
•employee health and other benefits.
Personnel expenses excluding stock-based compensation expense increased 14% in 2021 compared to 2020 due to $136 million of expense in 2021 for the return of government assistance received through various government aid programs, a $126 million benefit from government grants and other assistance recognized in 2020, and a $124 million higher bonus expense accrual, partially offset by $127 million lower salary expenses.
Certain governments passed legislation to help businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic through loans, wage subsidies, tax relief, or other financial aid. We participated in several of these programs, including the Netherlands' wage subsidy program and the United Kingdom's job retention scheme. In 2021, we voluntarily returned assistance received through various government aid programs and we recorded the $136 million in expense mentioned above to reflect the return of such assistance.
In response to the reduction in our business volumes as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, during 2020 we took actions at all of our brands to reduce the size of our workforce to optimize efficiency and reduce costs, which resulted in annualized personnel cost savings relative to our personnel expense run rate at the end of the first quarter of 2020 of approximately $370 million. Headcount was flat year-over-year at 20,300 as of December 31, 2021, but given the timing of our restructuring actions in the second half of 2020, the average headcount for 2021 decreased about 20% compared to 2020.
Stock-based compensation expense was $370 million in 2021 compared to $233 million in 2020. The increase in stock-based compensation expense in 2021 was impacted by a reduction in stock-based compensation expense of $73 million recorded in the first quarter of 2020 as a result of reduced financial performance driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the modification of certain awards during the first quarter of 2021.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of:
•occupancy and office expenses;
•fees for outside professionals;
•indirect taxes such as travel transaction taxes and digital services taxes; and
•personnel-related expenses such as travel, relocation, recruiting, and training expenses.
General and administrative expenses increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to higher fees for professional services, as well as higher indirect taxes driven by the improvement in revenue. These year-over-year increases were partially offset by the comparison to a higher level of personnel-related expenses, such as travel and entertainment costs, and occupancy and office expenses in the first quarter of 2020, prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Information Technology
Information technology expenses consist primarily of:
•software license and system maintenance fees;
•outsourced data center and cloud computing costs;
•payments to contractors; and
•data communications and other expenses associated with operating our services.
Information technology expenses increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to increased payments to contractors and software license fees, some of which relate to cybersecurity and data privacy.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses consist of:
•amortization of intangible assets with determinable lives;
•amortization of internally-developed and purchased software;
•depreciation of computer equipment; and
•depreciation of leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures, and office equipment.
Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to decreased depreciation of computer equipment, partially offset by increased internally-developed software amortization expense.
Restructuring and Other Exit Costs
Restructuring and other exit costs principally relate to the restructuring charges as a result of restructuring actions taken in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Restructuring and other exit costs decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 as these restructuring activities substantially concluded as of December 31, 2020. These restructuring
charges are primarily related to employee severance and other termination benefits at Booking.com (see Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Impairment of Goodwill
During 2020, we recorded goodwill impairment charges related to OpenTable and KAYAK, which are not tax-deductible, of $1.1 billion (see Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements and Critical Accounting Estimates included in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations).
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the issuance of senior notes with lower interest rates in March 2021 and the redemption of senior notes with higher interest rates in April 2021, the maturity in June 2020 and September 2021 of our convertible senior notes, partially offset by higher interest expenses associated with our outstanding senior notes and convertible senior note issued in April 2020.
Other income (expense), net
The following table sets forth the breakdown of "Other income (expense), net" for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Interest and dividend income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to lower yields as well as the change in the mix of investments with increased usage of investments classified as cash equivalents.
Net losses on equity securities for the year ended December 31, 2021 are primarily related to the losses on our equity investments in Meituan and DiDi, partially offset by gains on our equity investments in Grab and Yanolja. Net gains on equity
securities for the year ended December 31, 2020 are principally related to the gains on our equity investment in Meituan (see Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information).
Impairment of investment for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to our investment in DiDi (see Notes 5 and 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements and Critical Accounting Estimates included in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for additional information).
Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) include gains of $135 million and losses of $200 million related to our Euro-denominated debt and accrued interest that were not designated as net investment hedges and foreign currency losses on derivative contracts of $30 million and $31 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt is related to the redemption of our Senior Notes due April 2025 (the "April 2025 Notes") and our Senior Notes due April 2027 (the "April 2027 Notes") in April 2021 (see Note 12 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements).
Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 include losses on reverse treasury lock agreements
which were designated as cash flow hedges (see Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
Income Taxes
Our 2021 effective tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21%, primarily due to the benefit of the Netherlands Innovation Box Tax (discussed below), partially offset by higher international tax rates and an increase in unrecognized tax benefits. Our 2020 effective tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21%, primarily due to the non-deductible goodwill impairment charges related to OpenTable and KAYAK, U.S. federal tax associated with our international earnings, and an increase in unrecognized tax benefits, partially offset by the benefit of the Netherlands Innovation Box Tax.
Our effective tax rate was lower for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the non-deductible goodwill impairment charges related to OpenTable and KAYAK that were recorded in December 31, 2020, lower U.S. federal and state tax associated with our international earnings and lower unrecognized tax benefits.
Under Dutch corporate income tax law, income generated from qualifying innovative activities is taxed at a rate of 9% ("Innovation Box Tax") for periods beginning on or after January 1, 2021, rather than the Dutch statutory rate of 25%. Previously, the Innovation Box Tax rate was 7%. Effective January 1, 2022, the Netherlands corporate income tax rate increased from 25% to 25.8%. A portion of Booking.com's earnings during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 qualified for Innovation Box Tax treatment, which had a significant beneficial impact on our effective tax rates for these periods. While we expect Booking.com to continue to qualify for Innovation Box Tax treatment with respect to a portion of its earnings for the foreseeable future, the loss of the Innovation Box Tax benefit could substantially increase our effective tax rate and adversely impact our results of operations and cash flows in future periods. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "We may not be able to maintain our 'Innovation Box Tax' benefit."
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting economic conditions and government restrictions resulted in a material decrease in consumer spending and a significant decline in travel and restaurant activities and consumer demand for related services as compared to 2019 levels. Our financial results and prospects are almost entirely dependent on the sale of travel-related services.
The extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, cash flows, and growth prospects is highly uncertain and will ultimately depend on future developments. These include, but are not limited to, the severity, extent and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, including as a result of any new variants of COVID-19 and any resurgences of the pandemic, and the availability and efficacy of vaccines and other medical interventions to prevent or alleviate COVID-19 and their impacts on the travel and restaurant industries and consumer spending more broadly. Even though we have seen some improvements in the economic and operating conditions for our business since the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot predict the long-term effects of the pandemic on our business or the travel and restaurant industries as a whole.
Our continued access to sources of liquidity depends on multiple factors, including global economic conditions, the condition of global financial markets, the availability of sufficient amounts of financing, our ability to meet debt covenant requirements, our operating performance, and our credit ratings. If our credit ratings were to be downgraded, or financing sources were to ascribe higher risk to our rating levels or our industry, our access to capital and the cost of any financing would be negatively impacted. There is no guarantee that additional debt financing will be available in the future to fund our obligations, or that it will be available on commercially reasonable terms, in which case we may need to seek other sources of funding. In addition, the terms of future debt agreements could include more restrictive covenants than those we are currently subject to, which could restrict our business operations. For more information, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "Our liquidity, credit ratings, and ongoing access to capital could be materially and negatively affected by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic."
At December 31, 2021, we had $14.3 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term and long-term investments, of which approximately $7.4 billion is held by our international subsidiaries. Cash, cash equivalents, and long-term investments held by our international subsidiaries are denominated primarily in U.S. Dollars, Hong Kong Dollars, and Euros. Cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments are principally comprised of money market funds, time deposits and certificates of deposit, convertible debt securities of Trip.com Group, equity securities of Meituan, Grab, and DiDi, and our investments in private companies (see Notes 5 and 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). In December 2021, we redeemed our December 2015 investment of $500 million in Trip.com Group's convertible senior notes (see Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
At December 31, 2021, we had a remaining transition tax liability of $912 million as a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the "Tax Act"), which included $825 million reported as "Long-term U.S. transition tax liability" and $87 million included in "Accrued expenses and other current liabilities" in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. This liability will be paid over the next five years. In accordance with the Tax Act, generally, future repatriation of our international cash will not be subject to a U.S. federal income tax liability as a dividend, but will be subject to U.S. state income taxes and international withholding taxes, which have been accrued by us.
In August 2019, we entered into a $2.0 billion five-year unsecured revolving credit facility with a group of lenders. The revolving credit facility provides for the issuance of up to $80 million of letters of credit as well as borrowings of up to $100 million on same-day notice, referred to as swingline loans. The proceeds of loans made under the facility can be used for working capital and general corporate purposes, including acquisitions, share repurchases, and debt repayments. At December 31, 2021, there were no borrowings outstanding and $4 million of letters of credit issued under the facility. The revolving credit facility contains a maximum leverage ratio covenant, compliance with which is a condition to our ability to borrow thereunder. In 2020, we amended the revolving credit facility to (i) suspend the maximum leverage ratio covenant through and including the three months ending March 31, 2022, which was replaced with a $4.5 billion minimum liquidity covenant based on unrestricted cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, and unused capacity under this revolving credit facility and (ii) increase the permitted maximum leverage ratio from and including the three months ending June 30, 2022 through and including the three months ending March 31, 2023. We agreed not to declare or make any cash distribution and not to repurchase any of our shares (with certain exceptions including in connection with tax withholding related to shares issued to employees) unless (i) prior to the delivery of financial statements for the three months ending June 30, 2022, we have at least $6.0 billion of liquidity on a pro forma basis, based on unrestricted cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, and unused capacity under this revolving credit facility and (ii) after the delivery of financial statements for the three months ending June 30, 2022, we are in compliance on a pro forma basis with the maximum leverage ratio covenant then in effect. Such restriction
ends upon delivery of financial statements required for the three months ending June 30, 2023, or we have the ability to terminate this restriction earlier if we demonstrate compliance with the original maximum leverage ratio covenant in the revolving credit facility. Beginning with the three months ending June 30, 2022, the minimum liquidity covenant will cease to apply and the maximum leverage ratio covenant, as increased, will again be in effect. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the minimum liquidity covenant. There can be no assurance that we will be able to meet either the minimum liquidity covenant or the maximum leverage ratio covenant, as applicable, at any particular time, and our ability to borrow under the revolving credit facility depends on compliance with the applicable covenant. Further, the lenders have the right to require repayment of any amounts borrowed under the facility if we are not in compliance with the applicable covenant (see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
In September 2021, in connection with the maturity of our Convertible Senior Notes due September 2021, we paid $1.0 billion to satisfy the aggregate principal amount due and an additional $86 million conversion premium in excess of the principal amount.
In March 2021, we issued Senior Notes due March 2025 with an interest rate of 0.1% for an aggregate principal amount of 950 million Euros and Senior Notes due March 2028 with an interest rate of 0.5% for an aggregate principal amount of 750 million Euros. The proceeds from the issuance of these Senior Notes issued in March 2021 were used to redeem the April 2025 Notes and the April 2027 Notes. In April 2021, we paid $2.0 billion to redeem the April 2025 Notes and the April 2027 Notes.
At December 31, 2021, we had outstanding senior notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of $11.1 billion, with $2.0 billion payable within the next twelve months. The senior notes had a cumulative interest to maturity of $1.2 billion, with $233 million payable within the next twelve months. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to our debt arrangements, including principal amounts, interest rates, and maturity dates.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased 71,494 shares of our common stock for an aggregate cost of $162 million to satisfy employee withholding tax obligations related to stock-based compensation. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a remaining aggregate amount of $10.4 billion authorized by our Board of Directors to repurchase our common stock. We resumed repurchases in early 2022 under this authorization and, as of February 22, 2022, have repurchased approximately $500 million of our common stock in the first quarter of 2022. We expect to complete repurchases under the remaining authorization within the next three years assuming the travel recovery continues and we are able to meet our minimum liquidity covenant under the revolving credit facility. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the impact of the 2020 credit facility amendment on our ability to repurchase shares.
In November 2021, we entered into an agreement to acquire global flight booking provider, Etraveli Group, for approximately 1.6 billion Euros ($1.9 billion). Completion of this acquisition is subject to certain closing conditions, including regulatory approvals.
In December 2021, we paid $1.2 billion, net of cash acquired, to acquire Getaroom, a business-to-business distributor of hotel rooms.
In September 2016, we signed a turnkey agreement to construct an office building for Booking.com’s future headquarters in the Netherlands for 270 million Euros ($307 million). Upon signing this agreement, we paid 43 million Euros ($48 million) for the acquired land-use rights. In addition, since signing the turnkey agreement we have made several progress payments principally related to the construction of the building. As of December 31, 2021, we had a remaining obligation of 15 million Euros ($17 million) related to the turnkey agreement, which will be paid through 2022, when we anticipate construction will be complete. In addition to the turnkey agreement, we have a remaining obligation at December 31, 2021 to pay 68 million Euros ($77 million) over the remaining initial term of the acquired land lease, which expires in 2065. We have made and will continue to make additional capital expenditures to fit out and furnish the office space. At December 31, 2021, we had 20 million Euros ($23 million) of outstanding commitments to vendors to fit out and furnish the office space. See Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to our commitments and contingencies.
At December 31, 2021, we had lease obligations of $561 million, with $155 million payable within the next twelve months. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our obligation related to operating leases.
At December 31, 2021, we had, in the aggregate, $154 million of non-cancellable purchase obligations individually greater than $10 million payable over the next five years, of which $41 million are payable within the next twelve months. The purchase obligations are primarily related to sponsorship and cloud hosting arrangements. The purchase obligations disclosed
here are those related to agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable and legally binding, that specify all significant terms, including the quantities to be purchased, price provisions, and the approximate timing of the transaction.
At December 31, 2021, there were standby letters of credit and bank guarantees of $511 million issued on our behalf. These are obtained primarily for regulatory purposes and payment guarantees to third-party payment processors.
Marketing expenses and personnel expenses are the most significant operating expenses for our business. We rely on marketing channels to generate a significant amount of traffic to our websites. We have established widely used and recognized e-commerce brands through marketing and promotional campaigns. See our Consolidated Statements of Operations and "Trends" and "Results of Operations" within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for additional information on marketing expenses and personnel expenses including stock-based compensation expenses.
We believe that our existing cash balances and liquid resources will be sufficient to fund our operating activities, capital expenditures, and other obligations through at least the next twelve months. However, if we are not successful in generating sufficient cash flow from operations or in raising additional capital when required in sufficient amounts and on terms acceptable to us, we may be required to reduce our planned capital expenditures and scale back the scope of our business plans, either of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, our ability to compete or our future growth prospects, financial condition, and results of operations. If additional funds were raised through the issuance of equity securities, the percentage ownership of our then current stockholders would be diluted. We may not generate sufficient cash flow from operations in the future, revenue growth or sustained profitability may not be realized, and future borrowings or equity sales may not be available in amounts sufficient to make anticipated capital expenditures, finance our strategies, or repay our indebtedness.
Cash Flow Analysis
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.8 billion, resulting from net income of $1.2 billion and a favorable impact from adjustments for non-cash items of $1.4 billion, and a favorable net change in working capital and other long-term assets and liabilities of $269 million. Non-cash items were principally associated with net losses on equity securities, deferred income tax benefit, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense and other stock-based payments, loss on early extinguishment of debt, and operating lease amortization. For the year ended December 31, 2021, accounts receivable increased by $1.0 billion and deferred merchant bookings and other current liabilities increased by $1.5 billion, primarily due to increases in business volumes.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $85 million, resulting from net income of $59 million and a favorable impact from adjustments for non-cash items of $1.0 billion, partially offset by an unfavorable net change in working capital and long-term assets and liabilities of $1.0 billion. Non-cash items were principally associated with net gains on marketable equity securities, impairment of goodwill, depreciation and amortization, provision for expected credit losses and chargebacks, stock-based compensation expense and other stock-based payments, deferred income tax expense, and unrealized foreign currency transaction losses related to Euro-denominated debt. For the year ended December 31, 2020, prepaid expenses and other current assets decreased by $161 million, primarily due to a refund for overpayment from a vendor and lower prepayment to third-party payment processors due to decreases in business volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. For the year ended December 31, 2020, accounts receivable decreased by $891 million and deferred merchant bookings and other current liabilities decreased by $2.3 billion primarily due to decreases in business volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.0 billion, resulting from the acquisition of Getaroom of $1.2 billion, proceeds from sales and maturities of investments of $508 million, net of purchases of $17 million, and purchase of property and equipment of $304 million. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.6 billion, resulting from the proceeds from sales and maturities of investments of $3.0 billion, net of purchases of $74 million, and the purchase of property and equipment of $286 million. Cash invested in the purchase of property and equipment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 includes payments of $52 million related to the turnkey agreement for constructing Booking.com's future headquarters.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.2 billion, almost entirely resulting from payments for redemption and conversion of debt of $3.1 billion and payments for the repurchase of common stock of $163 million, partially offset by the proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $2.0 billion. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.5 billion, almost entirely resulting from the proceeds from the
issuance of long-term debt of $4.1 billion, partially offset by payments for the repurchase of common stock of $1.3 billion and payments for the conversion of convertible notes of $1.2 billion.
For a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources as of and our cash flow activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, see Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Contingencies
French tax authorities conducted audits of Booking.com for the years 2003 through 2012, 2013 through 2015, and 2016 through 2018. In December 2015, the French tax authorities issued Booking.com assessments for unpaid income and value added taxes ("VAT") related to tax years 2006 through 2012 for approximately 356 million Euros ($403 million), the majority of which represents penalties and interest. The assessments assert that Booking.com had a permanent establishment in France. In December 2019, the French tax authorities issued an additional assessment of 70 million Euros ($80 million), including interest and penalties, for the 2013 year asserting that Booking.com had taxable income attributable to a permanent establishment in France. The French tax authorities also have issued assessments totaling 39 million Euros ($45 million), including interest and penalties, for certain tax years between 2011 and 2015 on Booking.com's French subsidiary asserting that the subsidiary did not receive sufficient compensation for the services it rendered to Booking.com in the Netherlands. In December 2021, the French tax authorities issued assessments on Booking.com’s French subsidiary totaling 78 million Euros ($88 million), including interest and penalties, for the tax years 2016 through 2018 again asserting that the subsidiary did not receive sufficient compensation for the services it rendered to Booking.com. As a result of a formal demand from the French tax authorities for payment of the amounts assessed against Booking.com for the years 2006 through 2012, in January 2019, we paid the assessments of approximately 356 million Euros ($403 million) in order to preserve our right to contest those assessments in court. The payment, which is included in "Other assets, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2021 and 2020, does not constitute an admission that we owe the taxes and will be refunded (with interest) to us to the extent we prevail. In December 2019 and October 2020, we initiated court proceedings with respect to certain of the assessments. Although we believe that Booking.com has been, and continues to be, in compliance with French tax law, and we are contesting the assessments, during the three months ended September 30, 2020, we contacted the French tax authorities regarding the potential to achieve resolution of the matter through a settlement. After assessing several potential outcomes and potential settlement amounts and terms, an unrecognized tax benefit in the amount of 50 million Euros ($59 million) was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, of which the majority was included as a partial reduction to the tax payment recorded in "Other assets, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2021 and 2020. In December 2020, the French Administrative Court (Conseil d’Etat) delivered a decision in the "ValueClick" case that could have an impact on the outcome in our case. After considering the potential adverse impact of the new decision on the potential outcomes for the Booking.com assessments, we currently estimate that the reasonably possible loss related to VAT is approximately 20 million Euros ($22 million). For additional information related to the French and other tax assessments, see Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements and Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - "We may have exposure to additional tax liabilities."
Beginning in 2014, Booking.com received several letters from the Netherlands Pension Fund for the Travel Industry (Reiswerk) ("BPF") claiming that Booking.com is required to participate in the mandatory pension scheme of the BPF with retroactive effect to 1999, which has a higher contribution rate than the pension scheme in which Booking.com is currently participating. BPF instituted legal proceedings against Booking.com and in 2016 the District Court of Amsterdam rejected all of BPF’s claims. BPF appealed the decision to the Court of Appeal, and, in May 2019, the Court of Appeal also rejected all of BPF’s claims, in each case by ruling that Booking.com does not meet the definition of a travel intermediary for purposes of the mandatory pension scheme. BPF then appealed to the Netherlands Supreme Court. In April 2021, the Supreme Court overturned the previous decision of the Court of Appeal and held that Booking.com meets the definition of a travel intermediary for the purposes of the mandatory pension scheme. The Supreme Court ruled only on the qualification of Booking.com as a travel intermediary for the purposes of the mandatory pension scheme, and did not rule on the various other defenses we brought forward against BPF's claims. The Supreme Court referred the matter to another Court of Appeal that will have to assess the other defenses we brought forward if BPF were to proceed with the litigation. We intend to pursue a number of defenses in any subsequent proceedings and may ultimately prevail in whole or in part. While we continue to believe that Booking.com is in compliance with its pension obligations and that the Court of Appeal could ultimately rule in favor of Booking.com, given the Supreme Court’s decision, we believe it is probable that we have incurred a loss related to this matter. We are not able to reasonably estimate a loss or a range of loss because there are significant factual and legal questions yet to be determined in any subsequent proceedings. As a result, as of December 31, 2021, we have not recorded a liability in connection with a potential adverse ultimate outcome to this litigation. However, if Booking.com were to ultimately lose and all of BPF’s claims were to be accepted (including with retroactive effect to 1999), we estimate that as of December 31, 2021, the maximum loss, not including any potential interest or penalties, would be approximately 289 million Euros ($328 million). Such estimated potential loss increases as Booking.com continues not to contribute to the BPF and depends on Booking.com’s applicable
employee compensation after December 31, 2021. For additional information related to the pension matter and our other contingent liabilities, see Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.