Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s discussion and analysis is included to assist the shareholder in understanding our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow. This discussion should be reviewed in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes presented in Item 8 of this report and the supplemental financial data appearing throughout this report. Since the primary asset of the Company is its wholly-owned subsidiary, most of the discussion and analysis relates to the Bank.
OVERVIEW
The Company is a bank holding company headquartered in Charleston, South Carolina, with $679.2 million in assets as of December 31, 2021 and net income of $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company offers a broad range of financial services through its wholly owned subsidiary, the Bank. The Bank is a state-chartered commercial bank, which operates principally in the Charleston, Dorchester, and Berkeley counties of South Carolina. The Bank’s original and current concept is to be a full service financial institution specializing in personal service, responsiveness, and attention to detail to foster long-standing relationships.
We derive most of our income from interest on loans and investment securities. The primary source of funding for making these loans and purchasing investment securities is our interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposits. Consequently, one of the key measures of our success is the amount of net interest income, or the difference between the income on our interest-earning assets, such as loans and investments, and the expense on our interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits. Another key measure is the spread between the yield we earn on these interest-earning assets and the rate we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities.
A consequence of lending activities is that we may incur credit losses. The amount of such losses will vary depending upon the risk characteristics of the loan portfolio as affected by economic conditions such as rising interest rates and the financial performance of borrowers. The reserve for credit losses consists of the allowance for loan losses (the “allowance”) and a reserve for unfunded commitments (the “unfunded reserve”). The allowance provides for probable and estimable losses inherent in our loan portfolio while the unfunded reserve provides for potential losses related to unfunded lending commitments. For a detailed discussion on the allowance for loan losses, see “Allowance for Loan Losses”.
In addition to earning interest on loans and investment securities, we earn income through fees and other expenses we charge to the customer. The various components of other income and other expenses are described in the following discussion. The discussion and analysis also identifies significant factors that have affected our financial position and operating results as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 and our operating results for 2020 compared to 2019, and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report. In addition, a number of tables have been included to assist in the discussion.
The following table sets forth certain summary financial information concerning the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiary for the last five years. The information was derived from the audited consolidated financial statements. The information should be read in conjunction with this section of the report, and the audited consolidated financial statements and notes, which are presented in Item 8 of this report.
(1) Including mortgage loans to be sold.
(2) Excluding mortgage loans to be sold.
(3) Adjusted to retroactively reflect 10% stock dividend issued during the year ended December 31, 2018.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We have adopted various accounting policies that govern the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and with general practices within the banking industry in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are set forth in the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions made by the Company that have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities. We consider these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The judgment and assumptions we use are based on factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the number of judgments and assumptions that we make, actual results could differ and have a material impact on the carrying values of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations.
We consider our policy regarding the allowance for loan losses to be our most subjective accounting policy due to the significant degree of judgment. We have developed what we believe to be appropriate policies and procedures for assessing the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses, recognizing that this process requires a number of assumptions and estimates with respect to our loan portfolio. Our assessments may be impacted in future periods by changes in economic conditions, the impact of regulatory examinations and the discovery of information with respect to borrowers, which were not known at the time of the issuance of the consolidated financial statements. For additional discussion concerning our allowance for loan losses and related matters, see “Allowance for Loan Losses”.
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared COVID-19 a pandemic. Due to orders issued by the governor of South Carolina and in an abundance of caution for the health of our customers and employees, in March 2020 the Bank closed lobbies to all 5 offices but remained fully operational. The Bank subsequently reopened all of the lobbies in June 2021.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was signed into law, which established the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) and allocated $349.0 billion of loans to be issued by financial institutions. Under the program, the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) will forgive loans, in whole or in part, made by approved lenders to eligible borrowers for payroll and other permitted purposes in accordance with the requirements of the program. These loans carry a fixed rate of 1.00% and a term of two years, if not forgiven, in whole or in part. The loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA and as long as the borrower submits its loan forgiveness application within ten months of completion of the covered period. The borrower is not required to make any payments until the forgiveness amount is remitted to the lender by the SBA. The Bank received a processing fee from the SBA ranging from 1% to 5% based on the size of the loan. The fees are deferred and amortized over the life of the loans in accordance with ASC 310-20. The Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act (“PPP/ HCEA Act”) was signed into law on April 24, 2020. The PPP/HCEA Act authorized additional funding under the CARES Act of $310.0 billion for PPP loans to be issued by financial institutions through the SBA. The Bank has provided $55.3 million in funding to 480 customers through the PPP as of December 31, 2021. Because these loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA and did not undergo the Bank’s typical underwriting process, they are not graded and do not have an associated allowance.
Borrowers must submit a forgiveness application within ten months of the completion of the covered period. Once the borrower has submitted the application, the Bank has 60 days to review, issue a lender decision, and submit the decision and application to the SBA. Once the application is submitted, the SBA has 90 days to review and remit the appropriate forgiveness amount to the Bank plus any interest accrued through the date of payment. The SBA began accepting PPP Forgiveness Applications on August 10, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank received 371 PPP forgiveness applications, in the amount of $49.1 million in principal, and submitted 361 applications and decisions to the SBA, in the amount of $47.7 million in principal. Of the 391 PPP submissions, 351 loans, in the amount of $46.9 million, were forgiven as of December 31, 2021. Upon forgiveness the Bank will recognize the deferred fee income in accordance with ASC 310-20. The Bank received processing fees of $2.4 million and recognized $1.3 million and $0.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Regulatory agencies, as set forth in the Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (initially issued on March 22, 2020 and revised on April 7, 2020), have encouraged financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19. In this statement, the regulatory agencies expressed their view of loan modification programs as positive actions that may mitigate adverse effects on borrowers due to COVID-19 and that the agencies will not criticize institutions for working with borrowers in a safe and sound manner. Moreover, the revised statement provides that eligible loan modifications related to COVID-19 may be accounted for under section 4013 of the CARES Act or in accordance with ASC 310-40. Under Section 4013 of the CARES Act, banks may elect not to categorize loan modifications as TDRs if the modifications are related to COVID-19, executed on a loan that was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019, and executed between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of December 31, 2020 or 60 days after the date of termination of the National Emergency. All short-term loan modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief are not considered TDRs. Beginning in March 2020, the Bank provided payment accommodations to customers, consisting of 60-day principal deferral to borrowers negatively impacted by COVID-19. During 2020, the Bank processed approximately $0.7 million in principal deferments to 84 customers, with an aggregate loan balance of $29.7 million. The principal deferments represented 0.24% of our total loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020. The Bank did not process any principal deferments during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Bank has examined the payment accommodations granted to borrowers in response to COVID-19 and classified 9 loans, with an aggregate loan balance of $4.0 million, that were granted payment accommodations as TDRs given the continued financial difficulty of the customer, associated industry risk, and multiple deferral requests. All other borrowers were current prior to relief, were not experiencing financial difficulty prior to COVID-19, and the Bank determined they were not considered TDRs. As of December 31, 2021, 4 of the TDRs were removed from TDR status due to improvement in financial condition and sustained performance under the restructured terms, 2 TDRs were paid off through refinancing into new loans at market terms, and 1 TDR was paid off. Two loans with a balance of $0.5 million remain in TDR status as of December 31, 2021. Additionally, of the 75 customers that received payment accommodations that were not classified as TDRs, 41 customers, with an aggregate loan balance of $9.9 million, have paid their loan in full as of December 31, 2021. The remaining loans are paying as agreed as of December 31, 2021. There are no loans that received payment accommodation past due greater than 30 days. The Bank will continue to examine payment accommodations as requested by our borrowers.
On December 27, 2020, the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act (“Economic Aid Act”) was enacted, which reauthorized lending under the PPP program through March 31, 2021, with an additional $325 billion. Under this Act, the SBA will forgive loans, in whole or in part, made by approved lenders to eligible borrowers for payroll and other permitted purposes in accordance with the requirements of the program. These loans carry a fixed rate of 1.00% and a term of five years, if not forgiven, in whole or in part. The loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA and as long as the borrower submits its loan forgiveness application within ten months of completion of the covered period, the borrower is not required to make any payments until the forgiveness amount is remitted to the lender by the SBA. The Bank will receive a processing fee based on the size of the loan from the SBA and a tiered structure. For loans up to $50,000 in principal, the lender processing fee will be the lesser of 50% of the principal amount or $2,500. For loans between $50,000 and $350,000 in principal, the lender processing fee will be 5% of the principal amount. For loans $350,000 and above, the lender processing fee will be 3% of the principal amount. The fees are deferred and amortized over the life of the loans in accordance with ASC 310-20. Over the course of the PPP program, the Bank extended 480 loans with a total loan amount of $55.3 million.
While the effects of COVID-19 have impacted all industries to varying degrees, during 2020 the Bank assessed the retail and/or service, food and beverage, and short-term rental industries in our geographic area as having a higher risk due to the possibility of the primary source of repayment not materializing. These industries are dependent upon the hospitality industry and were affected by the mandates issued by the Governor of South Carolina to limit occupancy or close for a period of time. Our loans in these industries represented 3.96% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 and were temporarily downgraded to our “Watch” category during 2020. In May 2021, due to improving economic conditions, increased vaccination rates and a continued reopening of the South Carolina economy, these loans were upgraded to our “Satisfactory” category.
Effects of COVID-19 may negatively impact management assumptions and estimates, such as the allowance for loan losses. However, it is difficult to assess or predict how, and to what extent, COVID-19 will affect the Bank in the future.
COMPARISON OF THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 TO DECEMBER 31, 2020
Net income increased $0.2 million or 4.40% to $6.7 million, or basic and diluted income per share of $1.22 and $1.19, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $6.5 million or basic and diluted income per share of $1.17 and $1.14, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher average earning asset balances coupled with a decline in our cost of funds. Our returns on average assets and average equity for the year ended December 31, 2021 were 1.14% and 12.30%, respectively, compared to 1.29% and 11.96%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net interest income increased $0.5 million or 2.61% to $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in interest and fees on PPP loans and investment securities. Interest and fees on loans and investment securities increased $0.4 million or 2.35% to $17.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as the result of higher balances of average earning assets.
Average earning assets increased $86.6 million or 18.01% to $567.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $480.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This is primarily related to an increase in the average balance of investment securities and interest-bearing deposits at the Federal Reserve and, to a lesser extent, loans. The increase in investment securities and interest-bearing balances at the Federal Reserve reflect the deployment of excess funds resulting from an $85.8 million increase in average deposits during the year.
The provision to the allowance for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $120,000 compared to $240,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the composition of our loan portfolio in accordance with our allowance for loan loss methodology. The Board of Directors determined that this provision was appropriate based upon the adequacy of our reserve. Charge-offs of $20,990 and recoveries of $92,283, together with the provision to the allowance, resulted in an allowance for loan losses of $4.4 million or 1.43% of total loans as of December 31, 2021. The allowance for loan losses is 1.47% of total loans net of PPP loans.
Other income increased $0.5 million or 13.61% to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other income reflects increases in gain on sales of securities of $0.3 million and service charges and fees of $0.2 million. Our mortgage banking income increased $46,700 or 2.06% to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to elevated volume associated with a continuation of the low interest rate environment. Mortgage banking income is highly influenced by mortgage interest rates and the housing market.
Other expense increased $0.6 million or 5.45% to $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Salaries and employee benefits increased approximately $0.2 million, or 3.03%, due to increased benefits, payroll taxes and other employee-related costs. Net occupancy expense increased approximately $0.2 million due to rent escalation provisions in certain of our leases. Other operating expense increased $0.2 million, or 14.45%, due to certain loan-related costs and higher FDIC insurance assessments resulting from an increase in deposit balances.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s effective tax rate was 23.50% compared to 23.33% during the year ended December 31, 2020.
COMPARISON OF THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 TO DECEMBER 31, 2019
Net income decreased $0.8 million or 11.72% to $6.5 million, or basic and diluted income per share of $1.17 and $1.14, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $7.3 million or basic and diluted income per share of $1.33 and $1.31, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to interest and fee income received on loans tied to changes in variable interest rates as a result of the significant decrease in interest rates at the Federal Reserve during the end of the first quarter of 2020, combined with below market interest rates on PPP loans. Our returns on average assets and average equity for the year ended December 31, 2020 were 1.29% and 11.96%, respectively, compared to 1.66% and 14.86%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net interest income decreased $1.2 million or 6.43% to $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in interest and fees on loans. Interest and fees on loans decreased $0.9 million or 5.87% to $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as the result of changes in variable interest rates as effected by the significant decrease in interest rates at the Federal Reserve during the end of the first quarter of 2020 combined with below market interest rates on PPP loans.
Average earning assets increased $57.9 million or 13.69% to $480.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $422.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This is primarily related to the increase in the average balance of loans related to the PPP program and interest-bearing deposits at the Federal Reserve.
The provision to the allowance for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $240,000 compared to $180,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the composition of our loan portfolio in accordance with our allowance for loan loss methodology. The Board of Directors determined that this provision was appropriate based upon the adequacy of our reserve. Charge-offs of $0.3 million and recoveries of $0.2 million, together with the provision to the allowance, resulted in an allowance for loan losses of $4.2 million or 1.30% of total loans as of December 31, 2020. The allowance for loan losses is 1.45% of total loans, net of PPP loans.
Other income increased $1.2 million or 54.87% to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our mortgage banking income increased $1.3 million or 141.04% to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to increased volume associated with lower interest rates. Mortgage banking income is highly influenced by mortgage interest rates and the housing market.
Other expense increased $1.1 million or 9.89% to $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Salaries and employee benefits increased approximately $0.6 million due to increased salaries and commissions on robust mortgage activity. Net occupancy expense increased approximately $0.6 million due to a full year of occupancy in our North Charleston office, which opened in September 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s effective tax rate was 23.33% compared to 22.91% during the year ended December 31, 2019.
ASSET AND LIABILITY MANAGEMENT
We manage our assets and liabilities to ensure there is sufficient liquidity to enable management to fund deposit withdrawals, loan demand, capital expenditures, reserve requirements, operating expenses, and dividends; and to manage daily operations on an ongoing basis. Funds are primarily provided by the Bank through customer deposits, principal and interest payments on loans, mortgage loan sales, the sale or maturity of securities, temporary investments and earnings. The Asset Liability/Investment Committee (“ALCO”) manages asset and liability procedures though the ultimate responsibility rests with the President/Chief Executive Officer. At December 31, 2021, total assets increased 27.55% to $679.2 million from $532.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and total deposits increased 31.8% to $609.2 million from $462.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, earning assets, which are composed of U.S. Treasury, Government Sponsored Enterprises and Municipal Securities in the amount of $212.3 million, interest-bearing deposits at the Federal Reserve in the amount of $129.0 million and total loans, including mortgage loans held for sale, in the amount of $309.4 million, constituted approximately 95.80% of our total assets.
The yield on a majority of our earning assets adjusts in tandem with changes in the general level of interest rates. Some of the Company’s liabilities are issued with fixed terms and can be repriced only at maturity.
MARKET RISK
Market risk is the risk of loss from adverse changes in market prices and interest rates. Our risk consists primarily of interest rate risk in our lending and investing activities as they relate to the funding by deposit and borrowing activities.
Our policy is to minimize interest rate risk between interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities at various maturities and to attempt to maintain an asset sensitive position over a one-year period. By adhering to this policy, we anticipate that our net interest margins will not be materially affected, unless there is an extraordinary and or precipitous change in interest rates. The average net interest rate margin for 2021 decreased to 3.06% from 3.52% for 2020. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net cumulative gap was liability sensitive for periods less than one year and asset sensitive for periods of one year or more. The reason for the shift in sensitivity is the direct result of management’s strategic decision to invest excess funds held at the Federal Reserve into fixed rate investment securities that match our investment policy objectives. Management is aware of this departure from policy and will continue to closely monitor our sensitivity position going forward.
Since the rates on most of our interest-bearing liabilities can vary on a daily basis, we continue to maintain a loan portfolio priced predominately on a variable rate basis. However, in an effort to protect future earnings in a declining rate environment, we offer certain fixed rates, interest rate floors, and terms primarily associated with real estate transactions. We seek stable, long-term deposit relationships to fund our loan portfolio. Furthermore, we do not have any brokered deposits or internet deposits.
At December 31, 2021, the average maturity of the investment portfolio was 4.76 years with an average yield of 1.02% compared to 4.57 years with an average yield of 1.60% at December 31, 2020.
We do not take foreign exchange or commodity risks. In addition, we do not own mortgage-backed securities nor do we have any exposure to the sub-prime market or any other distressed debt instruments.
The following table summarizes our interest sensitivity position as of December 31, 2021.
(1) Including mortgage loans to be sold and deferred fees.
(2) At amortized cost based on the earlier of the call date or scheduled maturity.
LIQUIDITY
Historically, we have maintained our liquidity at levels believed by management to be adequate to meet requirements of normal operations, potential deposit outflows and strong loan demand and still allow for optimal investment of funds and return on assets.
The following table summarizes future contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
Proper liquidity management is crucial to ensure that we are able to take advantage of new business opportunities as well as meet the credit needs of our existing customers. Investment securities are an important tool in our liquidity management. Our primary liquid assets are cash and due from banks, investment securities available for sale, interest-bearing deposits at the Federal Reserve, and mortgage loans held for sale. Our primary liquid assets accounted for 52.30% and 36.83% of total assets at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Investment securities classified as available for sale, which are not pledged, may be sold in response to changes in interest rates and liquidity needs. All of the investment securities presently owned are classified as available for sale. Net cash provided by operations and deposits from customers have been the primary sources of liquidity. At December 31, 2021, we had unused short-term lines of credit totaling approximately $41 million (which can be withdrawn at the lender’s option). Additional sources of funds available to us for liquidity include increasing deposits by raising interest rates paid and selling mortgage loans held for sale. We also established a Borrower-In-Custody arrangement with the Federal Reserve. This arrangement permits us to retain possession of assets pledged as collateral to secure advances from the Federal Reserve Discount Window. At December 31, 2021, we could borrow up to $72.1 million. There have been no borrowings under this arrangement.
Our core deposits consist of non-interest bearing demand accounts, NOW accounts, money market accounts, time deposits and savings accounts. We closely monitor our reliance on certificates of deposit greater than $250,000 and other large deposits. We maintain a Contingency Funding Plan (“CFP”) that identifies liquidity needs and weighs alternate courses of action designed to address these needs in emergency situations. We perform a quarterly cash flow analysis and stress test the CFP to evaluate the expected funding needs and funding capacity during a liquidity stress event. We believe our liquidity sources are adequate to meet our operating needs and do not know of any trends, events or uncertainties that may result in a significant adverse effect on our liquidity position. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our liquidity ratio was 56.43% and 38.63%, respectively.
Average earning assets increased by $86.6 million from 2020 to 2021. This increase is primarily related to an increase in the average balance of investment securities and interest-bearing deposits at the Federal Reserve and, to a lesser extent, loans. The increase in investment securities and interest-bearing balances at the Federal Reserve reflect the deployment of excess funds resulting from an $85.8 million increase in average deposits during the year.
The following table shows the composition of average assets over the past five fiscal years.
(1) Including mortgage loans to be sold and deferred fees.
We continued to experience growth in our interest-bearing deposits at the Federal Reserve subsequent to December 31, 2021. As a result of this increase in liquidity, and to increase the yield on these balances, in January 2022 we purchased $45.0 million of U.S. Treasury Notes having maturities ranging from approximately two to four years.
ANALYSIS OF CHANGES IN NET INTEREST INCOME
The following table shows changes in interest income and expense based upon changes in volume and changes in rates.
(1) Volume/rate changes have been allocated to each category based on the percentage of each change to the total change.
(2) Including mortgage loans to be sold.
YIELDS ON AVERAGE EARNING ASSETS AND RATES ON AVERAGE INTEREST-BEARING LIABILITIES
The following table shows the yields on average earning assets and average interest-bearing liabilities.
(1) The effect of forgone interest income as a result of non-accrual loans was not considered in the above analysis.
(2) Average loan balances include non-accrual loans and mortgage loans to be sold.
INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO
The following tables summarize the carrying value of investment securities as of the indicated dates and the weighted-average yields of those securities at December 31, 2021. Weighted-average yields are determined based on the amortized cost and book yield of the individual investment securities comprising each investment security type and maturity classification.
The following tables present the amortized cost and estimated fair value of investment securities for the past three years.
As of December 31, 2021, we had fifteen U.S. Treasury Notes and nineteen Municipal Securities with an unrealized loss of $1.3 million and $0.2 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had no U.S. Treasury Notes or Municipal Securities with an unrealized loss. As of December 31, 2021, we had nine securities issued by Government-Sponsored Enterprises with an unrealized loss of $1.9 million compared to four Government-Sponsored Enterprises with an unrealized loss of $0.2 million as of December 31, 2020. The unrealized losses on these securities are related to changes in the interest rate environment from the date of purchase. The contractual terms of these investments do not permit the issuer to settle the securities at a price less than the amortized cost of the investment. Therefore, these investments are not considered other-than-temporarily impaired. We have the ability to hold these investments until market price recovery or maturity.
The primary purpose of the investment portfolio is to fund loan demand, manage fluctuations in deposits and liquidity, satisfy pledging requirements and generate a favorable return on investment. In doing these things, our main objective is to adhere to sound investment practices. To that end, all purchases and sales of investment securities are made through reputable securities dealers that have been approved by the Board of Directors. The Board of Directors of the Bank reviews the entire investment portfolio at each regular monthly meeting, including any purchases, sales, calls, and maturities during the previous month. Furthermore, the Credit Department conducts a financial underwriting assessment of all municipal securities and their corresponding municipalities annually and management reviews the assessments.
LOAN PORTFOLIO COMPOSITION
We focus our lending activities on small and middle market businesses, professionals and individuals in our geographic market. At December 31, 2021, outstanding loans (including deferred loan fees of $488,481) totaled $306.6 million, which equaled 50.33% of total deposits and 45.14% of total assets.
The following table presents our loan portfolio, excluding both mortgage loans to be sold and deferred loan fees, as of December 31, 2021, compared to the prior four years.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, total loans decreased $14.2 million. This is primarily due to the forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program loans, which offset growth in our other commercial real estate portfolio.
We had no foreign loans or loans to fund leveraged buyouts at any time during the years ended December 31, 2017 through December 31, 2021.
The following table presents the contractual terms to maturity for loans outstanding at December 31, 2021. Overdrafts are reported as due in one year or less. The table does not include an estimate of prepayments, which can significantly affect the average life of loans and may cause our actual principal experience to differ from that shown.
IMPAIRED LOANS
A loan is impaired when it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement based on current information and events. All loans with a principal balance over $50,000 placed on non-accrual status are classified as impaired. However, not all impaired loans are on non-accrual status nor do they all represent a loss.
Impairment loss is measured by:
a. The present value of the future cash flow discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, or
b. The fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent.
The following is a schedule of our impaired loans and non-accrual loans as of December 31, 2017 through 2021.
Beginning in March 2020, the Bank provided payment accommodations to customers, consisting of 60-day principal deferral to borrowers negatively impacted by COVID-19. During 2020, the Bank processed approximately $0.7 million in principal deferments to 84 customers, with an aggregate loan balance of $29.7 million. The Bank did not process any principal deferments during the year ended December 31, 2021. The principal deferments represented 0.24% of our total loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020.
TROUBLED DEBT RESTRUCTURINGS
According to GAAP, we are required to account for certain loan modifications or restructurings as a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”), when appropriate. In general, the modification or restructuring of a debt is considered a TDR if we, for economic or legal reasons related to a borrower’s financial difficulties, grant a concession to the borrower that we would not otherwise consider. Three factors must always be present:
1. An existing credit must formally be renewed, extended, or modified,
2. The borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, and
3. We grant a concession that we would not otherwise consider.
The following is a schedule of our TDR’s including the number of loans represented.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 310-20-35-9 allows a loan to be removed from TDR status if the terms of the loan reflect current market rates and the loan has been performing under modified terms for an extended period of time or under certain other circumstances.
Nine TDRs with a balance of $4.7 million at December 31, 2020 were removed from TDR status during the year ended December 31, 2021. Five TDRs with a balance of $3.8 million were removed from TDR status due to improvement in financial condition and sustained performance under the restructured terms, two TDRs with a balance of $0.5 million were paid off, and two TDRs with a balance of $0.4 million were paid off through refinancing into new loans at market terms. One TDR with a balance of $33,300 at December 31, 2017 was removed from TDR status during the year ended December 31, 2018 since, at the most recent renewal, the loan was amortized at market rate and no concessions were granted. We do not know of any potential problem loans which will not meet their contractual obligations that are not otherwise discussed herein.
Regulatory agencies, as set forth in the Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (initially issued on March 22, 2020 and revised on April 7, 2020), have encouraged financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19. In this statement, the regulatory agencies expressed their view of loan modification programs as positive actions that may mitigate adverse effects on borrowers due to COVID-19 and that the agencies will not criticize institutions for working with borrowers in a safe and sound manner. Moreover, the revised statement provides that eligible loan modifications related to COVID-19 may be accounted for under section 4013 of the CARES Act or in accordance with ASC 310-40. Under Section 4013 of the CARES Act, banks may elect not to categorize loan modifications as TDRs if the modifications are related to COVID-19, executed on a loan that was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019, and executed between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of December 31, 2020 or 60 days after the date of termination of the National Emergency. All short-term loan modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief are not considered TDRs. Beginning in March 2020, the Bank provided payment accommodations to customers, consisting of 60-day principal deferral to borrowers negatively impacted by COVID-19. The Bank has examined the payment accommodations granted to borrowers in response to COVID-19 and classified 9 loans, with an aggregate loan balance of $4.0 million, that were granted payment accommodations as TDRs given the continued financial difficulty of the customer, associated industry risk, and multiple deferral requests. As of December 31, 2021, 4 of the TDRs were removed from TDR status due to improvement in financial condition and sustained performance under the restructured terms, 2 TDRs were paid off through refinancing into new loans at market terms, and 1 TDR was paid off. Two loans with a balance of $0.5 million remain in TDR status as of December 31, 2021. The Bank will continue to examine payment accommodations as requested by the borrowers.
ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES
The allowance for loan losses represents our estimate of probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio. The adequacy of the allowance for loan losses (the “allowance”) is reviewed by the Loan Committee and by the Board of Directors on a quarterly basis. For purposes of this analysis, adequacy is defined as a level sufficient to absorb estimated losses in the loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date presented. To remain consistent with GAAP, the methodology employed for this analysis has been modified over the years to reflect the economic environment and new accounting pronouncements. The Credit Department reviews this calculation on a quarterly basis. In addition, an independent third party validates the allowance calculation on a periodic basis. The methodology is based on a reserve model that is comprised of the three components listed below:
1) Specific reserve analysis for impaired loans based on FASB ASC 310-10-35, Receivables - Overall
2) General reserve analysis applying historical loss rates based on FASB ASC 450-20, Contingencies: Loss Contingencies
3) Qualitative or environmental factors.
Loans greater than $50,000 are reviewed for impairment on a quarterly basis if any of the following criteria are met:
1) The loan is on non-accrual
2) The loan is a troubled debt restructuring
3) The loan is over 60 days past due
4) The loan is rated sub-standard, doubtful, or loss
5) Excessive principal extensions are executed
6) If we are provided information that indicates we will not collect all principal and interest as scheduled
Impairment is measured by the present value of the future cash flow discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. An impaired loan may not represent an expected loss.
A general reserve analysis is performed on all loans, excluding impaired loans. This analysis includes a pool of loans that are reviewed for impairment but are not found to be impaired. Loans are segregated into similar risk groups and a historical loss ratio is determined for each group over a five-year period. The five-year average loss ratio by loan type is then used to calculate the estimated loss based on the current balance of each group.
Qualitative and environmental loss factors are also applied against the portfolio, excluding impaired loans. These factors include external risk factors that we believe are representative of our overall lending environment. We believe that the following factors create a more comprehensive loss projection, which we can use to monitor the quality of the loan portfolio.
1) Portfolio risk
a) Levels and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans and changes in loan rating matrix
b) Trends in volume and terms of loans
c) Over-margined real estate lending risk
2) National and local economic trends and conditions
3) Effects of changes in risk selection and underwriting practices
4) Experience, ability and depth of lending management staff
5) Industry conditions
6) Effects of changes in credit concentrations
a) Loan concentration
b) Geographic concentration
c) Regulatory concentration
7) Loan and credit administration risk
a) Collateral documentation
b) Insurance risk
c) Maintenance of financial information risk
The sum of each component’s analysis contributes to the total “estimated loss” within our portfolio.
Portfolio Risk
Portfolio risk includes the levels and trends in delinquencies, impaired loans and changes in the loan rating matrix, trends in volume and terms of loans, and over-margined real estate lending. We are satisfied with the stability of the past due and non-performing loans and believe there has been no decline in the quality of our loan portfolio due to any trend in delinquent or adversely classified loans. Sizable unsecured principal balances on a non-amortizing basis are monitored. Although the vast majority of our real estate loans are underwritten on a cash flow basis, the secondary source of repayment is typically tied to our ability to realize the conversion of the collateral to cash. Accordingly, we closely monitor loan to value ratios. The maximum collateral advance rate is 80% on all real estate transactions, with the exception of raw land at 65% and land development at 70%.
Occasionally, we extend credit beyond our normal collateral advance margins in real estate lending. We refer to these loans as over-margined real estate loans. Although infrequent, the aggregate of these loans represents a notable part of our portfolio. Accordingly, these loans are monitored and the balances reported to the Board of Directors every quarter. An excessive level of this practice (as a percentage of capital) could result in additional regulatory scrutiny, competitive disadvantages and potential losses if forced to convert the collateral. The consideration of over-margined real estate loans directly relates to the capacity of the borrower to repay. We often request additional collateral to bring the loan to value ratio within the policy objectives and require a strong secondary source of repayment.
Although significantly under our policy threshold of 100% of capital (currently approximately $53.9 million), the amount of over-margined real estate loans currently totals approximately $1.5 million or approximately 0.48% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2021 compared to $2.9 million or approximately 0.89% of the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020.
A credit rating matrix is used to rate all extensions of credit and to provide a more specific picture of the risk each loan poses to the quality of the loan portfolio. There are eight possible ratings used to determine the quality of each loan based on the following characteristics: cash flow, collateral quality, guarantor strength, financial condition, management quality, operating performance, the relevancy of the financial statements, historical loan performance, debt coverage ratio, and the borrower’s leverage position. The matrix is designed to meet our standards and expectations of loan quality. It is based on experience with similarly graded loans, industry best practices, and regulatory guidance. Our loan portfolio is graded in its entirety, with the exception of PPP loans. Because PPP loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA and did not undergo the Bank’s typical underwriting process, they are not graded.
National and local economic trends and conditions
National and local economic trends and conditions are constantly changing and both positively and negatively impact borrowers. Most macroeconomic conditions are not controllable by us and are incorporated into the qualitative risk factors. Natural and environmental disasters, including the rise of sea levels, political uncertainty, increasing levels of consumer price inflation, supply-chain disruptions and international instability are a few of the trends and conditions that are currently affecting the national and local economies. Additionally, the national and local economy has been affected by COVID-19 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. These changes have impacted borrowers’ ability, in many cases, to repay loans in a timely manner. On occasion, a loan’s primary source of repayment (i.e. personal income, cash flow, or lease income) may be eroded as a result of unemployment, lack of revenues, or the inability of a tenant to make rent payments.
Effects of changes in risk selection and underwriting practices
The quality of our loan portfolio is contingent upon our risk selection and underwriting practices. All new loans (except for mortgage loans in the process of being sold to investors and loans secured by properly margined negotiable securities traded on an established market or other cash collateral) with exposure over $300,000 are reviewed by the Loan Committee on a monthly basis. The Board of Directors review credits over $750,000 monthly. Annual credit analyses are conducted on credits over $500,000 upon the receipt of updated financial information. Prior to extensions of credit, significant loan opportunities go through sound credit underwriting. Our Credit Department conducts a detailed cash flow analysis on each proposal using the most current financial information.
Experience, ability and depth of lending management staff
We have over 300 combined years of lending experience among our lending staff. We are aware of the many challenges currently facing the banking industry. As other banks look to increase earnings in the short term, we will continue to emphasize the need to maintain safe and sound lending practices and core deposit growth managed with a long-term perspective.
Industry conditions
There continues to be an influx of new banks and consolidation of existing banks in our geographic area, which creates pricing competition. We believe that our borrowing base is well established and therefore unsound price competition is not necessary.
Effects of changes in credit concentrations
The risks associated with the effects of changes in credit concentration include loan, geographic and regulatory concentrations. As of December 31, 2021, one Standard Industrial Code group, activities related to real estate, comprised more than 2% of our total outstanding loans.
Effects of changes in geographic concentrations
We are located along the east coast of the United States and on an earthquake fault line, increasing the chances that a natural disaster may impact our borrowers and us. We have a Disaster Recovery Plan in place; however, the amount of time it would take for our customers to return to normal operations is unknown. Our plan is reviewed and tested annually.
Loan and credit administration risk
Loan and credit administration risk includes collateral documentation, insurance risk and maintaining financial information risk.
The majority of our loan portfolio is collateralized with a variety of our borrowers’ assets. The execution and monitoring of the documentation to properly secure the loan is the responsibility of our lenders and loan department. We require insurance coverage naming us as the mortgagee or loss payee. Although insurance risk is also considered collateral documentation risk, the actual coverage, amounts of coverage and increased deductibles are important to management.
Financial Information Risk includes a function of time during which the borrower’s financial condition may change; therefore, keeping financial information up to date is important to us. Our policy requires all new loans (with a credit exposure of $10,000 or more), regardless of the customer’s history with us, to have updated financial information. In addition, we monitor appraisals closely as real estate values are appreciating.
Based on our analysis of the adequacy of the allowance for loan loss model, we recorded a provision for loan loss of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2021, the five-year average loss ratios were: 0.17% Commercial, 0.00% Commercial Real Estate Construction, -0.01% Commercial Real Estate Other, -0.03% Consumer Real Estate, and 0.54% Consumer Other.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, charge-offs of $20,990 and recoveries of $0.1 million were recorded to the allowance for loan losses, resulting in an allowance for loan losses of $4.4 million or 1.43% of total loans at December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, charge-offs of $0.3 million and recoveries of $0.2 million were recorded to the allowance for loan losses, resulting in an allowance for loan losses of $4.2 million or 1.30% of total loans at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the allowance for loan losses was 1.47% of total loans less PPP loans. PPP loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA; therefore, these loans do not have an associated reserve. We believe loss exposure in the portfolio is identified, reserved against, and closely monitored to ensure that economic changes are promptly addressed in the analysis of reserve adequacy.
The accrual of interest is generally discontinued on loans which become 90 days past due as to principal or interest. The accrual of interest on some loans may continue even though they are 90 days past due if the loans are well secured or in the process of collection and we deem it appropriate. If non-accrual loans decrease their past due status to less than 30 days for a period of six to nine months, they are reviewed individually to determine if they should be returned to accrual status. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no loans over 90 days past due still accruing interest.
The following table represents a summary of loan loss experience for the past five years.
We believe the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2021 is adequate to cover estimated losses in the loan portfolio; however, assessing the adequacy of the allowance is a process that requires considerable judgment. Our judgments are based on numerous assumptions about current events that we believe to be reasonable, but may or may not be valid. Thus, there can be no assurance that loan losses in future periods will not exceed the current allowance amount or that future increases in the allowance will not be required. No assurance can be given that our ongoing evaluation of the loan portfolio in light of changing economic conditions and other relevant circumstances will not require significant future additions to the allowance, thus adversely affecting our operating results.
The following table presents a breakdown of the allowance for loan losses for the past five years.
(1) Loan category as a percentage of total loans.
The allowance is also subject to examination testing by regulatory agencies, which may consider such factors as the methodology used to determine adequacy and the size of the allowance relative to that of peer institutions and other adequacy tests. In addition, such regulatory agencies could require us to adjust our allowance based on information available to them at the time of their examination.
The methodology used to determine the reserve for unfunded lending commitments, which is included in other liabilities, is inherently similar to the methodology used to determine the allowance for loan losses described above, adjusted for factors specific to binding commitments, including the probability of funding and historical loss ratio. During the year ended December 31, 2021, a provision of $0 was recorded compared to a provision of $11,894 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The balance for the reserve for unfunded lending commitments was $44,912 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
NONPERFORMING ASSETS
Nonperforming assets include OREO, nonaccrual loans and loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest. The following table summarizes nonperforming assets for the five years ended December 31:
DEPOSITS
The following table shows the contractual maturities of time deposits in denominations of $100,000 or more at December 31, 2021 and the amount of time deposits in excess of FDIC insurance limits.
Certificates of Deposit $100,000 and over increased $1.2 million or 8.41% to $15.2 million as of December 31, 2021 from $14.0 million as of December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher customer balances resulting from a continuation of government stimulus programs and increased savings.
The following table presents average deposits by category.
Deposits increased $147.0 million or 31.80% to $609.2 million as of December 31, 2021, from $462.2 million as of December 31, 2020. Non-interest bearing deposits increased $86.6 million to $255.8 million as of December 31, 2021, primarily driven by a continuation of various government stimulus programs and decreased consumer spending, which both began in fiscal 2020.
We fund growth through core deposits. We do not have, nor do we rely on, Brokered Deposits or Internet Deposits.
SHORT-TERM BORROWINGS
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no outstanding federal funds purchased. We have a Borrower-In-Custody arrangement with the Federal Reserve. This arrangement permits the Company to retain possession of loans pledged as collateral to secure advances from the Federal Reserve Discount Window. Under this agreement, we may borrow up to $72.1 million. We established this arrangement as an additional source of liquidity. There have been no borrowings under this arrangement.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Bank had unused short-term lines of credit totaling approximately $41 million and $23 million, respectively (which are withdrawable at the lender’s option).
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
In the normal course of operations, we engage in a variety of financial transactions that, in accordance with GAAP, are not recorded in the financial statements, or are recorded in amounts that differ from the notional amounts. These transactions involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit, interest rate, and liquidity risk. We use such transactions for general corporate purposes or customer needs. General corporate purpose transactions are used to help manage credit, interest rate and liquidity risk or to optimize capital. Customer transactions are used to manage customer requests for funding.
Our off-balance sheet arrangements consist principally of commitments to extend credit described below. We estimate probable losses related to binding unfunded lending commitments and record a reserve for unfunded lending commitments in other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the balance of this reserve was $44,912. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no interests in non-consolidated special purpose entities.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. The amount of collateral obtained if deemed necessary by the Company upon extension of credit is based on our credit evaluation of the borrower. Collateral held varies but may include accounts receivable, negotiable instruments, inventory, property, plant and equipment, and real estate. Commitments to extend credit, including unused lines of credit, amounted to $117.5 million and $122.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Standby letters of credit represent our obligation to a third-party contingent upon the failure of our customer to perform under the terms of an underlying contract with the third party or obligates us to guarantee or stand as surety for the benefit of the third party. The underlying contract may entail either financial or nonfinancial obligations and may involve such things as the shipment of goods, performance of a contract, or repayment of an obligation. Under the terms of a standby letter, generally drafts will be drawn only when the underlying event fails to occur as intended. We can seek recovery of the amounts paid from the borrower. Commitments under standby letters of credit are usually for one year or less. The maximum potential amount of undiscounted future payments related to standby letters of credit at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.6 million and $0.8 million, respectively.
We originate certain fixed rate residential loans and commit these loans for sale. The commitments to originate fixed rate residential loans and the sales commitments are freestanding derivative instruments. We had forward sales commitments, totaling $2.8 million at December 31, 2021, to sell loans held for sale of $2.8 million, compared to forward sales commitments of $13.0 million at December 31, 2020, to sell loans held for sale of $13.0 million. The fair value of these commitments was not significant at December 31, 2021 or 2020. We had no embedded derivative instruments requiring separate accounting treatment.
Once we sell certain fixed rate residential loans, the loans are no longer reportable on our balance sheet. With most of these sales, we have an obligation to repurchase the loan in the event of a default of principal or interest on the loan. This recourse period ranges from three to nine months. Misrepresentation or fraud carries unlimited time for recourse. The unpaid principal balance of loans sold with recourse was $30.8 million at December 31, 2021 and $57.2 million at December 31, 2020. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were no loans repurchased.
EFFECT OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which require the measurement of financial position and results of operations in terms of historical dollars without consideration of changes in the relative purchasing power over time due to inflation.
Unlike most other industries, the assets and liabilities of financial institutions like the Company are primarily monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates generally have a more significant impact on our performance than the effects of general levels of inflation and changes in prices. In addition, interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. We strive to manage the relationship between interest rate sensitive assets and liabilities in order to protect against wide interest rate fluctuations, including those resulting from inflation.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our capital needs have been met to date through the $10.6 million in capital raised in our initial offering, the retention of earnings less dividends paid and the exercise of options to purchase stock. Total shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2021 was $53.9 million. The rate of asset growth since our inception has not negatively impacted our capital base.
On July 2, 2013, the Federal Reserve Board approved the final rules implementing the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s (“BCBS”) capital guidelines for U.S. banks (“Basel III”). Following the actions by the Federal Reserve, the FDIC also approved regulatory capital requirements on July 9, 2013. The FDIC’s rule is identical in substance to the final rules issued by the Federal Reserve Bank.
Basel III became effective on January 1, 2015. The purpose is to improve the quality and increase the quantity of capital for all banking organizations. The minimum requirements for the quantity and quality of capital were increased. The rule includes a new common equity Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets ratio of 4.5% and a common equity Tier 1 capital conservation buffer of 2.5% of risk-weighted assets. The rule also raises the minimum ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets from 4% to 6% and requires a minimum leverage ratio of 4%. In addition, the rule also implements strict eligibility criteria for regulatory capital instruments and improves the methodology for calculating risk-weighted assets to enhance risk sensitivity. Full compliance with all of the final rule requirements will be phased in over a multi-year schedule.
On November 4, 2019, the federal banking agencies jointly issued a final rule on an optional, simplified measure of capital adequacy for qualifying community banking organizations called the community bank leverage ratio (“CBLR”) framework effective on January 1, 2020. A qualifying community banking organization is defined as having less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets, a leverage ratio greater than 9%, off-balance sheet exposures of 25% or less of total consolidated assets, and trading assets and liabilities of 5% or less of total consolidated assets. Additionally, the qualifying community banking institution must be a non-advanced approaches FDIC supervised institution. The final rule adopts Tier 1 capital and existing leverage ratio into the CBLR framework. The Bank adopted this rule as of September 30, 2020 and is no longer subject to other capital and leverage requirements. A CBLR bank meeting qualifying criterion is deemed to have met the “well capitalized” ratio requirements and be in compliance with the generally applicable capital rule. The Bank’s CBLR as of December 31, 2021 was 8.66%. As of December 31, 2021, the Company and the Bank were categorized as “well capitalized.” We believe, as of December 31, 2021, that the Company and the Bank meet all capital adequacy requirements to which we are subject.
There are no current conditions or events that we are aware of that would change the Company’s or the Bank’s capital adequacy category.
Please see “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information regarding the Company’s and the Bank’s capital ratios at December 31, 2021.