ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included in "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
On February 5, 2020, we filed a Certificate of Amendment of the Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to (i) effect a reverse stock split of all issued and outstanding shares of our common stock at a ratio of 1-for-10 and (ii) reduce the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 200,000,000 to 40,000,000.
On February 5, 2020, we effected a reverse stock split of all issued and outstanding shares of our common stock at a ratio of 1-for-10, and reduced the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 200,000,000 to 40,000,000. Share related amounts have been retroactively adjusted in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to reflect this reverse stock-split for all periods presented.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering and developing novel, controllable cellular immunotherapies for various forms of cancer, including both hematological cancers and solid tumors. We are advancing CAR-T cell therapies, which are an innovative approach in which a patient’s or donor’s T cells are genetically modified to carry chimeric antigen receptors, or CARs. We are using our proprietary Chemical Induction of Dimerization, or CID, technology platform to engineer our product candidates with switch technologies that are designed to control components of the immune system in real time. By incorporating our CID platform, our product candidates may offer better efficacy and safety outcomes than are seen with current cellular immunotherapies. For additional information about our business, and candidate development programs, see the discussions contained within “Item 1. Business” in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues
The increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to last year, was due to agreements executed with external parties during the year. In the first quarter of 2021, we entered into a multi-year supply agreement with Takeda Development Center Americas, Inc. (Takeda) for the supply of rimiducid for potential use in clinical trials of TAK-007 (CD19 CAR-NK cell therapy). The supply was fulfilled in the second quarter of 2021 generating revenue of $0.7 million. In the third quarter of 2021, we entered into an option and license agreement with The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center (“MD Anderson”) for certain option and license rights to CaspaCIDe and related technologies. An upfront fee under the agreement of $5.0 million was recognized as revenue, together with $0.5 million of annual license fee under a previous license agreement with MD Anderson. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the only source of revenue was the annual license fee of $0.5 million.
Research and Development Expenses (R&D)
The decrease in R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to reduced expenses related to rivo-cel related activities, the sale of the manufacturing facility, and the reduction in force that was implemented in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by an increase in expenses related to our GoCAR-T programs. This resulted in $12.3 million reduction in salaries, benefits, travel, and share based compensation related charges and a $3.2 million reduction in general R&D supplies, technical operations and pharmaceutical development expenses and facility charges primarily due to lower clinical trial activities. Additionally, depreciation expense decreased $0.1 million due to the manufacturing facility and related laboratories disposed of in April 2020 and additional laboratory assets and equipment sold in March 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses (G&A)
The decrease in G&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due the aforementioned reduction in force that reduced employee-related charges by $6.8 million as well as the reduction in rivo-cel related commercialization activities that reduced charges by $1.7 million.
Impairment
In connection with the Company’s restructuring plan, the management elected to seek an exit to its leased R&D facility in Houston, Texas during the fourth quarter of 2020. As a result, we reclassified the assets and liabilities associated with the leased facility as held for sale, which included a right-of-use asset of $0.5 million, and property plant and equipment of $2.3 million. Based on the cost to exit the lease and the net realizable value of the related assets, we recognized an impairment charge of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The sale of the assets and equipment was completed in the first quarter of 2021, and there was no additional impairment recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Gain on dispositions, net
The decrease in gain of dispositions, net for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to last year, was primarily due to the disposal of the clinical supply manufacturing facility to MD Anderson in the second quarter of 2020 which resulted a gain of $3.7 million in 2020. In addition, there was a loss on termination of the South San Francisco office space of $0.5 million during the first quarter of 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income or expense primarily consists of interest income, interest expense, and changes in fair values of our warrant liability and the private placement option, which are remeasured at each reporting period. Due to the nature of the inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of the warrant liability and private placement option, we may experience significant fluctuations at each reporting period. These fluctuations may be due to a variety of factors, including changes in our stock price and changes in stock price volatility over the remaining term of the warrants and options.
The decrease in other income for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to a decreased gain of $15.1 million from the change in fair value of our warrant and private placement option liabilities, compared to a gain from change in fair value of $46.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The bigger change in fair value over 2020 was primarily driven by a more significant decrease in our stock price compared to 2021. Meanwhile, there is a decrease of $3.0 million in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to last year, as a result of the early retirement of the Oxford Loan in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
At December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $47.7 million and net cash used in operations of approximately $23.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Notably, in December 2021, we completed a private placement equity financing transaction for gross proceeds of approximately $35.0 million before deducting placement agent commissions and offering expenses.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the basis that there is no substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, which contemplates realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. Our cash resources are primarily consumed by operating activities and we expect negative cash flows from operations to continue for at least the next 12 months. We do not have any material contractual obligations or commitments as of December 31, 2021. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, clinical costs, legal and other regulatory expenses, and general overhead costs. Based on our current research and development plans and our timing expectations related to the progress of our programs, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through at least mid-2023.
We plan to continue attempting to obtain future financing and/or engage in strategic transactions, but we cannot predict, with certainty, the outcome of our actions to generate liquidity, including the availability of additional equity or debt financing, or whether such actions would generate the expected liquidity as currently planned. To continue as a going concern, we may postpone or eliminate some of our research and development programs and reduce our administrative costs. We may also intend to seek additional funding including, but not limited to, any or all of the following potential sources:
We have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 for the offer and sale of up to $400.0 million of our securities, of which approximately $317.5 million remains available for future offerings. We may pursue additional funding through the sale of our securities in one or more offerings under this registration statement; however, we cannot assure you that we will be able to do so on favorable terms. Our ability to offer and sell our securities in a primary offering on our Form S-3 is currently limited by Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3, commonly referred to as the “baby shelf” limitation. If we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms may include liquidation or other preferences that could adversely affect the rights of our existing stockholders. If we raise additional capital through the issuance of debt securities, we could incur fixed payment obligations and become subject to certain restrictive covenants, including limitations on
our ability to incur additional debt and acquire or license intellectual property rights, and other operating restrictions that could restrict our ability to conduct our business.
In addition, we may receive additional capital through the exercise of outstanding warrants to purchase our stock if our stock price sufficiently increases. As of December 31, 2021, warrants to purchase 5,750,000 shares of our Series 1 preferred stock at an exercise price of $130.00 per share (equivalent to $13.00 per share of common stock), warrants to purchase 4,149,378 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $6.50 per share and warrants to purchase 2,055,920 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.69 per share were outstanding. The preferred stock warrants expire on August 21, 2026 and the common warrants expire on November 3, 2025 and December 7, 2028, respectively.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. There can be no assurance that further deterioration in credit and financial markets and confidence in economic conditions will not occur. If equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult to obtain, more costly and/or more dilutive. Moreover, if we do not obtain such additional funds, there could be substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and increased risk of insolvency, which could result in a total loss of investment to our stockholders and other security holders.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $23.1 million compared to $56.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary operating activities during 2021 were (1) $9.7 million of net losses, (2) a $15.1 million non-cash gain from change in fair market value of warrant derivative and private placement option liabilities, (3) a $2.4 million decrease from operating assets and liabilities, and (4) a $0.5 million of loss on dispositions, net. These activities were partially offset by share-based compensation charges of $3.4 million and other smaller non-cash items.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $0.9 million compared to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to $0.9 million of net proceeds received from the sale of property and equipment. The $14.1 million of net cash provided by investing activities during 2020 was also related to proceeds from the sale of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $32.9 million compared to net cash used of $14.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was generated from the issuance of pre-funded warrants during the private placement closed in December 2021, net of offering expenses. The net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the principal payments and the subsequent early retirement of debt totaling $37.1 million partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock and pre-funded warrants, net in the amount of $22.9 million.
As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any short-term or long-term lease liabilities, debt obligations or other material capital commitments. The expected capital expenditures for the next 12 months are minimal.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for any other contractually narrow or limited purpose.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to
be reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates, and in other instances changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from management’s estimates under different assumptions or conditions. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies related to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. Our management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors and the audit committee has reviewed the company’s disclosure relating to it in this MD&A.
Warrant Derivatives
Freestanding public warrants exercisable for multiple underlying instruments are classified as liabilities. The Company accounts for these warrants in accordance with ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities From Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC Topic 815, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities (“ASC 815”). The Company estimates the fair value of these liabilities using the binomial option model. The option pricing model of our warrant derivative liabilities are estimates and are sensitive to changes to certain inputs used in the pricing model. See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounts for its warrant derivatives.
Freestanding pre-funded warrants and accompanying warrants exercisable for multiple underlying instruments are classified as equity. The Company accounts for these warrants in accordance with ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities From Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC Topic 815, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities (“ASC 815”). Upon the issuance of pre-funded warrants or the exercise of its accompanying common warrants, the Company receives proceeds from its investors which are recognized as equity. Furthermore, because pre-funded warrants and accompanying warrants do not participate in dividends with common stockholders, they are not considered a participating security in its current form and, therefore, they will be considered in the Company’s basic and diluted EPS calculations (if in net income position). See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounts for its pre-funded warrants.
Private Placement Option
The Company previously entered into a 2019 securities purchase agreement that contained a call option on preferred shares that are puttable outside the control of the Company. The Company accounted for the option in accordance with ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities From Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC Topic 815, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities (“ASC 815”). The Company estimated the fair value of the liability using a binomial lattice model, which is sensitive to changes to certain inputs. See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounted for its private placement option derivative. The private placement option was terminated on December 4, 2021, in connection with the 2021 securities purchase agreement.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in performing research and development activities, including compensation and benefits for research and development employees and consultants, facilities expenses, overhead expenses, cost of laboratory supplies, manufacturing expenses, fees paid to third parties and other outside expenses. We accrue for costs incurred as the services are being provided by monitoring the status of the clinical trial or project and the invoices received from our external service providers. We adjust our accrual as actual costs become known. See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounts for research and development expenses.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company’s share-based awards include stock option grants and restricted stock awards. The estimated fair value for stock options, which determines the Company’s calculation of compensation expense, is based on the Black-Scholes pricing model, which requires a number of estimates, including the expected lives of awards, interest rates, stock volatility and other assumptions. Additionally, we apply a forfeiture rate to estimate the number of grants that will ultimately vest, as applicable, and adjust the expense as these awards vest. See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounts for share-based compensation.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for discussion regarding recent accounting pronouncements.