Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on February 11, 2021. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet identified.
The registration statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on November 17, 2021. On November 22, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 27,600,000 Units, including the issuance of 3,600,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $276.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $16.3 million, of which approximately $9.7 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 7,520,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $7.5 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $276.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of net proceeds, including the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement, were placed in a trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of its Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination. Our initial business combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the trust account (excluding any deferred underwriters fees and taxes payable on the income earned on the trust account) at the time we signed a definitive agreement in connection with the initial business combination. However, we will only complete a business combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 18 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or May 22, 2023, or during any Extension Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law. In such event, the Rights and warrants will expire and be worthless.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for issuance of our Class B ordinary shares, and loan proceeds from the Sponsor of approximately $167,000 under a promissory note (the “Note”). We partially repaid approximately $166,000 of the Note upon closing of the Initial Public Offering and repaid the remaining balance of approximately $1,000 on November 24, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held outside of the trust account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor, members of our management team or any of their affiliates may provide us with working capital loans as may be required (of which up to $1.5 million may be converted at the lender’s option into warrants).
On April 1, 2022, we entered into a convertible promissory note (the “2022 Note”) with our Sponsor, a related party of the Company. Pursuant to the 2022 Note we may borrow from the Sponsor, from time to time, up to an aggregate of $1,500,000. Borrowings under the 2022 Note will not bear interest. The 2022 Note will mature on the earlier to occur of (i) 18 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering (or up to any Extension Period, if applicable) or (ii) the effective date of our initial business combination. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be converted into Private Placement Warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the Sponsor. The 2022 Note contains customary events of default, including those relating to our failure to repay the principal amount due upon maturity of the 2022 Note and certain bankruptcy events.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using the funds held outside of the trust account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of investment income from the trust account. We will continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses. Additionally, we recognize non-cash gains and losses within other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our derivative liabilities at each reporting period.
For the period from February 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $276,000, which consisted of approximately $235,000 in general and administrative expense, approximately $15,000 in related party general and related party expenses, and approximately $27,000 of loss from investments held in the trust account.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated November 17, 2021 requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to Class A ordinary shares). The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we registered such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from November 17, 2021 to purchase up to 3,600,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On November 22, 2021, the underwriters consummated the exercise in full of the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $5.5 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies and estimates:
Derivative Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We accounted for the Rights as equity-classified instruments based on an assessment of the Rights’ specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480 and ASC 815. The assessment considered whether the Rights were freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, met the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the Rights met all the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Rights were indexed to our own ordinary shares, among other conditions for the equity classification.
We classify the warrants issued in connection with its Initial Public Offering (the “Public Warrants”) and the Private Placement Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 480 and ASC 815. Such guidance provides that the warrants are not precluded from equity classification. Equity-classified contracts were initially measured at fair value (or allocated value). Subsequent changes in fair value will not be recognized as long as the contracts continue to be classified in equity in accordance with ASC 480 and ASC 815.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, all outstanding Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Under ASC 480, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the remeasurement from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of the redeemable Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net loss per common share is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net loss per ordinary shares does not consider the effect of the Public Warrants, the Private Placement Warrants and the Rights to purchase an aggregate of 23,045,000 Class A ordinary shares since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share for the period from February 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Remeasurement associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.