ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Item 1A Risk factors and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion and analysis presents financial information denominated in millions of dollars which can lead to differences from rounding when compared to similar information contained in the consolidated financial statements and related notes, which are primarily denominated in thousands of dollars.
Executive Summary
We are the world’s leading cloud software company powering social good. Serving the entire social good community-nonprofits, higher education institutions, K-12 schools, healthcare organizations, faith communities, arts and cultural organizations, foundations, companies and individual change agents-we connect and empower organizations and individuals to increase their impact through cloud software, services, expertise and data intelligence. Our portfolio is tailored to the unique needs of vertical markets, with solutions for fundraising and CRM, marketing, advocacy, peer-to-peer fundraising, corporate social responsibility (CSR) and environmental, social and governance (ESG), school management, ticketing, grantmaking, financial management, payment processing and analytics. Serving the industry for more than four decades, we are a remote-first company headquartered in Charleston, South Carolina, with operations in the United States, Australia, Canada, Costa Rica and the United Kingdom. During 2021, we had nearly 40,000 customers with contractual billing arrangements and nearly 100,000 customers that paid us through transactional fees. Through our customers and our solutions, we support millions of users and we connect millions of supporters to over 150,000 organizations and causes in over 100 countries.
Our revenue is primarily generated from the following sources: (i) charging for the use of our software solutions in cloud and hosted environments; (ii) providing payment and transaction services; (iii) providing software maintenance and support services; and (iv) providing professional services, including implementation, consulting, training, analytic and other services.
COVID-19 Impact
The economic impact of COVID-19 on the social good industry remains somewhat uncertain, although we are seeing signs of recovery in the industry. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the shift to a digital-first world. The percentage of giving done online grew by approximately 40% in 2020 with roughly a quarter of that giving taking place on mobile devices. If our existing and prospective customers remain cautious in their purchase decisions, our operating environment may continue to be challenging. Notwithstanding these conditions, we remain focused on continuing to execute our four-point strategy and strengthening our leadership position.
Four-Point Growth Strategy
1.Expand TAM
In December 2021, we doubled our TAM when we acquired EVERFI, an industry leader in global social impact technology. Adding EVERFI advances our position as a leader in the rapidly evolving ESG and CSR spaces and offers cross-selling and upselling opportunities through complementary product offerings with YourCause solutions. Our TAM now stands at over $20 billion, and we remain active in the evaluation of opportunities to further expand our addressable market through acquisitions and internal product development.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
2.Lead with World Class Teams and Operations
We have been investing in sales and marketing to better address our market opportunity with a focus on digital lead generation. One way we are equipping our salesforce to be more effective is by investing in the necessary technology and resources to efficiently drive an increased number of quality leads and better cover our large addressable market. We have implemented software tools to enhance our digital footprint and drive lead generation across the company. We are taking a multi-touch attribution approach to measuring the effectiveness of our marketing campaigns to drive efficiency in our go-to-market efforts and improve returns on our marketing dollars. This is just one of many examples of how we are optimizing our structure, tools and processes to better address our large vertical market opportunities. We have also taken lessons learned throughout the pandemic and re-evaluated elements of our go-to-market strategy with a digital-first mindset, and we have a significant opportunity to leverage the investments into digital to reduce our customer acquisition cost and increase our sales velocity, ultimately, driving a more scalable and cost-effective go-to-market model.
3.Delight Customers with Innovative Cloud Solutions
This strategy reflects our relentless focus on driving value and outcomes for our customers through our solutions. Blackbaud SKY®, our platform for cloud innovation, is a core tenant of this strategy and continues to power an elevated level of innovation by our engineers. It is also enabling our growing ecosystem of partners who are also passionate about social good, to extend and expand the capabilities available to our customers. During 2021, we continued making critical investments in research and development. Through our commitment to giving customers the flexibility to benefit, not just from Blackbaud's innovation, but the innovation happening outside of our walls, we developed more tools designed to create new capabilities that extend Blackbaud solutions. We now have over 6,000 non-Blackbaud developers registered in our ecosystem and we have seen substantial growth in the Blackbaud marketplace, where over 6,500 organizations have found a curated app to help them work smarter. Some of the use cases we have seen in the market include: an app that integrates Shopify with Raiser's Edge NXT and a new API integrating YourCause with Workday, enabling our customers to easily connect employee data into the YourCause platform for more effective employee engagement. We have also enabled non developers with low-code or no-code tools, such as our Microsoft Power Platform connector, to build automated workflows with our APIs without having to be seasoned developers, and we continue to innovate as online gifts become a greater share of our customers' total donations.
The customers we serve require vertical specific business solutions to automate their operations. In 2021, we released a variety of enhancements enabling them to maximize their time, team, and relationships, including substantial updates to Blackbaud Grantmaking and a significant release for accounts receivable functionality in Blackbaud Financial Edge NXT is now with early adopters.
4.Focus on Employees, Culture and ESG Initiatives
During the first quarter of 2021, we elevated a specific strategy focused on our employees, culture and ESG initiatives. This is not new for us. It is something that is in our DNA and is a big advantage as we look to attract and retain top talent. This is evident in our 2020 social responsibility report, which was released in April 2021. We are fully committed to continuing to create a diverse and inclusive environment at all levels of the organization. Early in 2021, we established an ESG Steering Committee with our CEO as the executive sponsor, and Board of Directors involvement. During the first quarter of 2021, we also joined the United Nations Global Compact. Building on our culture of innovation, we launched a new ideation initiative called "Imagine Week," inviting employees across the globe to pitch their ideas directly to the executive leadership team. Employees at every level and length of tenure in the company made proposals ranging from fundraising to customer service improvements. These ideas are making their way into our go-forward plans. In addition, we recently decided, effective in December 2021, to permanently close our fixed office locations (with the exception of our global headquarters facility in Charleston, South Carolina) to align our real estate footprint with our transition to a remote-first workforce. We enter into arrangements for smaller more flexible workspaces where necessary. This decision did not include EVERFI's office locations.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Financial Summary
Total Revenue ($M) Income from Operations ($M)
YoY Growth (%) YoY Growth (%)
Total revenue increased by $14.5 million during 2021, driven largely by the following:
+ Growth in recurring revenue related to increase in transactional revenue from the continued shift toward virtual fundraising and online charitable giving and, to a lesser extent, early progress in initiatives to bring our pricing in line with the market; also included in the increase in recurring revenue is an increase related to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates of $8.6 million
- Decrease in one-time consulting revenue due primarily to less implementation and customization services, in line with our multi-year strategic shift from a license-based and one-time services business model to a cloud subscription business model. Our cloud subscription offerings generally require less implementation and customization services.
- Decrease in one-time analytics revenue as analytics are generally integrated in our cloud solutions
For additional information on the impact of foreign currency fluctuations on our financial results, see Foreign Currency Exchange Rates below on page 44.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Income from operations decreased by $12.3 million during 2021, driven largely by the following:
- Increase in stock-based compensation expense of $33.1 million due to:
•Certain changes to our compensation program that are expected to cause stock-based compensation expense to remain higher than historical levels, including:
◦replacement of our annual cash bonus plans with a short-term performance-based equity award plan
◦decrease in the vesting period for our annual long-term incentive time-based equity awards from 4 years (1/4 per year) to 3 years (1/3 per year), beginning in February 2021; and
◦replacement of cash sign-on and retention bonuses with time-based equity awards.
•Increases in the grant date fair values of our annual equity awards granted to employees; and
•Overall Company performance against 2020 and 2021 goals.
- Increase in transaction-based costs of $9.6 million related to payment services integrated in our cloud solutions
- Increases in third-party contractor and hosting costs of $6.9 million and $3.4 million, respectively, as we continue to migrate our cloud infrastructure to leading public cloud service providers and invest in security
- Increase in corporate costs of $3.5 million primarily related to increases in third-party consulting fees and insurance costs, partially offset by a decrease in bad debt expense
- Increase in marketing costs of $3.5 million primarily due to investments in digital marketing and, to a lesser extent, incremental spending on advertising campaigns
- Increase in acquisition-related expenses and integration costs of $2.8 million
+ Increase in total revenue, as described above
+ Decrease in real estate activity costs of $11.2 million due to our workforce strategy changes made in the third quarter of 2020
+ Decrease in rent expense of $9.2 million related to the purchase of our global headquarters facility during the third quarter of 2020 and our exit of certain other office leases globally during the second half of 2020 in-line with the changes to our workforce strategy at that time
+ Decrease in amortization of intangible assets from business combinations of $4.8 million
+ Decrease in compensation costs other than stock-based compensation of $3.5 million primarily due to a decrease in headcount, partially offset by base salary merit increases in July 2021 and the return of our 401(k)-match program effective January 1, 2021
+ Decrease in travel costs of $3.5 million due to our restriction on non-essential employee travel in response to the COVID-19 pandemic
+ Decrease in employee severance of $3.4 million, related to a modest and targeted headcount reduction during the three months ended June 30, 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic
We are continuing to make critical investments in the business in areas such as digital marketing, engineering, security, customer success and our continued shift of cloud infrastructure to leading public cloud service providers. While we are making good progress, some of these investments have pushed into early 2022, particularly in areas where we are increasing headcount.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Customer retention
Our recurring revenue contracts are generally for a term of three years at contract inception with one to three-year renewals thereafter. We anticipate a continued decrease in maintenance contract renewals as we transition our solution portfolio and maintenance customers from a perpetual license-based model to a cloud subscription delivery model. In the long term, we also anticipate an increase in recurring subscription contract renewals as we continue focusing on innovation, quality and the integration of our cloud solutions, which we believe will provide value-adding capabilities to better address our customers' needs. Due primarily to these factors, we believe a recurring revenue customer retention measure that combines recurring subscription, maintenance and service customer contracts provides a better representation of our customers' overall behavior. During 2021 and 2020, approximately 93% of our customers with recurring revenue contracts were retained. This customer retention rate reflects our efforts to rationalize our portfolio of solutions and migrate customers from legacy solutions towards our next generation cloud solutions. We are investing in innovation, which we believe will increase customer retention over the long-term.
Balance sheet and cash flow
At December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $55.1 million and the carrying amount of our debt under the 2020 Credit Facility was $895.6 million. Our net leverage ratio was 3.31 to 1.00.
During 2021, we generated $213.7 million in cash flow from operations and had a net increase in borrowings of $429.2 million, which was primarily used to finance our acquisition of EVERFI on December 31, 2021. Additionally, we returned $108.4 million to stockholders by way of share repurchases and had aggregate cash outlays of $52.2 million for purchases of property and equipment and capitalized software development costs.
Security Incident update
As discussed in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report, total costs related to the Security Incident have exceeded the limit of our insurance coverage during the first quarter of 2022. Accordingly, we expect that the Security Incident will negatively impact our GAAP profitability and GAAP cash flow for the foreseeable future (see discussion regarding non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow on page 51). For full year 2022, we currently expect net cash outlays of approximately $25 million to $35 million for ongoing legal fees related to the Security Incident. In line with our policy, legal fees, are expensed as incurred. We have not recorded a liability for a loss contingency related to the Security Incident as of December 31, 2021 because we are unable at this time to reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Results of Operations
Reportable segment
We report our operating results and financial information in one operating and reportable segment. See Note 16 of our consolidated financial statements in this report for additional information.
Comparison of 2021 vs. 2020 and 2020 vs. 2019
Acquisitions
During 2021 and 2019, we acquired companies that provided us with strategic opportunities to expand our TAM and share of the philanthropic giving market through the integration of complementary solutions and services to serve the changing needs of our customers. The following are the companies we acquired and their respective acquisition dates:
•EVERFI, Inc. ("EVERFI") on December 31, 2021
•YourCause Holdings, LLC ("YourCause") on January 2, 2019
We have included the results of operations of acquired companies in our consolidated results of operations from the date of their respective acquisitions. In accordance with applicable accounting rules, we determined that the impact of the EVERFI and YourCause acquisitions were not material to our consolidated financial statements; therefore, revenue and earnings since the acquisition date and pro forma information are not required or presented. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements in this report for a summary of these acquisitions.
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
Recurring
Revenue ($M) Cost of revenue ($M) Gross profit ($M)
and gross margin (%)
YoY Growth (%) YoY Growth (%)
Recurring revenue is comprised of fees for the use of our subscription-based software solutions, which includes providing access to cloud solutions, hosting services, payment services, online training programs and subscription-based analytic services. Recurring revenue also includes fees from maintenance services for our on-premises solutions, services included in our renewable subscription contracts, retained and managed services contracts that we expect to have a term consistent with our cloud solution contracts, and variable transaction revenue associated with the use of our solutions.
Cost of recurring revenue is primarily comprised of compensation costs for customer support and production IT personnel, hosting and data center costs, third-party contractor expenses, third-party royalty and data expenses, allocated depreciation, facilities and IT support costs, amortization of intangible assets from business combinations, amortization of software development costs, transaction-based costs related to payments services including remittances of amounts due to third-parties and other costs incurred in providing support and recurring services to our customers.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Our customers continue to prefer cloud subscription offerings with integrated analytics, training and payment services. Recurring subscription contracts are typically for a term of three years at contract inception with one to three-year renewals thereafter. We intend to continue focusing on innovation, quality and integration of our cloud solutions, which we believe will drive future revenue growth.
2021 vs. 2020
Recurring revenue increased by $30.1 million, or 3.5%, driven primarily by the following:
+ Increase in transactional revenue of $20.0 million primarily due to the continued shift toward virtual fundraising and online charitable giving; also included in the increase in transactional revenue is an increase related to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates of $4.7 million
+ Increase in contractual recurring revenue of $10.1 million related to the performance of our cloud solutions and early progress in initiatives to bring our pricing in line with the market, partially offset by a decrease in maintenance revenue as customers migrate to our cloud solutions; also included in the increase in contractual recurring revenue is an increase related to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates of $3.9 million
For additional information on the impact of foreign currency fluctuations on our financial results, see Foreign Currency Exchange Rates below on page 44.
Cost of recurring revenue increased by $21.1 million, or 5.7%, driven primarily by the following:
+ Increase in compensation costs of $10.3 million primarily related to stock-based compensation due to the factors discussed above on page 36 and a shift in resources historically supporting one-time services and other towards recurring revenue
+ Increase in transaction-based costs of $9.6 million related to payment services integrated in our cloud solutions
+ Increase in third-party contractor and hosting costs of $7.8 million as we continue to migrate our cloud infrastructure to leading public cloud service providers and make investments in security
- Decrease in amortization of intangible assets from business combinations of $3.7 million
- Decrease in rent expense of $1.3 million largely due to a decrease in leased hardware, including servers, network gear and storage
- Decrease in amortization of software development costs of $0.8 million
Recurring gross margin decreased by 0.9% primarily due to the increase in cost of recurring revenue outpacing the increase in recurring revenue.
2020 vs. 2019
Recurring revenue increased by $19.1 million, or 2.3%, driven primarily by the following:
+ Increase in transactional revenue of $18.3 million, including an accelerated shift toward virtual and online fundraising and charitable giving related to COVID-19
+ Increase in contractual recurring revenue of $15.5 million related to positive demand from customers across our portfolio of cloud solutions
- Decrease in maintenance revenue of $14.7 million primarily related to our continuing efforts to migrate customers from legacy on-premises solutions onto our solutions powered by Blackbaud SKY, our modern cloud platform
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Partially offsetting contractual recurring revenue was a decrease in the mix of retained and managed services contracts we present in recurring revenue. Revenue from retained and managed service contracts that we do not expect to have a term consistent with our cloud solution contracts is included in one-time services and other revenue beginning January 1, 2020. This change in presentation resulted in a decrease in recurring revenue and an offsetting increase to one-time services and other revenue of $16.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of recurring revenue increased by $11.7 million, or 3.3%, driven primarily by the following:
+ Increase in transaction-based costs of $7.5 million related to payment services integrated in our cloud solutions
+ Increase in amortization of software development costs of $6.8 million due to investments made on innovation, quality and the integration of our cloud solutions
+ Impairment charge of $4.3 million during the three months ended June 30, 2020, against certain previously capitalized software development costs that reduced the carrying value of those assets to zero. The impairment charge resulted primarily from our decision to accelerate the end of customer support for certain solutions.
+ Increase in hosting and data center costs of $3.8 million as we are migrating our cloud infrastructure to leading public cloud service providers
- Decrease in amortization of intangible assets from business combinations of $5.7 million
- Decrease in compensation costs primarily associated with the decision to replace our 2020 cash bonus plans with grants of performance-based equity awards, which were recognized as stock-based compensation expense between May 1, 2020 and May 1, 2021. These awards were earned and became eligible for vesting on May 1, 2021 subject to meeting certain performance conditions and the recipient's continued employment with us
- Decrease in costs associated with certain retained and managed services contracts for which revenue is included in one-time services and other revenue beginning January 1, 2020, as discussed above
Recurring gross margin decreased by 0.4%, driven primarily by an increase in the mix of payments revenue, which generally have lower gross margins than our contractual recurring revenue, the impairment of previously capitalized software development costs, and incremental costs associated with our continued shift toward selling cloud solutions, including data center costs and amortization of software development costs.
One-time services and other
Revenue ($M) Cost of revenue ($M) Gross profit ($M)
and gross margin (%)
YoY Growth (%) YoY Growth (%)
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
One-time services and other revenue is comprised of fees for one-time consulting, analytic and onsite training services, fees for retained and managed services contracts that we do not expect to have a term consistent with our cloud solution contracts, revenue from the sale of our software sold under perpetual license arrangements, fees from user conferences and third-party software referral fees.
Cost of one-time services and other is primarily comprised of compensation costs for professional services and onsite training personnel, other costs incurred in providing onsite customer training, third-party contractor expenses, data expense incurred to perform one-time analytic services, third-party software royalties, costs of user conferences, allocated depreciation, facilities and IT support costs and amortization of intangible assets from business combinations.
2021 vs. 2020
One-time services and other revenue decreased by $15.6 million, or 24.9%, driven primarily by the following:
- Decrease in one-time consulting revenue of $10.5 million due primarily to less implementation and customization services, in line with our multi-year strategic shift from a license-based and one-time services business model to a cloud subscription business model. Our cloud subscription offerings generally require less implementation and customization services.
- Decrease in one-time analytics revenue of $4.2 million as analytics are generally integrated in our cloud solutions
- Decrease in onsite training revenue of $0.7 million due to COVID-19
Cost of one-time services and other decreased $6.0 million or 10.3%, primarily driven by the following:
- Decrease in allocated costs of $2.0 million primarily related to a decrease in rent expense, as discussed below in General and Administrative
- Decrease in third-party contractor costs of $1.5 million, primarily due to a decrease in partners delivering services
- Decrease in compensation costs other than stock-based compensation of $1.1 million largely due to a decrease in headcount, as well as a shift in resources historically supporting one-time services and other towards recurring revenue
- Decreases in amortization intangible assets from business combinations and employee severance
One-time services and other gross margin decreased by 18.3%, primarily due to the significant reductions in one-time consulting and analytics revenue discussed.
2020 vs. 2019
One-time services and other revenue decreased by $6.3 million, or 9.2%, driven primarily by the following:
+ Increase in the mix of retained and managed services contracts we present in one-time services and other. Revenue from retained and managed service contracts that we do not expect to have a term consistent with our cloud solution contracts is included in one-time services and other revenue beginning January 1, 2020. This change in presentation resulted in an increase to one-time services and other revenue and an offsetting decrease in recurring revenue of $16.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
- Decrease in one-time consulting revenue of $12.1 million primarily from less one-time sales related to changes in our compensation plans to place greater emphasis on subscription sales of our cloud solutions. Services increasingly being embedded in our renewable cloud solution contracts also contributed to the decrease in one-time services revenue. Our embedded services are recorded as recurring revenue.
- Decrease in one-time analytics revenue of $4.2 million as analytics are generally integrated in our cloud solutions
- Decrease in conference revenue of $3.6 million as our annual conference, bbcon, was held virtually and provided free of charge
- Decrease in onsite training revenue of $1.3 million due to COVID-19
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Cost of one-time services and other decreased $2.1 million or 3.4%, primarily driven by the following:
+ Increase in compensation costs of $3.4 million primarily related to an increase in stock-based compensation expense as we replaced our 2020 cash bonus plans and annual merit-based salary increases for our employees with grants of equity awards
- Decrease of $4.2 million in costs related to providing our annual user conference, bbcon, virtually
- Insignificant decrease in travel costs due to our restriction on non-essential employee travel in response to COVID-19
One-time services and other gross margin decreased by 5.6%, primarily as the reductions in one-time consulting and analytics revenue discussed above outpaced the decrease in related costs.
Operating Expenses
Sales, marketing and
customer success ($M) Research and
development ($M) General and
administrative ($M)
Percentages indicate expenses as a percentage of total revenue
Sales, marketing and customer success
Sales, marketing and customer success expense includes compensation costs, variable sales commissions, travel-related expenses, advertising and marketing materials, public relations costs, variable reseller commissions and allocated depreciation, facilities and IT support costs.
We see a large market opportunity in the long-term and will continue to make investments to drive sales effectiveness. We have also implemented software tools to enhance our digital footprint and drive lead generation. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented a modest and targeted headcount reduction during the second quarter of 2020, including a reduction in our sales headcount with a focus on retaining our most highly productive sales executives. The enhancements we are making in our go-to-market approach are expected to significantly reduce our average customer acquisition cost as well as the related payback period while increasing sales velocity. As a result, we do not expect our sales, marketing and customer success expense to return to pre-pandemic levels.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
2021 vs. 2020
Sales, marketing and customer success expenses decreased by $23.4 million, or 11.2%. The decreases in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue were primarily driven by the following:
- Decrease in compensation costs other than stock-based compensation of $20.7 million primarily due to the targeted reduction in sales headcount during the second quarter of 2020, as discussed above
- Decrease in allocated costs of $7.0 million primarily related to a decrease in rent expense and the impact of the targeted reduction in sales headcount during the second quarter of 2020, as discussed above
- Decrease in travel costs of $1.9 million due to our restriction on non-essential employee travel in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which went into effect during March 2020
- Decrease in commissions expense of $1.9 million related to a decrease in overall commissionable bookings during 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in commissionable one-time services and other bookings during 2021
+ Increase in stock-based compensation costs of $4.8 million due to the factors discussed beginning on page 36
+ Increase in advertising costs of $3.5 million primarily due to incremental spending on advertising campaigns and investments in digital marketing
2020 vs. 2019
Sales, marketing and customer success expenses decreased by $14.4 million, or 6.4%. The decreases in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue were primarily driven by the following:
- Decrease in compensation costs of $6.5 million primarily related to the decision to replace our 2020 cash bonus plans with grants of performance-based equity awards, which were recognized as stock-based compensation expense between May 1, 2020 and May 1, 2021. These awards were earned and became eligible for vesting on May 1, 2021 subject to meeting certain performance conditions and the recipient's continued employment with us
- Decrease in travel costs of $5.7 million due to our restriction on non-essential employee travel in response to COVID-19
- Decrease in commissions costs of $1.4 million related to a decrease in commissionable sales
Research and development
Research and development expense includes compensation costs for engineering and product management personnel, third-party contractor expenses, software development tools and other expenses related to developing new solutions or upgrading and enhancing existing solutions that do not qualify for capitalization, and allocated depreciation, facilities and IT support costs.
2021 vs. 2020
We continue to make investments to delight our customers with innovative cloud solutions. Research and development expense increased by $24.4 million, or 24.4%. The increases in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue were primarily driven by the following:
+ Increase in compensation costs of $18.9 million primarily related to our increased engineering hiring and, to a lesser extent, stock-based compensation due to the factors discussed above on page 36
+ Increase in third-party contractor costs of $3.5 million as we continue to migrate our cloud infrastructure to leading public cloud service providers and make investments in security
+ Decrease in software development costs of $2.1 million that were required to be capitalized under the internal-use software guidance
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Not included in research and development expense for 2021 and 2020 were $39.4 million and $41.5 million, respectively, of qualifying costs associated with development activities that are required to be capitalized under the internal-use software accounting guidance such as those for our cloud solutions, as well as development costs associated with acquired companies. Qualifying capitalized software development costs associated with our cloud solutions are subsequently amortized to cost of subscriptions revenue over the related asset's estimated useful life, which generally range from three to seven years. We expect that the amount of software development costs capitalized will be relatively consistent in the near-term as we continue making investments in innovation, quality, security and the integration of our solutions, which we believe will drive long-term revenue growth.
2020 vs. 2019
Research and development expenses decreased by $6.0 million, or 5.7%. The decreases in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue were primarily driven by the following:
- Decrease in compensation costs of $5.8 million primarily associated with the decision to replace our 2020 cash bonus plans with grants of performance-based equity awards, which were recognized as stock-based compensation expense between May 1, 2020 and May 1, 2021. These awards were earned and became eligible for vesting on May 1, 2021 subject to meeting certain performance conditions and the recipient's continued employment with us
- Decrease in third-party contractor costs of $1.5 million
- Decrease in travel costs of $1.2 million due to our restriction on non-essential employee travel in response to COVID-19
+ Partially offset by a decrease in software development costs of $4.5 million that were required to be capitalized under the internal-use software guidance
Not included in research and development expense for 2020 and 2019 were $41.5 million and $46.0 million, respectively, of qualifying costs associated with development activities that are required to be capitalized under the internal-use software accounting guidance such as those for our cloud solutions, as well as development costs associated with acquired companies.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense consists primarily of compensation costs for general corporate functions, including senior management, finance, accounting, legal, human resources and corporate development, third-party professional fees, insurance, allocated depreciation, facilities and IT support costs, acquisition-related expenses and other administrative expenses.
During the third quarter of 2020, we adjusted our workforce strategy to provide more flexibility for our employees to work remotely. As a result, during the three months ended September 30, 2020, we reduced the estimated useful lives of our operating lease ROU assets for certain of our office locations we expected to exit, which resulted in an increase in operating lease costs during the third and fourth quarters of 2020. For these same office locations, we also reduced the estimated useful lives of certain facilities-related fixed assets, which resulted in an increase in depreciation expense. We incurred approximately $23.1 million of pre-tax costs related to these real estate activities during the third and fourth quarters of 2020.
In October 2021, we made the decision to permanently close our fixed office locations (with the exception of our global headquarters facility in Charleston, South Carolina), effective in December 2021. This change was intended to align our real estate footprint with our transition to a remote-first workforce. We enter into arrangements for smaller more flexible workspaces where necessary. As a result, during the three months ended December 31, 2021, we reduced the estimated useful lives of our operating lease ROU assets for certain of our office locations we expected to exit, which resulted in incremental operating lease costs during the fourth quarter of 2021. For these same office locations, we also reduced the estimated useful lives of certain facilities-related fixed assets, which resulted in incremental depreciation expense during the fourth quarter of 2021. During the three months ended December 31, 2021, we also recorded impairments of operating lease ROU assets and certain facilities-related fixed assets we have ceased using as a result of our adjusted workforce strategy. These impairment charges are reflected in general and administrative expense. We incurred approximately $12.5 million of pre-tax costs related to these real estate activities during the fourth quarter of 2021.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
2021 vs. 2020
General and administrative expenses increased by $11.4 million, or 8.5%. The increases in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue were primarily driven by the following:
+ Increase in stock-based compensation costs of $13.2 million due to the factors discussed above on page 36
+ Increase in compensation expense, excluding stock-based compensation costs, of $4.3 million due to base salary merit increases on July 2021, as well as an increase in headcount
+ Increase in corporate costs of $3.9 million primarily related to increases in third-party consulting fees and insurance costs, partially offset by decreases in bad debt expense
+ Increases in amortization expense of capitalized cloud computing implementation costs and third-party contractor costs of $1.0 million and $0.6 million, respectively
- Decrease in real estate activity costs of $7.7 million due to our workforce strategy changes made in the third quarter of 2020
- Decrease in rent expense, net of allocated costs, of $2.4 million primarily related to the purchase of our global headquarters facility during the third quarter of 2020 and our exit of certain other office leases globally during the second half of 2020 in-line with changes to our workforce strategy at that time
- Decreases in depreciation expense and travel costs of $1.9 million and $0.9 million, respectively
2020 vs. 2019
General and administrative expenses increased by $21.4 million, or 18.9%. The increases in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue were primarily driven by the following:
+ Increase in real estate activity costs of $23.1 million due to our workforce strategy changes in response to COVID-19, as discussed above
+ Increase in corporate costs $5.9 million primarily related to an increase in bad debt expense
- Decrease in rent expense of $4.1 million primarily related to the purchase of our global headquarters facility, see Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements in this report
- Decrease in travel costs of $2.4 million due to our restriction on non-essential employee travel in response to COVID-19
- Decrease in compensation costs of $1.8 million primarily related to the decision to replace our 2020 cash bonus plans with grants of performance-based equity awards, which were recognized as stock-based compensation expense between May 1, 2020 and May 1, 2021. These awards were earned and became eligible for vesting on May 1, 2021 subject to meeting certain performance conditions and the recipient's continued employment with us
Restructuring
During 2017, in an effort to further our organizational objectives including, improved operating efficiency, customer outcomes and employee satisfaction, we initiated a multi-year plan to consolidate and relocate some of our existing offices to highly modern and more collaborative workspaces with short-term financial commitments. We substantially completed our facilities optimization restructuring plan as of December 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $5.8 million, in before-tax restructuring charges related to these activities. Such charges during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were insignificant.
Restructuring costs incurred prior to our adoption of ASU 2016-02 Leases (Topic 842) ("ASU 2016-02") on January 1, 2019 consisted primarily of costs to terminate lease agreements, contractual lease payments, net of estimated sublease income, upon vacating space as part of the plan, as well as insignificant costs to relocate affected employees and write-off facilities-related fixed assets that we would no longer use.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Upon adoption of ASU 2016-02 at January 1, 2019, we reduced our operating lease ROU assets recognized at transition by the carrying amounts of the restructuring liabilities for certain leased office spaces that we ceased using prior to December 31, 2018. Restructuring costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of operating lease ROU asset impairment costs and, to a lesser extent, lease payments for offices we had ceased using and write-offs of facilities-related fixed assets that we would no longer use.
Interest Expense
Interest expense ($M)
Percentages indicate expenses as a percentage of total revenue
2021 vs. 2020
Interest expense increased during 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to the Real Estate Loans assumed for the purchase of our global headquarters facility in August 2020 and the deferred financing costs and debt discount associated with the 2020 Credit Facility, which was entered into in October 2020. We expect interest expense as well as interest expense as a percentage of total revenue to increase in 2022 as a result of our acquisition of EVERFI in December 2021.
2020 vs. 2019
Interest expense decreased in dollars and as a percentage of revenue during 2020, when compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in our average daily borrowings. Our acquisition of YourCause in January 2019 drove the increase in borrowings during 2019 and no business acquisitions were made in 2020.
Deferred Revenue
The table below compares the components of deferred revenue from our consolidated balance sheets:
(1)The individual amounts for each year may not sum to total deferred revenue or current portion of deferred revenue due to rounding.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
To the extent that our customers are billed for our solutions and services in advance of delivery, we record such amounts in deferred revenue. Our recurring revenue contracts are generally for a term of three years at contract inception with one to three-year renewals thereafter, billed annually in advance and non-cancelable. We generally invoice our customers with recurring revenue contracts in annual cycles 30 days prior to the end of the contract term.
Deferred revenue from recurring revenue contracts as well as one-time services and other increased during 2021, primarily due to the inclusion of EVERFI deferred revenue balances and, to a much lesser extent, early progress in initiatives to bring our pricing in line with the market.
We have acquired businesses whose net tangible assets include deferred revenue. Prior to our adoption of Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2021-08 Business Combinations (Topic 805) - Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers ("ASU 2021-08") effective October 1, 2021 (See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in this report), and in accordance with historical GAAP reporting requirements, we recorded write-downs of deferred revenue from customer arrangements predating the acquisition to fair value, which resulted in lower recorded deferred revenue as of the acquisition date than the actual amounts paid in advance for solutions and services under those customer arrangements. Therefore, our deferred revenue after the historical acquisitions did not reflect the full amount of deferred revenue that would have been reported if the acquired deferred revenue was not written down to fair value. Further explanation of this impact is included below under the caption "Non-GAAP financial measures".
Income Taxes
Income tax provision (benefit) ($M)
Percentages indicate effective income tax rates
Our effective income tax rate may fluctuate quarterly and annually as a result of factors, including changes in tax law in jurisdictions where we conduct business, transactions entered into, changes in the geographic distribution of our earnings or losses, and our assessment of certain tax contingencies and valuation allowances.
We have deferred tax assets for federal, state, and international net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits. The federal and state net operating loss carryforwards are subject to various Internal Revenue Code limitations and applicable state tax laws. A portion of the foreign and state net operating loss carryforwards and a portion of state tax credits have a valuation reserve due to the uncertainty of realizing such carryforwards and credits in the future.
We file income tax returns in the U.S. for federal and various state jurisdictions as well as in foreign jurisdictions including Canada, the U.K., Australia, Ireland and Costa Rica. We are generally subject to U.S. federal income tax examination for calendar tax years ending 2018 through 2021, as well as state and foreign income tax examinations for various years depending on statute of limitations of those jurisdictions.
We have taken federal and state tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits may decrease within the next twelve months. The possible decrease could result from the expiration of statutes of limitations. The reasonably possible decrease at December 31, 2021 was insignificant.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
We recognize accrued interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense.
2021 vs. 2020
The decrease in our effective income tax rate in 2021 when compared to 2020, was primarily due to prior year increase in valuation allowance attributable to state tax credit carryforwards for which we do not expect to realize benefit. Furthermore, our 2021 effective income tax rate was positively impacted by increased benefit attributable to stock-based compensation deduction and a reduction to unrecognized tax benefit as a result of IRS audit settlement and statute of limitation lapses offset against negative impacts of the U.K.-enacted tax rate increase and increase in non-deductible compensation.
The total amount of unrecognized tax benefit that, if recognized, would favorably affect the effective income tax rate, was $3.2 million and $4.2 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
2020 vs. 2019
The increase in our effective tax rate in 2020 when compared to 2019, was primarily due to increase in valuation allowance attributable to state tax credit carryforwards for which we do not expect to realize benefit. Furthermore, our 2020 effective tax rate was negatively impacted by reduced benefit attributable to research tax credit and stock based compensation deduction. Lastly, higher 2020 earnings lessened impact of other non-deductible items.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The operating results analyzed below are presented on a non-GAAP basis. We use non-GAAP financial measures internally in analyzing our operational performance. Accordingly, we believe these non-GAAP measures are useful to investors, as a supplement to GAAP measures, in evaluating our ongoing operational performance. While we believe these non-GAAP measures provide useful supplemental information, non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures may not be completely comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences in the exact method of calculation between companies.
We have acquired businesses whose net tangible assets include deferred revenue. Prior to our adoption of ASU 2021-08 effective October 1, 2021 (See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in this report) and in accordance with historical GAAP reporting requirements, we recorded write-downs of deferred revenue under arrangements predating the acquisition to fair value, which resulted in lower recognized revenue than the contributed purchase price until the related obligations to provide services under such arrangements are fulfilled. Therefore, our GAAP revenues after the historical acquisitions did not reflect the full amount of revenue that would have been reported if the acquired deferred revenue was not written down to fair value. The non-GAAP measures described below reverse the acquisition-related deferred revenue write-downs so that the full amount of revenue booked by the acquired companies is included, which we believe provides a more accurate representation of a revenue run-rate in a given period and, therefore, provides more meaningful comparative results.
The non-GAAP financial measures discussed below exclude the impact of certain transactions because we believe they are not directly related to our operating performance in any particular period, but are for our long-term benefit over multiple periods. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures reflect our ongoing business in a manner that allows for meaningful period-to-period comparisons and analysis of trends in our business.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
(1)We early adopted ASU 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805) - Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers in the fourth quarter of 2021. See Note 2 for additional details.
(2)The individual amounts for each year may not sum to non-GAAP revenue, subtotal, non-GAAP gross profit, non-GAAP income from operations, non-GAAP income before provision for income taxes or non-GAAP net income due to rounding.
(3)Includes Security Incident-related costs incurred during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $40.6 million net of probable insurance recoveries during the same period of $38.7 million. Recorded expenses consisted primarily of payments to third-party service providers and consultants, including legal fees, as well as settlements of customer claims. Not included in this adjustment were costs associated with enhancements to our cybersecurity program.
(4)We apply a non-GAAP effective tax rate of 20.0% when calculating non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP diluted earnings per share.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Non-GAAP organic revenue growth
In addition, we use non-GAAP organic revenue growth, non-GAAP organic revenue growth on a constant currency basis and non-GAAP organic recurring revenue growth, in analyzing our operating performance. We believe that these non-GAAP measures are useful to investors, as a supplement to GAAP measures, for evaluating the periodic growth of our business on a consistent basis. Each of these measures of non-GAAP organic revenue growth excludes incremental acquisition-related revenue attributable to companies acquired in the current fiscal year. For companies, if any, acquired in the immediately preceding fiscal year, each of these non-GAAP organic revenue growth measures reflects presentation of full year incremental non-GAAP revenue derived from such companies as if they were combined throughout the prior period. In addition, each of these non-GAAP organic revenue growth measures excludes prior period revenue associated with divested businesses. The exclusion of the prior period revenue is to present the results of the divested businesses within the results of the combined company for the same period of time in both the prior and current periods. We believe this presentation provides a more comparable representation of its current business’ organic revenue growth and revenue run-rate.
As a result of our adoption of ASU 2021-08 effective October 1, 2021 (See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in this report), our calculations of non-GAAP organic revenue growth, non-GAAP organic revenue growth on a constant currency basis and non-GAAP organic recurring revenue growth, will no longer include the non-GAAP revenue attributable to acquired companies, as if there were no acquisition-related write-downs of acquired deferred revenue to fair value as required by historical GAAP.
(1)Non-GAAP acquisition-related revenue excludes incremental acquisition-related revenue calculated in accordance with GAAP that is attributable to companies acquired in the current fiscal year. For companies acquired in the immediately preceding fiscal year, non-GAAP acquisition-related revenue reflects presentation of full-year incremental non-GAAP revenue derived from such companies, as if they were combined throughout the prior period.
(2)Non-GAAP organic revenue for the prior year periods presented herein will not agree to non-GAAP organic revenue presented in the respective prior period quarterly financial information solely due to the manner in which non-GAAP organic revenue growth is calculated.
(3)To determine non-GAAP organic revenue growth on a constant currency basis, revenues from entities reporting in foreign currencies were translated to U.S. Dollars using the comparable prior period's quarterly weighted average foreign currency exchange rates. The primary foreign currencies creating the impact are the Australian Dollar, British Pound, Canadian Dollar and EURO.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Rule of 40
Rule of 40 is defined as non-GAAP organic revenue growth plus non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA margin. Non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA is defined as GAAP net income plus interest, net; income tax provision (benefit); depreciation; amortization of intangible assets from business combinations; amortization of software development costs; stock-based compensation; acquisition-related integration costs; acquisition-related expenses; employee severance; restructuring and other real estate activities; and Security Incident-related costs.
(1)During the third quarter of 2020 and the fourth quarter of 2021, we reduced the estimated useful lives of our operating lease right-of-use assets for certain of our office locations we expected to exit. For these same office locations, we also reduced the estimated useful lives of certain facilities-related fixed assets, which resulted in increases in depreciation expense. The accelerated portions of the fixed asset depreciation expense related to these activities of $1.7 million and $3.2 million for the three months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $1.7 million and $4.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, was presented in the "Restructuring and other real estate activities" line of the reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures. Total depreciation expense was $4.9 million and $6.9 million, for the three months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $14.4 million and $19.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2)Includes amortization expense related to software development costs and amortization expense from capitalized cloud computing implementation costs.
(3)The individual amounts for each year may not sum to subtotal, non-GAAP EBITDA or adjusted non-GAAP EBITDA due to rounding.
(4)Includes Security Incident-related costs incurred, net of probable insurance recoveries. See additional details in the reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP operating income above.
(5)Measured by non-GAAP organic revenue growth plus non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA margin. See Non-GAAP organic revenue growth table above.
(6)To determine non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA on a constant currency basis, non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA from entities reporting in foreign currencies were translated to U.S. Dollars using the comparable prior period's quarterly weighted average foreign currency exchange rates. The primary foreign currencies creating the impact are the Australian Dollar, British Pound, Canadian Dollar and EURO.
(7)Measured by non-GAAP organic revenue growth on constant currency basis plus non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA margin on constant currency basis.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Non-GAAP free cash flow
Non-GAAP free cash flow is defined as operating cash flow less capital expenditures, including costs required to be capitalized for software development, and capital expenditures for property and equipment.
During 2022, in order to provide a meaningful basis for comparison, we will also use non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow in analyzing our operating performance. Non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow is defined as operating cash flow less capital expenditures, including costs required to be capitalized for software development, capital expenditures for property and equipment, and less cash outflows, net of insurance, related to the Security Incident. We believe non-GAAP free cash flow and non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow will provide useful measures of the company's operating performance. Non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow is not intended to represent and should not be viewed as the amount of residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures.
Seasonality
Our revenues normally fluctuate as a result of certain seasonal variations in our business. Our first quarter has historically been the seasonal low for bookings, with the second and fourth quarters historically being seasonally higher, and our bookings tend to be back-end loaded within individual quarters given our quarterly quota plans. Transactional revenue is non-contractual and less predictable given the susceptibility to certain drivers such as timing and number of events and marketing campaigns, as well as fluctuations in donation volumes and tuition payments. Our transactional revenue has historically been at its lowest in the first quarter due to the timing of customer fundraising initiatives and events. We have historically experienced seasonal highs during the fourth quarter due to year-end giving campaigns and during the second quarter when a large number of events are held. Our revenue from professional services has historically been lower in the first quarter when many of those services commence and in the fourth quarter due to the holiday season. As a result of these and other factors, our total revenue has historically been lower in the first quarter than in the remainder of our fiscal year, with the fourth quarter historically achieving the highest total revenue. Our expenses, other than transaction-based costs related to our payment services, do not vary significantly as a result of these factors, but do fluctuate on a quarterly basis due to varying timing of expenditures.
Our cash flow from operations normally fluctuates quarterly due to the combination of the timing of customer contract renewals including renewals associated with customers of acquired companies, delivery of professional services and occurrence of customer events, as well as merit-based salary increases, among other factors. Historically, due to lower revenues in our first quarter, combined with the payment of certain annual vendor contracts, our cash flow from operations has been lowest in our first quarter. Due to the timing of customer contract renewals and student enrollments, many of which take place at or near the beginning of our third quarter, our cash flow from operations has been lower in our second quarter as compared to our third and fourth quarters. Partially offsetting these favorable drivers of cash flow from operations in our third and fourth quarters are base salary merit increases, which were replaced in 2020 with performance-based equity awards due to COVID-19, but returned in July 2021. In addition, deferred revenues can vary on a seasonal basis for the same reasons. Our cash flow from financing is negatively impacted in our first quarter when most of our equity awards vest, as we pay taxes on behalf of our employees related to the settlement or exercise of equity awards. During the second quarter of 2021, however, we experienced an increase in the amount of taxes we paid on behalf of our employees related to the settlement of equity awards when compared to the same period in 2020, as the equity granted in May 2020 in lieu of cash bonus plans and base salary merit increases vested. These patterns may change as a result of the continued shift to online giving, growth in volume of transactions for which we process payments, or as a result of acquisitions, new market opportunities, new solution introductions, the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents selected financial information about our financial position:
The following table presents selected financial information about our cash flows:
Our principal sources of liquidity are operating cash flow, funds available under the 2020 Credit Facility and cash on hand. Our operating cash flow depends on continued customer renewal of our subscription and maintenance arrangements and market acceptance of our solutions and services. Based on current estimates of revenue and expenses, we believe that the currently available sources of funds and anticipated cash flows from operations will be adequate for at least the next twelve months to finance our operations, fund anticipated capital expenditures and meet our debt obligations. We also believe that we will be able to continue to meet our long-term cash requirements due to our anticipated cash flow from operations, solid financial position and ability to access capital from financial markets. To the extent we undertake future material acquisitions, investments or unanticipated capital or operating expenditures, including in connection with the Security Incident, we may require additional capital. In that context, we regularly evaluate opportunities to enhance our capital structure including through potential debt or equity issuances.
As a well-known seasoned issuer, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement for an undetermined amount of debt and equity securities with the SEC on January 14, 2022. Under this universal shelf registration statement we may offer and sell, from time to time, debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts and stock purchase units. Subject to certain conditions, this registration statement will be effective through January 13, 2024.
At December 31, 2021, our total cash and cash equivalents balance included approximately $15.4 million of cash that was held outside the U.S. While these funds may not be needed to fund our U.S. operations for at least the next twelve months, if we need these funds, we may be required to accrue and pay taxes to repatriate a portion of the funds. We currently do not intend or anticipate a need to repatriate our cash held outside the U.S.
Operating Cash Flow
Throughout 2021, 2020 and 2019, our cash flows from operations were derived principally from: (i) our earnings from on-going operations prior to non-cash expenses such as depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, deferred income taxes, amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discount and adjustments to our provision for credit losses and sales returns; and (ii) changes in our working capital.
Working capital changes are comprised of changes in accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other assets, trade accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities and deferred revenue.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
2021 vs. 2020
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $65.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due a $49.7 million increase in cash flow from operations associated with working capital, and a $16.1 million increase in net income adjusted for non-cash expenses.
The increase in cash flow from operations associated with working capital during 2021, when compared to 2020, was primarily due to:
•the payment of our 2019 cash bonus plans in 2020 and the replacement of our 2020 cash bonus plans with performance-based equity awards (which we expect will continue going forward);
•an increase in the collection of our accounts receivable balances, including early progress in initiatives to bring our pricing in line with the market; and
•fluctuations in the timing of vendor payments; partially offset by
•an increase in income tax payments.
2020 vs. 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $34.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due a $81.0 million decrease in cash flow from operations associated with working capital, partially offset by a $46.5 million increase in net income adjusted for non-cash expenses.
The decrease in cash flow from operations associated with working capital during 2020, when compared to 2019, was primarily due to:
•an increase in current period bonus payments as a result of an increase in amounts accrued as of December 31, 2019 for over-performance against 2019 targets;
•a decrease in current period bonus accrual due to our decision to replace cash payments for our 2020 bonus plans with performance-based equity awards;
•a decrease in customer billings and payment collections due to the declines in our 2020 bookings performance compared to 2019 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•an increase in the aging of customer receivable balances, primarily due to COVID-19;
•an increase in one-time cash payments associated with the exit of a number of our leases; and
•fluctuations in the timing of vendor payments.
Security Incident update
As discussed in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report, total costs related to the Security Incident have exceeded the limit of our insurance coverage during the first quarter of 2022. Accordingly, we expect that the Security Incident will negatively impact our GAAP profitability and GAAP cash flow for the foreseeable future (see discussion regarding non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow on page 51). For full year 2022, we currently expect net cash outlays of approximately $25 million to $35 million for ongoing legal fees related to the Security Incident. In line with our policy, legal fees, are expensed as incurred. We have not recorded a liability for a loss contingency related to the Security Incident as of December 31, 2021 because we are unable at this time to reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Investing Cash Flow
During 2022, we expect our total capital expenditures, including estimated outlays for capitalized software development costs, to be between approximately $60.0 million and $70.0 million.
2021 vs. 2020
Net cash used in investing activities of $471.3 million increased by $399.4 million during 2021, when compared to 2020.
We spent $419.1 million for our acquisition of EVERFI in 2021 and we did not make any similar investments during 2020. We used $40.5 million for software development costs, which was relatively consistent with cash spent during 2020. We continue to invest in our innovative cloud solutions, as well as development activities for Blackbaud SKY, our modern cloud platform.
We also spent $11.7 million of cash for purchases of property and equipment during 2021, which was down $18.0 million from cash spent in 2020. The decrease in cash expended was primarily due to our purchase of our global headquarters facility in 2020.
2020 vs. 2019
Net cash used in investing activities of $71.8 million decreased by $95.4 million during 2020, when compared to 2019.
We spent $109.4 million for our acquisition of YourCause in 2019 and we did not make any similar investments during 2020. We used $42.2 million for software development costs, which was down $4.7 million from cash spent during 2019. We continue to invest in our innovative cloud solutions, as well as development activities for Blackbaud SKY, our modern cloud platform.
We also spent $29.7 million of cash for purchases of property and equipment during 2020, which was up $18.2 million from cash spent in 2019. The additional cash expended was primarily used to purchase our global headquarters facility.
Financing Cash Flow
2021 vs. 2020
During 2021, we had a net increase in borrowings of $429.2 million attributable to our acquisition of EVERFI, compared to a net increase in borrowings of $0.9 million in 2020. During 2021, we spent $108.4 million on repurchases of our common stock compared to $41.0 million during 2020 (see additional details below regarding our stock repurchase program which began in the fourth quarter of 2020). During 2020, we paid dividends of $6.0 million and we did not pay dividends during 2021, as we discontinued the declaration and payment of all cash dividends beginning with the second quarter of 2020.
We paid $39.4 million to satisfy tax obligations of employees upon settlement or exercise of equity awards during 2021 compared to $21.4 million during 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to our decision to replace our annual cash bonus plans with a short-term performance-based equity award plan. The amount of taxes paid by us on behalf of employees related to the settlement or exercise of equity awards varies from period to period based upon the timing of grants and vesting, as well as the market price for shares of our common stock at the time of settlement. Most of our equity awards currently vest in our first quarter.
During 2021, cash flow from financing activities associated with changes in restricted cash due to customers decreased $13.5 million, compared to an increase of $61.2 million during 2020. This line in the statement of cash flows represents the change in the amount of restricted cash held and payable by us to customers from one period to the next.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
2020 vs. 2019
During 2020, we had a net increase in borrowings of $0.9 million, compared to a net increase in borrowings of $79.5 million in 2019, which was primarily attributable to our acquisition of YourCause. During 2020, we spent $41.0 million on repurchases of our common stock (see additional details below regarding our stock repurchase program). In addition, during 2020, we paid dividends of $6.0 million, which was down compared to 2019, as we discontinued the declaration and payment of all cash dividends beginning with the second quarter of 2020.
We paid $21.4 million to satisfy tax obligations of employees upon settlement or exercise of equity awards during 2020 compared to $23.8 million during 2019.
Cash flow from financing activities associated with changes in restricted cash due to customers decreased $16.6 million during 2020, when compared to 2019, as the amount of restricted cash held and payable by us to customers as of December 31, 2019 was significantly larger than at the same date in 2018 primarily due to the timing of year-end donations. Additionally, effective August 3, 2020, a significant amount of restricted cash related to charitable giving transacted through our social responsibility and grantmaking solutions is now held and disbursed by the Blackbaud Giving Fund, an independent nonprofit organization, strategic partner of ours, and sponsoring organization for a donor advised fund. This change was made primarily to better support our YourCause CSR Connect and YourCause Grants Connect solutions.
Stock repurchase program
Under our stock repurchase program, we are authorized to repurchase shares from time to time in accordance with applicable laws both on the open market, including under trading plans established pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and in privately negotiated transactions. The timing and amount of repurchases depends on several factors, including market and business conditions, the trading price of our common stock and the nature of other investment opportunities. The repurchase program does not have an expiration date and may be limited, suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we purchased 1,592,933 shares for $108.4 million. In December 2021, our Board of Directors reauthorized and replenished our stock repurchase program that authorizes us to purchase up to $250.0 million of our outstanding shares of common stock. The remaining amount available to purchase stock under the stock repurchase program was $250.0 million as of December 31, 2021.
2020 Credit Facility
In October 2020, we entered into a 5-year $900.0 million Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “2020 Credit Facility”). Upon closing, we drew $400.0 million on a term loan and used the proceeds to repay the outstanding principal balance of the term loan under our previous credit facility, and repay $124.4 million of outstanding revolving credit loans under the previous credit facility.
Historically, we have drawn on our credit facility from time to time to help us meet financial needs primarily due to the seasonality of our cash flows from operations and financing for business acquisitions. At December 31, 2021, our available borrowing capacity under the 2020 Credit Facility was $239.5 million. The 2020 Credit Facility matures in October 2025.
On December 31, 2021, we borrowed a total of $435 million under the 2020 Credit Facility, including $250.0 million under the 2021 Incremental Term Loan (as defined in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements in this report) and $185 million of revolving credit loans, to fund a portion of the consideration and expenses related to our acquisition of EVERFI.
At December 31, 2021, the carrying amount of our debt under the 2020 Credit Facility was $895.6 million. Our average daily borrowings were $482.4 million during 2021.
The term loans under the 2020 Credit Facility and our other debt require periodic principal payments. The balance of the term loans and any amounts drawn on the revolving credit loans are due upon maturity of the 2020 Credit Facility in October 2025. The Real Estate Loans also require periodic principal payments and the balances of the real estate loans are due upon maturity in April 2038.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Following is a summary of the financial covenants under the 2020 Credit Facility:
(1)Under the terms of the 2020 Credit Facility, the Net Leverage Ratio requirement may be increased by up to 0.50 provided we satisfy certain requirements, including a permitted business acquisition, and provided that the maximum Net Leverage Ratio shall not exceed 4.25 to 1.00.
Under the 2020 Credit Facility, we also have restrictions on our ability to declare and pay dividends and our ability to repurchase shares of our common stock. In order to pay any cash dividends and/or repurchase shares of stock: (i) no default or event of default shall have occurred and be continuing under the 2020 Credit Facility, and (ii) our pro forma net leverage ratio, as set forth in the 2020 Credit Facility, must be 0.25 less than the net leverage ratio requirement at the time of dividend declaration or share repurchase. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our debt covenants under the 2020 Credit Facility.
First amendment to 2020 Credit Facility
On January 31, 2022, we entered into the First Amendment to Credit Agreement which amends the 2020 Credit Facility to, among other things, (i) modify the definition of “Applicable Margin”, (ii) modify the net leverage ratio financial covenant to require a net leverage ratio of (A) 4.00:1.00 or less for the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2021 and for fiscal quarters ending thereafter through December 31, 2023 and (B) 3.75:1.00 or less for the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2024 and thereafter, (iii) reset the $250.0 million fixed dollar basket with respect to the accordion feature, and (iv) modify certain negative covenants to provide additional operational flexibility. See Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements in this report for additional details.
Commitments and Contingencies
(1)The individual amounts may not sum to the total due to rounding.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, we had total remaining principal payments of $961.2 million. These payments represent principal payments only, under the following assumptions: (i) that the amounts outstanding under the 2020 Credit Facility, our real estate loans and our other debt at December 31, 2021 will remain outstanding until maturity, with minimum payments occurring as currently scheduled, and (ii) that there are no assumed future borrowings on the 2020 Revolving Facility for the purposes of determining minimum commitment amounts. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements in this report for more information.
Interest payments on debt
In addition to principal payments, as of December 31, 2021, we expect to pay interest expense over the life of our debt obligations of approximately $102.7 million. The actual interest expense recognized in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income will depend on the amount of debt, the length of time the debt is outstanding and the interest rate, which could be different from our assumptions on our remaining principal payments described above.
Operating leases
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
As of December 31, 2021, we had remaining operating lease payments of $75.8 million. These payments have not been reduced by sublease income, incentive payments, reimbursement of leasehold improvements or the amount representing imputed interest of $13.3 million. Our operating leases are generally for corporate offices, subleased offices and certain equipment and furniture. Given our remote-first workforce strategy and real estate footprint optimization efforts, as discussed above, we do not anticipate entering any new, material operating leases for offices for the foreseeable future. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements in this report for more information.
Purchase obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we had remaining purchase obligations of $33.6 million. These purchase obligations are for third-party technology used in our solutions and for other services we purchase as part of our normal operations. In certain cases, these arrangements require a minimum annual purchase commitment by us. Our purchase obligations are not recorded as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021, as we had not received the related services. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements in this report for more information.
The total liability for uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, was $3.7 million and $4.6 million, respectively. Our accrued interest and penalties related to tax positions taken on our tax returns was insignificant and $1.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rates
Approximately 16% of our total revenue for 2021 was generated by operations outside the U.S. We do not have significant operations in countries in which the economy is considered to be highly inflationary. Our consolidated financial statements are denominated in U.S. dollars and, accordingly, changes in the exchange rate between foreign currencies and the U.S. dollar will affect the translation of our subsidiaries’ financial results into U.S. dollars for purposes of reporting our consolidated financial results. The accumulated currency translation adjustment, recorded within other comprehensive income (loss) as a component of stockholders’ equity, was income of $1.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and income of $0.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
The vast majority of our contracts are entered into by our U.S. or U.K. entities. The contracts entered into by the U.S. entity are almost always denominated in U.S. dollars or Canadian dollars, and contracts entered into by our U.K., Australian and Irish subsidiaries are generally denominated in British Pounds, Australian dollars and Euros, respectively. Historically, as the U.S. dollar weakened, foreign currency translation resulted in an increase in our revenues and expenses denominated in non-U.S. currencies. Conversely, as the U.S. dollar strengthened, foreign currency translation resulted in a decrease in our revenues and expenses denominated in non-U.S. currencies. During 2021, foreign translation resulted in increases in our revenues and expenses denominated in non-U.S. currencies. Though we have exposure to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, the impact has generally not been material to our consolidated results of operations or financial position. During 2021, the fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates increased our total revenue and our income from operations by $9.2 million and $3.1 million, respectively. We will continue monitoring such exposure and take action as appropriate. To determine the impacts on revenue (or income from operations) from fluctuations in currency exchange rates, current period revenues (or income from operations) from entities reporting in foreign currencies were translated into U.S. dollars using the comparable prior year period's weighted average foreign currency exchange rates. These impacts are non-GAAP financial information and are not in accordance with, or an alternative to, information prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. If our costs were to become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we may not be able to fully offset such higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could harm our business, financial condition and results of operations. In addition, if inflationary pressures impact the rate of giving to our customers, there could be adverse impacts to our business, financial condition and results of operations.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we reconsider and evaluate our estimates and assumptions.
We base our estimates on historical experience, current trends and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could materially differ from any of our estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in this report. We believe the accounting estimates listed below are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of the impact that recently issued accounting pronouncements are expected to have on our financial position and results of operations when adopted in the future, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in this report.
2021 Form 10-K
Blackbaud, Inc.