ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based upon current plans, expectations, and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. You should review the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and the section titled “Risk Factors” for a discussion of factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
Blend Labs, Inc. was founded in 2012, with a vision to bring simplicity and transparency to financial services, so everyone can gain access to the capital they need to lead better lives. To realize this vision, we have built a market-leading cloud-based software platform for financial services firms that is designed to power the end-to-end consumer journey for any banking product. Our software platform was built in an extensible, modular, and configurable fashion to support continued product expansion. We have technology, data, and service providers on our software platform, including an extensive marketplace of insurance carriers, realtors, and settlement agencies. Our products and marketplaces provide multiple opportunities for us to serve financial services firms and consumers and drive revenue growth.
Our rapid growth reflects continued product innovation and increased transaction volume as we continue to attract financial services firms to our software platform and grow with them as they serve consumers. Financial services firms have been shifting for years to a digital-first approach to acquiring consumers, delivering products, and deepening existing consumer relationships. This imperative to compete through digital-first consumer experiences creates a compelling opportunity for Blend. We believe there is a large, untapped opportunity to provide additional product offerings and drive increased transaction volume for financial institutions and consumers using our software platform.
We are continually seeking to enhance the end-to-end banking journeys we power through our software platform. To accelerate the adoption of innovations in our mortgage and home equity products, on June 30, 2021 we acquired 90.1% ownership of Title365, a leading title insurance agency that offers title, escrow and other trustee services.
Our Business Model
Our success-based business model is designed to align our growth with the interests of our customers. We offer our products through software-as-a-service agreements where fees are assessed based on completed transactions, such as a funded loan, new account opening, or closing transaction. We do not charge for abandoned applications or rejected applications, even though they cause us to incur costs related to these applications. Completed transaction fees are determined by the number and type of software platform components that are needed to support each product offering. Completed transaction fees are not impacted by the dollar size of transactions; however, we provide volume-based discounts to customers as they complete a higher volume of transactions on our software platform. Customers also have the opportunity to secure discounts by agreeing to contractual minimums. With our success-based business model, we are focused on driving revenue growth by enabling our customers to more efficiently process and complete transactions using our software platform.
We focus on customer success to drive transaction volumes and opportunities for follow-on sales. Our products are sold through a direct sales force that continues to manage customer relationships on an ongoing basis post-sale. Customers often complete an initial deployment for one or two products and then add more products over time. The length of the sales cycle for our products generally declines for the second and subsequent products we sell to a financial services firm, highlighting our high customer satisfaction.
We also earn revenue through commissions or service fees when consumers use our integrated marketplaces to select a real estate agent, property and casualty insurance carrier, or our software-enabled title and settlement services entity, which excludes revenue from Title365. These commissions or service fees are generated from consumers and are incremental to what we earn from our financial services firm customers on completed transactions. Our marketplaces are intended to provide greater consumer choice and flexibility and to help financial services firms by providing them with a more complete offering in partnership with Blend. As we drive adoption of our software platform, we expect these commissions and service fees to comprise a larger part of our revenue.
The acquisition of Title365 has enabled our customers to streamline the title, settlement, and closing process at scale for mortgages, home equity lines of credit, and home equity loans, and we plan to continue to invest in improving and integrating settlement services into those banking products. In performing title search services, Title365 serves as an agent to place and bind title insurance policies with third-party underwriters. Title365 escrow, closing and settlement services are primarily associated with managing the closing of real estate transactions, including the processing of funds on behalf of the transaction participants, gathering and recording the required closing documents, and providing notary and other real estate or title-related activities. Title365 also provides title services in connection with a borrower default and with the issuance of home equity lines of credit and home equity loans.
Recent Developments
Initial Public Offering
On July 20, 2021, we completed our IPO, with a subsequent partial exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares on August 17, 2021. We issued and sold an aggregate of 22,468,111 shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.00001, at an offering price of $18.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of $366.7 million, after deducting underwriters' discounts and commissions of $27.3 million and offering expenses of $10.4 million.
Acquisition of Title365
On June 30, 2021, we acquired 90.1% ownership of Title365, a leading title insurance agency that offers title, escrow and other trustee services. Title365 has enabled our customers to streamline the title, settlement, and closing process at scale for mortgages, home equity lines of credit, and home equity loans.
COVID-19
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily closed our offices, required our employees and contractors to work remotely, and implemented travel restrictions, all of which represent a significant disruption in how we operate our business. The operations of our prospects, partners, and customers have likewise been disrupted. While the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the duration and spread of the outbreak and the extent and effectiveness of containment actions, it has already had an adverse effect on the global economy, and the ultimate societal and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown. We believe that demand for our software platform and our results of operations have not been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic thus far. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, we have continued to partner with our financial services customers to expand the scope and availability of products through our software platform. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we have seen a 50% increase in banking transactions on our software platform compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, and we attribute a portion of this increase to the accelerating need for digital transformation at financial services firms.
We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic is accelerating the transformation of financial services firms into digital businesses, is causing the regulatory environment to shift in favor of digitization (such as through the use of digital signatures and online notarization), and is driving consumer behavior away from traditional branches and toward digital channels for banking services, which we expect will generate additional opportunities for us in the future.
The future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business remains uncertain. See the section titled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the challenges and risks we have encountered and could encounter related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Ability to Increase Transaction Volume
Our success-based business model results in our revenue growing as we increase our transaction volume. We increase transaction volume on our software platform in part by attracting new customers and growing our relationships with existing customers. Our success is in part based on our ability to address the evolving needs of our customers and increase their usage of our software platform. Under our “Customer First” model, we focus on building successful long-term relationships and aligning revenue growth with value delivery. We invest in our customers’ success, beginning with an initial onboarding and rollout plan for each customer. We also monitor utilization rates by customers on our software platform to manage expanded use over time. Our proven ability to grow transaction volume has been a function of product depth, technological excellence, and the ability of our sales and marketing teams to match our solutions with the strategic objectives of our customers. Our software platform enables customers to process transaction volumes more effectively and create a better consumer experience.
By increasing transaction volume on our software platform, we also enable and drive our marketplace business. Our curated set of integrated marketplaces enable consumers to shop for products and services at the precise moment of need as they apply for loans and other products. These marketplaces enable consumers to find real estate agents, insurance carriers, and automobiles for sale online by quickly locating service providers and compare the rates. As we enable a greater volume and diversity of transactions on our software platform, we can help a greater number of consumers locate competitive service providers and build trust with the Blend brand. Revenue from our marketplace business is driven by our transaction volume and success of matching consumers with service providers.
Because our revenue growth is dependent on transaction volume growth, if our transaction volume growth rate declines for any reason, including but not limited to, reduced demand for our products and services, insufficient growth in the number of financial services firms that utilize our products and services or the lack of expansion of products and services within our existing customer base, transaction volume and mix, particularly with our significant customers, increased competition, or a decrease in the growth or reduction in size of our overall market, our revenue growth rate would decline accordingly. In the last quarter of 2021, we have seen industry estimates of mortgage transaction volume showing greater than 30% decline year-over-year, which impacts both of our segments. These industry estimates forecast a continued decline in total market transaction volume in the next 12 to 24 months. In our Title365 segment, we have already experienced lower than anticipated title transaction volume since the closing of the acquisition and may experience further reductions in the future.
Investments in Growth
Our ability to maintain a differentiated platform and offering is dependent upon our speed of innovation. We will invest in our software platform to drive innovation and maintain our position as a leading provider of software for financial services firms for any banking product. To drive adoption and increase penetration within our customer base, we will continue to rapidly introduce new products and features. While we focus today on consumer banking, we believe we can rapidly expand our library of modular components to support commercial banking products as well. In addition, our low-code, drag-and-drop design tools will enable our customers to bring new, innovative products to market quickly and positions us with what we believe is a market-leading combination of platform capabilities and out-of-the-box product offerings. We believe that investment in research and development will contribute to our long-term growth but will also negatively impact our short-term profitability.
Developments in the Macroeconomic Environment
A large portion of our revenue is driven by mortgage and mortgage related transaction volumes. These volumes affect our mortgage business, title business and marketplace offerings. We expect the volumes of loans and financial products closed using our software platform and the volume of issued title insurance policies will continue to drive a large portion of our revenue for the foreseeable future. As those volumes are influenced by numerous macroeconomic factors, including interest rates, our business’ performance will be impacted as the macro environment changes. For instance, as interest rates rise, we would expect to see a lower volume of refinance transactions, and in particular refinance mortgage transactions.
In January 2022, the Mortgage Bankers Association (“MBA”) released the U.S mortgage originations forecast which indicated that the residential mortgage originations are expected to steadily decline in 2022 and 2023 before leveling out in 2024 as interest rates are expected to rise. In March 2022, the U.S. Federal Reserve raised interest rates and has indicated it expects to raise interest rates again in the future. Declines in the mortgage origination volumes are likely to adversely affect our revenue, as we expect that our overall mortgage transaction volumes will decline in the near term due to the rising mortgage interest rates. Our revenue in the future periods will continue to be subject to these and other factors that are beyond our control and, as a result, are likely to fluctuate. We anticipate that as our platform grows and more consumer banking transactions occur on our software platform over the coming years, we will be less exposed to fluctuations in the macroeconomic environment.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key business metrics to help us evaluate our business, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Blend Platform - Number of Transactions
Our success in the Blend Platform segment depends in part on increasing the volume of mortgage and consumer banking transactions that take place on our software platform. This occurs as we add new customers and complete more transactions with existing customers, including when our existing customers adopt additional products. Our software platform is built to be extensible, modular, and configurable, so that our customers can easily utilize our pre-built workflow technology, our marketplaces, and our integrations with technology, data, and service providers. We design our new offerings to be highly complementary to existing ones in order to increase the speed of adoption and efficiently scale our revenue. This increasing attachment contributes further to our growth.
Title365 - Closed Orders
In our Title365 segment, closed orders represent the number of orders for title insurance or escrow services that were successfully fulfilled in each period with the issuance of a title insurance policy or provision of escrow services. The volume of closed orders is affected by the overall level of real estate activity, which is cyclical in nature and is affected by a number of factors, including the availability of mortgage credit, the cost of real estate, interest rate volatility, consumer confidence, employment and family income levels, and general economic conditions.
We believe that the continued growth in commercial use of the internet will lead to the continued migration of traditional offline markets and industries online. Accordingly, we expect there to be a migration of the Title365 legacy business to our software-enabled platform over time, and as a result, we expect the Title365 closed orders within the Title365 segment to decrease in future periods and the volume of software-enabled title, escrow, and settlement orders within the Blend Platform segment to increase.
The following tables set forth our key business metrics:
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Blend Platform
In our Blend Platform segment, we generate revenue from fees paid by customers to access our platform. Fees are assessed based on completed transactions, such as a funded loan, new account opening, or closing transaction. We do not charge for abandoned applications or rejected applications, even though they cause us to incur costs related to these applications. Arrangements with our customers do not provide the contractual right to take possession of our software at any point in time. Revenue is recognized when access to our platform is provisioned to our customers for an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. To a lesser extent, we generate revenue from professional services related to the deployment of our platform, premium support services, and consulting services. We also earn revenue through commissions or service fees when consumers use our Blend Platform integrated marketplaces to select a real estate agent, property and casualty insurance carrier, or title and settlement services entity.
Our customers have the ability to access our platform under subscription arrangements, in which customers commit to a minimum number of completed transactions at specified prices over the contract term, or under usage-based arrangements, in which customers pay in arrears a variable amount for completed transactions at specified prices. Our subscription arrangements are generally noncancelable, and we may also earn additional overage fees if the number of completed transactions exceeds the contractual amounts. Our usage-based arrangements generally can be terminated at any time by the customer. We recognize revenue ratably for our subscription arrangements because the customer receives and consumes the benefits of our platform throughout the contract period. We recognize fees for usage-based arrangements as the completed transactions are processed using our platform. Revenue from usage-based arrangements represented 29%, 12% and 12% of our Blend Platform segment revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Title365
In our Title365 segment, we earn revenue from title search services for title insurance policies, escrow and other closing and settlement services. In performing title search services, we act as an agent to place and bind title insurance policies with third-party underwriters that ultimately provide the title insurance policy to our customers. Revenue related to title insurance is recognized net of the amount of consideration paid to the third-party insurance underwriters. Our revenues from escrow, closing and settlement services are primarily associated with managing the closing of real estate transactions, including the processing of funds on behalf of the transaction participants, gathering and recording the required closing documents, and providing notary and other real estate or title-related activities. Revenue related to these services is recognized at the closing of the underlying real estate transaction. We also offer title services in connection with a borrower default and with the issuance of a home equity lines of credit and home equity loans. Revenue for default title services and home equity services is recognized at the time of delivery of the title report.
In future periods, due to our acquisition of Title365, we expect that total revenue will increase significantly in dollar amounts, and that our revenue growth rate will increase in the near term due to the inclusion of Title365 revenue, which was not included in prior periods. We expect, however, that in periods subsequent to the twelve months following the closing of the acquisition of Title365, our revenue growth rate will decline. We also expect that rising mortgage interest rates in the near term will drive down transaction volume, which will adversely affect both Blend Platform and Title365 revenue. While we believe that the Blend Platform segment will continue to deliver positive growth, we expect that the title insurance and other services revenue within the Title365 segment will face significant headwinds to growth and potentially short-term decline due to the projected industry mortgage origination volume decline.
Cost of Revenue
Blend Platform
In our Blend Platform segment, cost of revenue consists primarily of costs of subscribed hosting, support, and professional services. Costs of subscribed hosting services and support revenue consist primarily of expenses related to hosting our services, third-party fees related to platform connectivity services, which include verification of income, assets, and employment, software licenses, amortization of internal use software development costs, and expenses related to providing support to our customers. Costs of professional services consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, expenses associated with delivering implementation and other services, travel expenses, and allocated overhead costs. For each application submission, we incur third-party costs as described above, including costs for incomplete transactions for which we do not charge fees to our customers. The timing of those costs may not be aligned with the revenue recognized. We expect our cost of revenue to continue to increase in dollar amounts as we grow our business and revenue and decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term as we achieve greater scale in our business, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period.
Title365
In our Title365 segment, cost of revenue consists of costs of title, escrow and other trustee services, which represent primarily personnel-related expenses of our Title365 segment as well as title abstractor, notary, and recording service expense provided by external vendors. In future periods, due to our acquisition of Title365, we expect that cost of revenue will increase significantly in dollar amounts and that cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue will increase in the near term.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, associated with our engineering personnel responsible for the design, development, and testing of new products and features, professional and outside services fees, software and hosting costs, and allocated overhead costs.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in dollar amount as our business grows but will decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term as we achieve greater scale in our business, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on the timing and extent of our research and development activities.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, costs of general marketing activities and promotional activities, travel-related expenses, and allocated overhead costs. Sales commissions that are incremental costs of acquiring a contract with a customer as well as associated payroll taxes, are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period of benefit, which we have determined to be three years. Sales commissions that are not incremental costs of acquiring a contract with a customer are expensed in the period incurred.
We plan to increase the dollar amount of our investment in sales and marketing for the foreseeable future, primarily for increased headcount for our direct sales organization and investment in brand and product marketing efforts. We expect, however, that our sales and marketing expenses will decrease as a percentage of our revenue over time as we achieve greater scale in our business, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on fluctuations in the timing and extent of our sales and marketing activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense (which includes amounts related to the stand-alone stock option award granted to our Co-Founder and Head of Blend in March 2021) for our finance, accounting, legal and compliance, human resources, and other administrative teams as well as for certain executives and professional fees, including audit, legal and compliance, and recruiting services.
We expect to increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business. Following our IPO, which was completed in July 2021, we have incurred, and expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to publicly listed companies and costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. As a public company, we have incurred, and expect to continue to incur increased expenses in the areas of insurance, investor relations, internal audit, and professional services. In addition, general and administrative expenses have increased, and we expect will continue to increase as a result of integrating and operating Title365. As a result, we expect the dollar amount of our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future. We expect, however, that our general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percentage of our revenue as we achieve greater scale in our business, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on the timing and extent of our general and administrative activities.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
Amortization of acquired intangible assets relates to customer relationships acquired in connection with the Title365 business combination, which are amortized over the estimated useful life on a straight-line basis.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income earned from our investment portfolio.
Interest Expense
Interest expense relates primarily to debt financing used to fund our acquisition of Title365 and includes interest payable under the terms of the credit agreement entered into in connection with the closing of the acquisition of Title365 and amortization of debt discounts and debt issuance costs.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of U.S. state income taxes and adjustments to the valuation allowance. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our net federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that such net deferred tax assets will be realized. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a benefit for income taxes associated with the partial release of our historical valuation allowance resulting from the recognition of a deferred tax liability in connection with the Title365 acquisition.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented in dollars and as a percentage of our revenue:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
____________
*Certain percentages may not foot due to rounding
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
Revenue increased $138.5 million, or 144%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase of $98.9 million related to the inclusion of revenue from Title365 as well as an increase in Blend Platform revenue of $39.5 million, or 41%. Within Blend Platform revenue, Mortgage Banking revenue increased $28.2 million, or 35%, primarily due to the higher volume of banking transactions with our customers, and Consumer Banking and Marketplace revenue increased $10.5 million, or 83%, primarily due to an increase in revenue from our integrated consumer banking software solutions, adjacent products and marketplace offerings. Professional Services revenue increased $0.8 million or 25%, primarily due to an increase in demand for services associated with the deployment and support of our platform.
Cost of revenue increased $84.2 million, or 246%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily resulting from the inclusion of $68.6 million in Title365 operating costs. Additionally, Blend Platform cost of revenue increased by $15.6 million, or 46%, primarily due to a $8.9 million increase in personnel-related expenses primarily attributable to increased headcount, a $4.6 million increase in third-party hosting costs and software licenses relating to additional hosting services correlating with increased revenue growth, and a $2.8 million increase in professional and outside services to support our continued growth and expanded operations. The increases were partially offset by a $1.9 million decrease in amortization of previously capitalized internal-use software costs.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $36.7 million, or 66%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by an increase in Blend Platform research and development costs. This increase was attributable to a $23.1 million increase in personnel and related expenses due to an increase in research and development headcount dedicated to the ongoing investment in our products, a $8.9 million increase in stock-based compensation, a $1.7 million increase in software and hosting services to support the growing business and increased volume of transactions on our platform, and a $2.1 million increase in professional and outside services relating to contractors to augment the engineering team and consulting services to formulate technology.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $32.7 million, or 64%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by an increase in Blend Platform sales and marketing costs of $28.9 million, and an increase of $3.8 million due to the inclusion of costs associated with the operations of Title365. The increase in Blend Platform sales and marketing costs was primarily due to a $16.4 million increase in personnel and related expenses attributable to increased sales and marketing headcount, a $3.4 million increase in stock-based compensation, a $1.7 million increase in expense related to trade shows and conferences, a $3.5 million increase in commissions, and a $1.5 million increase in advertising and promotion expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $98.7 million, or 328% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by an increase in Blend Platform general and administrative costs of $90.6 million, and an increase of $8.1 million due to the inclusion of costs associated with the operations of Title365. The increase in Blend Platform general and administrative costs was primarily due to a $47.4 million increase in stock-based compensation, of which $38.8 million related to the stock option award with market-based performance targets granted to our Co-Founder and Head of Blend, including a catch up expense recognized upon the completion of the IPO, a $11.0 million increase in professional and other consulting services, a $12.0 million increase in transaction and integration costs associated with the Title365 acquisition, a $16.7 million increase in personnel and related expenses attributable to increased administrative, finance and accounting, legal, and human resources headcount necessary to support the growth in our business and responsibilities of a public company, and a $2.0 million increase in software and hosting services to support our growing business and increased volume of transactions on our platform.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
Amortization of acquired intangible assets increased $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the amortization of the customer relationships intangible asset acquired in the Title365 business combination.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
Revenue increased $45.4 million, or 90%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Within Blend Platform, Mortgage Banking revenue increased $39.8 million, or 99%, primarily due to the higher volume of banking transactions with our customers, Consumer Banking and Marketplace revenue increased $6.3 million, or 99%, primarily due to an increase in revenue from our integrated software solutions outside of mortgage, including ancillary products and marketplace offerings, and Professional Services revenue decreased by $0.7 million or 17%, primarily due to a decrease in professional services associated with the deployment and support of our platform.
Cost of revenue increased $14.7 million, or 75%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $7.9 million increase in third-party hosting costs and software licenses to support continued growth and expanded operations, and a $6.1 million increase in third-party fees, primarily related to platform connectivity services.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $6.9 million, or 14%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $4.0 million increase in personnel-related expenses primarily attributable to an increase in research and development headcount, a $2.8 million increase in professional and outside services, and a $1.6 million increase in software and hosting services to support the growing business and increased volume of transactions. The overall increase was partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in allocated overhead due to changes in employee mix and reduction of facility costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $13.8 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an $11.4 million increase in personnel-related expenses primarily attributable to an increase in sales and marketing headcount, inclusive of a $1.5 million increase in stock-based compensation attributable to secondary sales in 2020, a $3.3 million increase in commission expense, and a $0.8 million increase in software and hosting costs. The overall increase was partially offset by a $3.1 million decrease in travel, entertainment, trade shows, conferences, and general advertising as a result of canceled in-person events because of restrictions from the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $3.5 million, or 13%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $2.4 million increase in professional fees and a $1.3 million increase in personnel-related expenses primarily attributable to an increase in our administrative, finance and accounting, legal, and human resources headcount necessary to support the growth in our business. The increase in personnel-related expenses was net of a $4.1 million decrease in stock-based compensation attributable to a decrease in secondary sales as compared to 2019. The overall increase was partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in travel and related expenses as a result of restrictions from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities of $547.2 million, and availability of credit under our $25.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility. Cash and cash equivalents are comprised of bank deposits and money market funds. Marketable securities are comprised of U.S. treasury and agency securities, commercial paper, and corporate debt securities. Most of our cash and cash equivalents are held in the United States. Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through proceeds from the issuance of our stock and warrants and cash generated from the sale of our product offerings.
We have generated significant losses from operations and negative cash flows from operating activities in the past as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $442.8 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect to continue to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future due to the investments that we intend to make in our business and, as a result, we may require additional capital resources to grow our business.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 22,418,562 shares of Series G convertible preferred stock at $13.827822 per share for total gross proceeds of approximately $310.0 million. All shares of Series G convertible preferred stock converted into an equal number of shares of Class A common stock upon completion of the IPO.
On July 20, 2021, we completed our IPO, with a subsequent partial exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares on August 17, 2021. We issued and sold an aggregate of 22,468,111 shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.00001, at an offering price of $18.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of $366.7 million, after deducting underwriters' discounts and commissions of $27.3 million and offering expenses of $10.4 million.
Credit Agreement
In connection with our acquisition of Title365, on June 30, 2021, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for a $225.0 million term facility and a $25.0 million revolving facility. The term facility was funded on July 1, 2021, and was fully drawn upon to provide, in part, the acquisition consideration being paid in connection with the purchase of a 90.1% interest in Title365. The revolving facility is currently available and undrawn.
There is no amortization of the outstanding principal amount under our credit facility; all principal amounts thereunder are payable on the maturity date (which is the fifth anniversary of the closing of the credit facility).
The obligations under our credit facility are guaranteed by all of our domestic subsidiaries (other than Title365 and its direct and indirect subsidiaries, and subject to certain thresholds and other exceptions), and secured by a lien on substantially all of our and our subsidiaries’ assets (other than the equity issued by, and the assets of, Title365 and its direct and indirect subsidiaries and subject to certain thresholds and other exceptions).
Our credit facility subjects us to certain affirmative and negative covenants, financial reporting obligations, and a minimum liquidity threshold that is tested quarterly. It also requires mandatory prepayment of all or a portion of the outstanding debt thereunder in certain circumstances.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements arising from known contractual and other obligations primarily relate to our obligations under our Credit Agreement, leases for our office locations, and purchase commitments. As of December 31, 2021, our principal contractual cash obligations consisted of the following:
We believe that current cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, and the availability of credit under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements, however, will depend on continued growth in our customer base, the timing and extent of spending to support our research and development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced products and features, and the continuing market adoption of Blend’s software platform. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may seek to raise additional funds at any time through equity, equity-linked arrangements, and debt. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired and at reasonable rates, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected. See the section titled “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-Our failure to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies in the future could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our results of operations.”
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for employee-related expenditures, sales and marketing expenses, and third-party hosting costs. Historically, we have generated negative cash flows from operating activities and have supplemented working capital requirements through net proceeds from the sale of equity securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $127.5 million in cash for operating activities. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $169.1 million, impacted by $94.0 million of non-cash charges, offset by a $39.3 million change in deferred taxes primarily driven by the release of historical valuation allowance, and $13.1 million cash used as a result of changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of $70.8 million in stock-based compensation, $10.6 million of depreciation and amortization, $5.0 million in amortization of deferred contract costs, $3.2 million of amortization of our operating lease right-of-use assets, and $1.4 million of amortization of debt discount and issuance costs. The cash used as a result of changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $13.9 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, a $5.6 million decrease in deferred revenue, a $3.2 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, and a $5.8 million increase in accounts receivable, partially offset by a $7.1 million increase in other liabilities, a $1.6 million increase in accounts payable, a $1.2 million decrease in deferred contract costs, non-current, and $5.6 million increase in accrued compensation costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $65.0 million in cash for operating activities. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $74.6 million, impacted by $20.8 million non-cash charges, and $11.2 million of cash used due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of $10.1 million in stock-based compensation, $4.0 million of depreciation and amortization, $3.6 million in amortization of deferred contract costs, and $2.4 million of non-cash operating lease expense. The cash used due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $12.2 million increase in trade and other receivables, a $6.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, a $2.6 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, and a $2.0 million increase in the non-current portion of deferred contract costs. These amounts were partially offset by a $5.7 million increase in accrued compensation, a $4.8 million increase in other liabilities, and a $1.2 million increase in deferred revenue.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $58.9 million in cash for operating activities. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $81.5 million, impacted by $18.5 million non-cash charges, and $4.0 million of cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of $9.9 million in stock-based compensation, $4.8 million of depreciation and amortization, $2.3 million in amortization of deferred contract costs, and $1.2 million in amortization related to a discount on a convertible note. The cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $5.7 million increase in deferred revenue, a $2.6 million increase in accounts payable, a $2.3 million increase in accrued compensation, and a $1.1 million increase in other liabilities. These amounts were partially offset by a $7.1 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $0.8 million decrease in deferred contract costs.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $633.9 million, which was primarily due to $400.0 million cash used in connection with our acquisition of Title365, $351.6 million used in purchases of marketable securities, partially offset by maturities of marketable securities of $125.1 million, an investment via issuance of note receivable of $3.0 million, and an investment in non-marketable equity securities of $2.5 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $7.9 million, which was primarily the result of purchases of marketable securities of $174.0 million and property and equipment purchases of $1.3 million, partially offset by sales and maturities of marketable securities of $167.4 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $65.5 million, which was primarily the result of purchases of marketable securities of $150.7 million and property and equipment purchases of $0.6 million, partially offset by sales and maturities of marketable securities of $85.8 million.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $933.6 million, reflecting net proceeds from our initial public offering of $366.8 million, net proceeds from debt financing of $218.8 million, net proceeds from issuance of Series G convertible preferred stock of $309.7 million, proceeds from the exercise of convertible preferred stock warrants of $10.2 million, proceeds from the exercises of stock options of $25.4 million, and proceeds from the repayment of an employee promissory note of $2.9 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $90.7 million, reflecting proceeds from issuance of Series F convertible preferred stock of $76.2 million, proceeds from exercise of Class A common stock warrants of $10.0 million and the exercise of stock options net of repurchases of $4.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $132.7 million, reflecting proceeds from issuance of Series E convertible preferred stock of $124.6 million, proceeds from a convertible note of $5.0 million, the exercise of stock options net of repurchases of $1.6 million, and the exercise of convertible preferred stock warrants of $1.5 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We administer escrow and trust deposits held at third-party financial institutions representing funds received under real estate contracts, escrowed funds received under escrow agreements, and/or undisbursed amounts received for settlement of mortgage and home equity loans. Cash held for these purposes was approximately $27.0 million net of outstanding checks in transit of $56.2 million as of December 31, 2021. These funds are not considered assets of ours and, therefore, are not included in our consolidated balance sheet; however, we are contingently liable for the disposition of these funds on behalf of consumers. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any other relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other purposes.
Employee Compensation
We face significant competition for talent from other technology and high-growth companies. To attract and retain top talent, we have had to offer, and believe we will need to continue to offer, highly competitive compensation packages and provide a range of health, savings, retirement, time-off and wellness benefits for our employees.
Additionally, we may consider adopting various employee compensation programs from time to time, including one possible program that would allow employees the opportunity to annually elect the proportion of their compensation that would be provided in the form of cash or equity. The details of any such program, and the extent to which we may implement any such program, have not been determined at this time. If we do decide to adopt a program like this in the future, it could result in us paying a greater percentage of our employees’ compensation in the form of cash or equity, depending on how our employees elect to receive their compensation. This could result in us using a larger amount of our cash reserves for the payment of compensation in future periods or could result in us granting a greater number of our shares subject to equity awards, which could increase our overall dilution, increase our stock-based compensation expense for financial accounting purposes, and increase our tax withholding and remittance obligations. How we determine any such tax withholding obligations would be satisfied could further impact our cash position or increase dilution.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers, or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements, and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with the U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows could be affected.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements, the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Overview
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which requires application of the following five-step model:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer - A contract with a customer exists when (i) we enter into an enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the services to be transferred and identifies the payment terms related to these services, (ii) the contract has commercial substance, and (iii) it is determined that collection of substantially all consideration for services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration when it is due.
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract - Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the services either on their own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from us, and are distinct within the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the services is separately identifiable from the other promises in the contract. To the extent that a contract includes multiple promised services, we apply judgment to determine whether promised services are capable of being distinct.
•Determination of the transaction price - The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring services to the customer. We estimate and include variable consideration for our subscription arrangements in the transaction price at contract inception to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. In estimating overage fees in subscription arrangements, we consider our historical experience and other external factors that may impact the expectation of future completed transactions beyond a customer’s contracted minimum number of completed transactions. The estimated variable consideration is sensitive to the inputs, judgements, and assumptions made by us. Although we believe that our approach to developing estimates of variable consideration is reasonable, actual results could differ, and we may be exposed to increases or decreases in revenue that could be material. Our estimates of variable consideration may prove to be inaccurate, in which case we may have understated or overstated the revenue recognized in a reporting period. The amount of variable consideration recognized to date that remains subject to estimation is included within the prepaid expenses and other current assets and deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheet.
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract - We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis, or SSP. The SSP is the price at which we would sell a promised service separately to a customer. In instances where we do not sell or price a service separately, we estimate the SSP by considering available information such as market conditions, internally approved pricing guidelines, and the underlying cost of delivering the performance obligation. Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation.
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation - For each performance obligation identified, we determine at contract inception whether it satisfies the performance obligation over time or at a point in time.
Blend Platform
We generate revenue from fees paid by our customers to access our platform, and, to a lesser extent, from professional services related to the deployment of our platform, support services, and consulting services.
Our customers have the ability to access our platform under subscription arrangements, in which customers commit to a minimum number of completed transactions at specified prices over the contract term, or under usage-based arrangements, in which customers pay a variable amount for completed transactions at specified prices. Subscription arrangements are generally non-cancelable during the contract term while usage-based arrangements generally can be terminated at any time by the customer. Arrangements with customers do not provide the contractual right to take possession of our software at any point in time. We begin recognizing revenue when access to our platform is provisioned to our customers for an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
Access to our platform represents a series of distinct services as we continually provide access to our platform, and fulfill our obligation to our customer over the non-cancelable contractual term and the customer receives and consumes the benefit of our platform throughout the contract period. The series of distinct services represents a single performance obligation that is satisfied over time.
Under our subscription arrangements, we typically bill our customers for any committed amounts quarterly, semi-annually or annually in advance and for overages beyond a customer’s contracted minimum number of completed transactions on a monthly or quarterly basis in arrears. We recognize fees for subscription arrangements ratably over the non-cancelable contract term of the arrangement as subscription services are provided, beginning on the commencement date of each contract, which is the date services are made available to our customers.
For usage-based arrangements, we typically bill our customers for any completed transactions on a monthly basis in arrears. We recognize fees for usage-based arrangements as the completed transactions are processed using our platform. Revenue from usage-based arrangements represented 29%, 12% and 12% of our Blend Platform revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Professional services revenue consists of fees for services related to helping customers deploy, configure, and optimize the use of our technology. These services include consulting, system integration, data migration, process enhancement, and training. Our professional services contracts are typically on a fixed price basis and billed in full at the beginning of the contract term. Professional services revenue is recognized on a proportional performance basis, which measures the service hours performed to date relative to the total expected hours to completion.
Title365
Title365 is a title insurance agency that offers title, escrow and other trustee services, including title search procedures for title insurance policies, escrow and other closing and settlement services. Title365 also offers title services in connection with a borrowers default and with the issuance of home equity lines of credit and home equity loans.
For title insurance services, we earn a fee for placing and binding title insurance policies with third-party underwriters that ultimately provide the title insurance policy to consumers. We act as an agent to place and bind title insurance policies and satisfy the performance obligation upon the closing of the underlying real estate transaction. Revenue related to title insurance is recognized net of the amount of consideration paid to the third-party insurance underwriters.
Escrow fees and fees for other trustee services are primarily associated with managing the closing of real estate transactions, including the processing of funds on behalf of the transaction participants, gathering and recording the required closing documents, and providing notary and other real estate or title-related activities. The transfer of these services is satisfied and revenue is recognized at the closing of the underlying real estate transaction.
Revenues for default title services and home equity services are recognized at the time of delivery of the title report, as we have no significant ongoing obligations after delivery.
Business Combinations
On June 30, 2021, we completed our acquisition of 90.1% ownership of Title365. We account for acquisitions in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. Identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquired business are recognized and measured as of the acquisition date at fair value. Goodwill is recognized to the extent by which the aggregate of the acquisition-date fair value of the consideration transferred and any noncontrolling interest in the acquired business exceeds the recognized basis of the identifiable assets acquired, net of assumed liabilities. Transaction costs directly attributable to the acquisition are expensed as incurred. Upon acquisition, the accounts and results of operations of the acquired business are consolidated as of and subsequent to the acquisition date.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred in a business combination over the aggregate fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather tested for impairment annually, or more frequently, if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable.
Acquired intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. Determination of the fair value of the acquired customer relationships and licenses involves significant estimates and assumptions related to revenue forecasts, discount rates, customer attrition rates, and replacement costs. Determination of estimated useful lives of intangible assets requires significant judgment, and the Company regularly evaluates whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the useful lives of finite-lived intangible assets may warrant revision. Finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
Redeemable Noncontrolling Interest
The Title365 stockholders’ agreement includes a provision whereby we have a call option to purchase the 9.9% noncontrolling interest at a purchase price equal to the greater of (1) $49.5 million plus an amount of interest calculated using an interest rate of 5.0% per annum compounding annually; or (2) 4.4 multiplied by the trailing 12-month EBITDA multiplied by the noncontrolling interest ownership percentage (“Title365 Call Option”). The Title365 Call Option is exercisable beginning two years following the acquisition closing date. The noncontrolling interest holder also holds an option to compel us to purchase the remaining 9.9% noncontrolling interest at a price calculated in the same manner as the Title365 Call Option (“Title365 Put Option”). The Title365 Put Option is exercisable beginning five years following the acquisition closing date. Neither the Title365 Call Option nor the Title365 Put Option have an expiration date. As the Title365 Put Option is not solely within our control, we classified this interest as redeemable noncontrolling interest (“RNCI”), within the mezzanine equity section of the consolidated balance sheets. The RNCI is accreted to the redemption value under the interest method from the acquisition date through the date the Title365 Put Option becomes exercisable. At each balance sheet date, RNCI is reported at the greater of the initial carrying amount adjusted for the redeemable noncontrolling interest's share of earnings or losses and other comprehensive income or loss, or its accreted redemption value. The changes in the redemption amount are recorded with corresponding adjustments against retained earnings or, in the absence of retained earnings, additional paid-in-capital. For each reporting period, the entire periodic change in the redemption amount is reflected in the computation of net loss per share under the two-class method as being akin to a dividend.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize our stock-based compensation based on estimated fair values for all stock awards, which include stock options and RSUs that vest based upon the satisfaction of a service condition. We recognize stock-based compensation expense for stock options and RSUs that vest only based upon the satisfaction of a service condition on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
For stock option awards, we use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the grant date fair value of the stock options granted. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock (for pre-IPO awards), the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of the common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of the common stock. The assumptions used to determine the fair value of the option awards represent our estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our Class A common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Prior to our IPO, the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards has historically been determined by our board of directors, with input from management and contemporaneous third-party valuations. We believe that our board of directors has the relevant experience and expertise to determine the fair value of our common stock. Given the absence of a public trading market of our common stock, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock at each grant date. These factors include:
•the results of contemporaneous valuations performed at periodic intervals by a third-party valuation firm;
•the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the prices of our convertible preferred stock and common stock sold to investors in arms-length transactions;
•our actual operating and financial performance and estimated trends and prospects for our future performance;
•our stage of development;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering, direct listing, or sale of our company, given prevailing market conditions;
•the lack of marketability involving securities in a private company;
•the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
•U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In valuing our common stock, our board of directors determined the equity value of our business generally using the income approach and the market approach valuation methods. In allocating the equity value, we considered and have used a combination of the option pricing method, or OPM, the Probability Weighted Expected Return Method, or PWERM, and the Hybrid Method (which is a combination of the OPM and PWERM). The Hybrid Method involves the estimation of multiple future potential outcomes for us and estimation of the probability of each respective potential outcome. The common stock per share value determined using this approach is ultimately based upon probability-weighted per share values resulting from the various future scenarios. Our scenarios included the use of an initial public offering scenario and a scenario assuming continued operation as a private entity (in which an OPM was applied). After the Equity Value is determined and allocated to the various classes of shares, a discount for lack of marketability, or DLOM, is applied to arrive at the fair value of the common stock. A DLOM is applied based on the theory that as a private company, an owner of the stock has limited opportunities to sell this stock as there is not a readily available market to sell the stock.
In addition, we also considered any secondary transactions involving our capital stock. In our evaluation of those transactions, we considered the facts and circumstances of each transaction to determine the extent to which they represented a fair value exchange. Factors considered include transaction volume, timing, whether the transactions occurred among unrelated parties, and whether the transactions involved investors with access to our financial information.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
For valuations after our IPO, the fair value of each share of underlying Class A common stock is based on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the date of grant.
Certain stock options granted to our Co-Founder and Head of Blend vest upon the satisfaction of a service condition, liquidity event-related performance condition and performance-based market conditions. In July 2021, the first tranche of the Co-Founder and Head of Blend stock option award vested upon completion of the IPO. The remaining tranches of shares will vest dependent on performance goals tied to the Company’s stock price hurdles with specified expiration dates for each tranche.
Segment Information
Our operating segments are defined in a manner consistent with how we manage our operations and how our chief operating decision maker evaluates the results and allocates our resources. Prior to the acquisition of Title365 we operated as a single reportable segment. Following the acquisition, Blend Platform, the legacy banking platform business, and Title365 operate as two separate reportable segments.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.