Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties and should be read together with the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
Business
We are a clinical-stage therapeutics company focused on developing innovative products that address significant unmet medical needs in the treatment of cardiopulmonary. Our focus is the continued development of our nitric oxide therapy for patients with or at risk of pulmonary hypertension, or PH, using our proprietary pulsatile nitric oxide delivery platform, INOpulse.
In 2016, we began developing INOpulse for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension associated with fibrotic interstitial lung disease (fILD), which includes PH associated with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (PH-IPF) as well as other pulmonary fibrosing diseases. During May 2017, we announced the completion of our Phase 2 clinical trial using INOpulse therapy to treat PH-IPF. The clinical data showed the INOpulse was associated with clinically meaningful improvements in hemodynamics and exercise capacity in difficult-to-treat PH-IPF patients. The PH-IPF trial was a proof of concept study (n=4) designed to evaluate the ability of pulsed inhaled nitric oxide, or iNO, to provide selective vasodilation as well as to assess the potential for improvement in hemodynamics and exercise capacity in PH-IPF patients. The clinical trial met its primary endpoint showing an average of 15.3% increase in blood vessel volume (p<0.001) during acute inhalation of iNO as well as showing a significant association between ventilation and vasodilation, demonstrating the ability of INOpulse to provide selective vasodilation to the better ventilated areas of the lung. The trial showed consistent benefit in hemodynamics with a clinically meaningful average reduction of 14% in systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (“sPAP”) with acute exposure to iNO. The study assessed both the iNO 75 and iNO 30 dosage.
In January 2019, we announced top-line results from cohort 1 of our iNO-PF trial. The results suggested directional improvements in multiple clinically meaningful exploratory endpoints as measured by a wearable medical-grade activity monitor. In addition, these results suggested that iNO may have a favorable safety profile, supporting the continuation into cohort 2. In April 2019, we announced that we reached an agreement with the FDA on modifying the ongoing Phase 2b trial into a seamless Phase 2/3 trial, with cohort 3 serving as the pivotal study, as well as an agreement on the primary endpoint in cohort 3 of change in moderate to vigorous activity (“MVPA”) from baseline to month 4, measured by Actigraphy. Actigraphy (medical wearable continuous activity monitoring) has the potential to provide highly sensitive objective real-world physical activity data that we expect to correlate with clinically meaningful patient functional abilities and health outcomes. Actigraphy is currently being utilized as the primary endpoint in multiple late-stage clinical programs in various cardiopulmonary diseases such as heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (“COPD”). In December 2019, we announced top-line results from cohort 2 of the iNO-PF trial. Cohort 2 of iNO-PF suggested directionally favorable and potentially clinically meaningful placebo corrected improvement in MVPA, in subjects treated with iNO45 (45 mcg/kg IBW/hr) versus placebo. The improvement in MVPA was underscored by benefits in overall activity, as well as multiple patient reported outcomes. In March 2020, we announced that in consultation with the FDA, we had finalized some of the key elements of our planned pivotal Phase 3 study for fILD, including the use of MVPA as the primary endpoint for approval, the patient population of pulmonary fibrosis
subjects at risk of PH, as well as the dose of iNO45. In December 2020, we announced the first patient enrollment in this Phase 3 study called REBUILD. Clinical site initiation and patient enrollment has been impacted due to the COVID-19 pandemic, however, to date we have activated a majority of our targeted clinical sites and continue to focus our efforts on site engagement and patient recruitment.
In 2018, we initiated an ancillary Phase 2 open-label intra-patient dose escalation study that utilizes right heart catheterization to assess the hemodynamic effect of INOpulse from a dose of iNO 30 to iNO 125 in PH-PF subjects. In February 2020, we announced the completion of the study and that the top-line results demonstrated that INOpulse achieved clinically and statistically meaningful cardiopulmonary improvements in pulmonary vascular resistance and mean pulmonary arterial pressure. The data suggested that inhaled nitric oxide was generally well-tolerated and may yield a favorable risk-benefit profile across doses.
In 2018, we also initiated development of INOpulse for the treatment of PH associated with Sarcoidosis (PH-Sarc). Sarcoidosis is a multi-system disease which is characterized by the growth of granulomas (inflammatory cells) in one or more organs. The most frequent organs involved are the lungs and lymph nodes within the chest. Pulmonary hypertension may be present in as many as 74% of patients depending on the disease severity and how the pulmonary hypertension (PH) is defined. The presence of PH in sarcoidosis is associated with a poor prognosis. There are a number of different mechanisms linking PH with sarcoidosis. The primary treatment for sarcoidosis is corticosteroids; however, the outcome of this treatment on the PH is unclear. There is no approved therapy for PH associated with sarcoidosis. Various PAH treatments have been tried including iNO and IV prostacyclin with some clinical and functional improvement. The study was a Phase 2 open-label dose escalation design that utilized right heart catheterization to assess the acute hemodynamic effect of INOpulse from a dose of iNO 30 to iNO 125 in PH-Sarc subjects. In December 2021, we announced the completion of the acute dose escalation phase of the study and that the top-line results demonstrated that INOpulse provided clinically meaningful improvements in pulmonary vascular resistance.
We completed a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, dose-confirmation Phase 2 clinical trial of INOpulse for pulmonary hypertension associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or PH-COPD, in July 2014. The results from this trial showed that iNO 30 was a potentially safe and effective dose for treatment of PH-COPD. Based on the results of this trial, we completed further Phase 2 testing to assess the targeted vasodilation provided by INOpulse in this patient population. We presented the results of this trial in September 2015 at the European Respiratory Society International Congress 2015 in Amsterdam. The data showed that INOpulse improved vasodilation in patients with PH-COPD. In July 2016, the results were published in the International Journal of COPD in an article entitled “Pulmonary vascular effects of pulsed inhaled nitric oxide in COPD patients with pulmonary hypertension.” During September 2017, we shared the results of our Phase 2a PH-COPD trial that was designed to evaluate the acute effects of pulsed inhaled nitric oxide, or iNO, on vasodilation as well as the chronic effect on hemodynamics and exercise tolerance. The trial showed a statistically significant increase (average 4.2%) in blood vessel volume on iNO compared to baseline (p=0.03), and a statistically significant correlation in Ventilation-Vasodilation (p=0.01). The chronic results demonstrated a statistically significant and clinically meaningful increase in six minute walk distance, or 6MWD, of 50.7m (p=0.04) as well as a decrease of 19.9% in systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (p=0.02), as compared to baseline. The data suggested that the dose may have a favorable safety profile. In May 2018, we announced that the FDA concurred with the design of our planned Phase 2b study of INOpulse for treatment of PH-COPD. The study will assess the effect of INOpulse on various parameters including exercise capacity, right ventricular function and oxygen saturation, as well as other composite endpoints. We continue to evaluate alternatives for the funding and timing of this program.
On March 19, 2020, the FDA granted emergency expanded access (“EA”) to allow for our INOpulse system to immediately be used as supportive treatment for a patient with COVID-19 under the care and supervision of the patient’s physician. The clinical goal of this experimental treatment was to mitigate the hospitalized patient’s disease progression and avoid the need to perform intubation. Under the emergency access program, 180 hospitalized patients with COVID-19 from 18 hospitals across the United States received treatment with INOpulse. In April 2020, we submitted an IND application to the FDA to study the iNO delivery system for the treatment of patients with COVID-19. The proposed randomized, placebo controlled study, called COViNOX, was designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of INOpulse in patients diagnosed with COVID-19 who require supplemental oxygen before the disease progresses to necessitate mechanical ventilation support. The COViNOX protocol aimed to enroll up to 500 patients with COVID-19 who were to
be treated with either INOpulse or placebo. The primary endpoint of the study required an assessment of the proportion of subjects who experienced respiratory failure or mortality during the 28-day study period, which would allow the trial to serve as a registrational study for approval. The IND application was accepted by the FDA in May 2020, and the trial was initiated with the first patient treated in July 2020. The first 100 patients completed their 28-day assessment periods in October 2020. In November 2020, we announced that the independent Data Monitoring Committee (“DMC”) had completed its pre-specified interim analysis from the first 100 patients. Based on the finding of futility, we placed the COViNOX study on a clinical hold. Although new enrollment of subjects into the study was halted, the remaining 91 subjects already enrolled at the time the clinical hold was announced were allowed to complete the treatment course. Upon completion of the protocol defined monitoring period, the pre-specified efficacy and safety analysis of these 191 patients was reviewed by the DMC and the DMC concluded that there were no safety concerns that were attributed to INOpulse for COVID-19. Based on the COVINOX results, we put the trial on a permanent clinical hold and we are not planning additional studies for INOpulse for the treatment of COVID-19. In May 2021, we submitted notification of withdrawal of the COViNOX IND to the FDA.
We have devoted all of our resources to our therapeutic discovery and development efforts, including conducting clinical trials for our product candidates, protecting our intellectual property and the general and administrative support of these operations. We have devoted significant time and resources to developing and optimizing our drug delivery system, INOpulse, which operates through the administration of nitric oxide as brief, controlled pulses that are timed to occur at the beginning of a breath.
To date, we have generated no revenue from product sales. We expect that it may be several years before we commercialize a product candidate, if ever.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected our operations and may materially affect our business. In response to the pandemic, we have revised our operations, including implemented work from home and social distancing policies. For instance, our clinical trials may suffer from lower than anticipated patient recruitment or enrollment and we may be forced to temporarily delay ongoing trials in PH. In addition, we risk a delay, default and/or nonperformance under our existing agreements arising from force majeure. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 variants and the actions to contain it or treat its impact, among others.
In addition, COVID-19 has resulted in significant governmental measures being implemented to control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, travel restrictions, social distancing and business shutdowns. We have taken temporary precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risk of the virus to our employees, including temporarily allowing all employees to work remotely. We have suspended non-essential travel worldwide for our employees and are discouraging employee attendance at other gatherings. These measures could negatively affect our business. For instance, temporarily allowing employees to work remotely may induce absenteeism, disrupt our operations or increase the risk of a cybersecurity incident. COVID-19 has also caused volatility in the global financial markets and a slowdown in the global economy, which may negatively affect our ability to raise additional capital on attractive terms or at all.
As a clinical-stage company with clinical trials currently underway, the pandemic is impacting the execution of our clinical trials. We have clinical trial sites located in regions that have been affected by COVID-19 and variants thereof. Clinical site initiation and patient enrollment has been impacted due to prioritization of hospital resources in favor of COVID-19 patients and difficulties in recruiting clinical site investigators and clinical site staff. Some patients have not been able to travel or gain access to clinical trial sites due to local restrictions. Similarly, our ability to recruit and retain patients and principal investigators and site staff who, as healthcare providers, may have heightened risk of exposure to COVID-19, has been negatively impacted, which has delayed the timelines of our clinical trial operations. We may also experience interruption of key clinical trial activities, such as on-site clinical trial site data monitoring, due to limitations on travel imposed or recommended by federal or state governments, employers and others or interruption of clinical trial subject visits and study procedures (particularly any procedures that may be deemed non-essential), which may ultimately impact the extent of missing data.
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected and may continue to affect the operations of the FDA, EMA and other regulatory authorities, which could result in delays of reviews and approvals, including with respect to our product candidates. If regulatory matters resulting from COVID-19 continue to prevent regulatory authorities from conducting their regular inspections, reviews, or other regulatory activities, it could impact the ability of regulatory authorities to timely review and process our regulatory submissions, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.
The extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the pandemic, the severity of COVID-19 or new variants that emerge or the effectiveness of actions to contain and treat COVID-19 and new variants, particularly in the geographies where we or our third party suppliers, contract manufacturers, or contract research organizations operate. We cannot presently predict the scope and severity of any potential business shutdowns or disruptions. If we or any of the third parties with whom we engage, however, were to experience shutdowns or other business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could be materially and negatively affected, which could have a material adverse impact on our business and our results of operations and financial condition. See “Risk Factors” for additional discussion of the potential adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Financial Operations Overview
Prior to February 2014, we were a wholly-owned subsidiary of Ikaria, Inc. (a subsidiary of Mallinckrodt plc), or Ikaria. As part of an internal reorganization of Ikaria in October 2013, Ikaria transferred to us exclusive worldwide rights, with no royalty obligations, to develop and commercialize pulsed nitric oxide in PAH, PH-COPD and PH-IPF. Following the internal reorganization, in February 2014, Ikaria distributed all of our then outstanding units to its stockholders through the payment of a special dividend on a pro rata basis based on each stockholder’s ownership of Ikaria capital stock, which we refer to as the Spin-Out, and as a result we became a stand-alone company. In November 2015, we entered into an amendment to our exclusive cross-license, technology transfer and regulatory matters agreement with Ikaria that included a royalty equal to 3% of net sales of any commercial products for PAH. In April 2018, we expanded the scope of our license from PH-IPF to PH in patients with Pulmonary Fibrosis (PH-PF), which includes idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, occupational and environmental lung disease, with a royalty equal to 1% of net sales of any commercial products for PH-PF.
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and may not generate any revenue from product sales for the next several years, if ever. In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of product sales, license fees and milestone payments in connection with strategic partnerships, and royalties from the sale of products developed under licenses of our intellectual property. Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable depends primarily on our ability to successfully develop and commercialize or partner our product candidates as well as any product candidates we may advance in the future. We expect that any revenue we may generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the timing and amount of any payments we may receive under future partnerships, if any, and from sales of any products we successfully develop and commercialize, if any. If we fail to complete the development of any of our product candidates currently in clinical development or any future product candidates in a timely manner, or to obtain regulatory approval for such product candidates, our ability to generate future revenue, and our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows and future prospects would be materially adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in connection with the development of our product candidates, including upfront and development milestone payments, related to in-licensed product candidates and technologies.
Research and development expenses primarily consist of:
● employee-related expenses, including salary, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials and consultants that conduct a portion of our pre-clinical studies;
● expenses relating to vendors in connection with research and development activities;
● the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials;
● facilities, depreciation and allocated expenses;
● lab supplies, reagents, active pharmaceutical ingredients and other direct and indirect costs in support of our pre-clinical and clinical activities;
● device development and drug manufacturing engineering;
● license fees related to in-licensed products and technology; and
● costs associated with non-clinical activities and regulatory approvals.
We expense research and development costs as incurred.
Conducting a significant amount of research and development is central to our business model. Product candidates in late stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development primarily due to the increased size and duration of late-stage clinical trials. Subject to the availability of requisite financing, we plan to increase our research and development expenses for ongoing clinical programs for the foreseeable future as we seek to continue multiple clinical trials for our product candidates, including to potentially advance INOpulse for PH-COPD and seek to identify additional early-stage product candidates.
We track external research and development expenses and personnel expenses on a program-by-program basis. We use our employee and infrastructure resources, including regulatory, quality, clinical development and clinical operations, across our clinical development programs and have included these expenses in research and development infrastructure. Research and development laboratory expenses are also not allocated to a specific program and are included in research and development infrastructure. Engineering activities related to INOpulse and the manufacture of cylinders related to INOpulse are included in INOpulse engineering.
Drug and Delivery System Costs
Drug and delivery system costs include cartridge procurement, cartridge filling, delivery system manufacturing and delivery system servicing. These costs relate to all indications that utilize the INOpulse delivery system.
Research and Development Infrastructure
We invest in regulatory, quality, clinical development and clinical operations activities, which are expensed as incurred. These activities primarily support our clinical development programs.
INOpulse Engineering
We have invested a significant amount of funds in INOpulse, which is configured to be highly portable and compatible with available modes of long-term oxygen therapy via nasal cannula delivery. Our Phase 2 clinical trials of INOpulse for PAH and INOpulse for PH-COPD utilized the first generation INOpulse DS/DS-C device. We believe that
our second generation INOpulse device, as well as a custom triple-lumen cannula, have significantly improved several characteristics of our INOpulse delivery system. We have also invested in design and engineering technology, through Ikaria, for the manufacture of our drug cartridges. We manufacture and service the INOpulse devices that we are using in our ongoing clinical trials of INOpulse for fILD and PH-Sarc by third party turnkey manufacturers.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include salaries and costs related to executive, finance, and administrative support functions, patent filing, patent prosecution, professional fees for legal, insurance, consulting, investor relations, human resources, information technology and auditing and tax services not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the changes in these items in dollars and as a percentage.
Total Operating Expenses. Total operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $20.2 million compared to $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $6.1 million, or 23%. This decrease was due to a decrease in research and development expenses primarily attributable to the discontinuation of the COVID-19 trial in the current year as well as a decrease in our general and administrative expenses.
Research and Development Expenses. Total research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $13.0 million compared to $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $4.9 million, or 27%. The decrease in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to the decrease in expenses related to the COVID-19 trial in 2021 due to our discontinuation of such trial. Total research and development expenses consisted primarily of the following:
● fILD, PH-Sarc and PH-COPD research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $3.5 million compared to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.4 million, or 12%. The increase was primarily due to the timing of the Phase 3 fILD trial which was ongoing during the year ended December 31, 2021 and the Phase 2 trial during the year ended December 31, 2020.
● COVID-19 expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $0.4 million compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $4.9 million. The decrease is due to the timing of completion of the trial and close-out activities during the first quarter of 2021.
● Drug and delivery system costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1.4 million compared to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.2 million, or 47%. Drug and delivery system costs are recorded at the time of purchase from our suppliers. The decrease in the drug and delivery system costs was attributable to the close-out of the COVID-19 trial during the first quarter in 2021 compared to the commencement requirements to support the COVID-19 trial and the Phase 3 trial activities of fILD during the year ended December 31, 2020.
● Research and development infrastructure expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $5.8 million compared to $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.8 million, or 17%. The increase was primarily due to an increase in contractor costs associated with the Phase 3 clinical trial for fILD during the year ended December 31, 2021.
● INOpulse engineering expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2.0 million compared to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.2 million, or 9%. The increase was primarily due to additional consulting expenses related to improvement of the delivery system manufacturing process.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $7.1 million compared to $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.3 million, or 15%. The decrease was primarily due to reduced consulting and labor costs.
Change in Fair Value of Common Stock Warrant Liability. Change in fair value of common stock warrant liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 was income of $0.6 million compared to an expense of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The warrants were issued in November 2016 and May 2017 and the change in the liability fair value was due to a change in our stock price, volatility, and shorter remaining term.
Income Tax Benefit. Income tax benefit was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.3 million, or 15%. In June 2021, we sold $16.4 million of state NOLs and $0.3 million of research and development tax credits under the State of New Jersey’s Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program for net proceeds of $1.7 million. In May 2020, we sold $21.2 million of state NOLs and $0.2 million of Research and Development credit under the State of New Jersey's Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program for net proceeds of $2.0 million. The proceeds from such sales are recorded as income tax benefit when sales occur or proceeds are received.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In the course of our development activities, we have sustained operating losses and expect such losses to continue over the next several years. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop, conduct clinical trials and seek regulatory approval for our product candidates. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, contract manufacturing services, laboratory and related supplies, clinical costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses. We do not have a sales, marketing, manufacture or distribution infrastructure for a pharmaceutical product. To develop a commercial infrastructure, we will have to invest financial and management resources, some of which would have to be deployed prior to having any certainty of marketing approval.
We had cash and cash equivalents of $24.7 million as of December 31, 2021. Our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will be used primarily to fund the Phase 3 trial of INOpulse for fILD.
We have evaluated whether there are any conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year beyond the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Based on such evaluation and our current plans, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will not be sufficient to satisfy our operating cash needs for at least one year after the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that in order for us to meet our obligations arising from normal business operations for the next twelve months, we will require additional capital in the form of equity, debt or both. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern is related to the further implementation of our current business plan. Advances and changes in our business plans and clinical programs may offer alternative utilization of our capital resource including shifting resources between programs as well as various strategic financing opportunities. We continue to pursue potential sources of funding, including equity financing.
We may continue to pursue potential sources of funding, including equity financing and previously were able to obtain funding from equity offerings and sale of tax attributes during 2021 and 2020, including:
● On April 1, 2020, we completed the sale of 1,275,000 shares of our common stock in a registered direct offering at an offering price of $12.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $14.1 million, after deducting agent fees of $1.1 million and offering costs of $0.1 million. Such shares were sold pursuant to our effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3.
● On May 22, 2020, we completed the sale of 3,365,384 shares of our common stock in a public offering and concurrent registered direct offering including a full exercise of an option to purchase additional shares at a price of $13.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $40.6 million, after deducting agent fees of $2.9 million and offering costs of $0.3 million. The agent fees included a financial advisory fee of $0.9 million to Angel Pond Capital LLC, a company affiliated with Theodore Wang, a member of our board of directors. Such shares were sold pursuant to our prior shelf registration statement on Form S-3.
● On June 26, 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which became effective on July 2, 2020. The shelf registration allows us to issue, from time to time at prices and on terms to be determined prior to the time of any such offerings, up to $150 million of any combination of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and rights, either individually or in units.
● In July 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement with Jefferies LLC, as sales agent, pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock, from time to time, for an aggregate sales price of up to $40.0 million through an “at the market offering” program under a shelf registration statement on Form S-3. To date, we have not sold any shares under this agreement.
● The State of New Jersey’s Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program enables qualified, unprofitable New Jersey based technology or biotechnology companies to sell a percentage of NOL and R&D tax credits to unrelated profitable corporations, subject to meeting certain eligibility criteria. Based on consideration of various factors, including application processing time and past trend of benefits made available under the program, we believe that it is probable that our plans to sell our NOLs can be effectively implemented to address our short-term financial needs. We have sold $16.3 million of state NOLs and $0.3 million of research and development tax credits under the State of New Jersey’s Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program in June 2021 for net proceeds of $1.7 million. We have also sold an additional $21.2 million of state NOLs and $0.2 million of research and development tax credits under the State of New Jersey’s Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program for net proceeds of $2.0 million in May 2020. We plan to sell additional NOLs and R&D credits under the same program in the future subject to program availability and state approval. The proceeds from such sales are recorded as income tax benefit when sales occur or proceeds are received.
We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may exhaust our capital resources sooner than we expect. In addition, the process of testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the
timing of progress in clinical trials is uncertain. Because our product candidates are in clinical development and the outcome of these efforts is uncertain, we may not be able to accurately estimate the actual amounts that will be necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● progress and cost of our clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● our ability to manufacture sufficient supply of our product candidates and the costs thereof;
● the cost and timing of seeking regulatory approvals;
● the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the number and development requirements of any other product candidates we pursue;
● our ability to enter into collaborative agreements and achieve milestones under those agreements;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing patent applications, claims, patents and other intellectual property rights; and
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other products and technologies.
In addition, there are many uncertainties regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, and we are closely monitoring the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how the pandemic impact our clinical trials, employees and suppliers. While the pandemic did not materially affect our business operations, site activation and patient enrollment in our clinical trials have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, should COVID-19 continue to spread, our business operations could be delayed or interrupted which could result in the use of more funds than anticipated in completing such trials.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity and debt financings, sales of state NOLs and R&D credits subject to program availability and approval, existing working capital and funding from potential future collaboration arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sale of equity or convertible debt, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders may be diluted, and the terms of such securities may include liquidation or other preferences or rights such as anti-dilution rights that adversely affect the rights of our existing stockholders. If we raise additional funds through strategic partnerships in the future, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, or are unable to sell our state NOLs and R&D credits, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves. In addition, the timing of when existing and new capital resources are used and received may not align with the period of time evaluated by management for going concern purposes such that management may be required to conclude that substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern in accordance with relevant accounting guidance may exist in future periods.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $22.8 million, as compared to $19.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash used in operating activities was primarily due to the change in operating assets and liabilities which is partially offset by the decrease in our operating expenses.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
There was no cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $57.6 million, which included the proceeds from the direct and public offerings in the second quarter of 2020 as well as warrant exercises in the first quarter of 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following is a summary of our long-term contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1) Operating lease obligations include a lease agreement we entered into on August 6, 2015 for office space and a lease agreement we entered into on September 3, 2019 for laboratory space, both in Warren, New Jersey.
Royalty payments and success-based milestones associated with our license and supply agreements with Ikaria have not been included in the above table of contractual obligations as we cannot reasonably estimate if or when they will occur.
In the course of our normal business operations, we also enter into agreements with suppliers, contract service providers and others to assist in the performance of our research and development and manufacturing activities. We can elect to discontinue the work under these contracts and purchase orders at any time with notice, and such contracts and purchase orders do not contain minimum purchase obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to research and development expense, impairment of long-lived assets, stock-based compensation, common stock warrants, and income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be
reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. These expenses include the costs of our proprietary research and development efforts, as well as costs incurred in connection with certain licensing arrangements. Upfront and milestone payments made to third parties in connection with research and development collaborations are expensed as incurred up to the point of regulatory approval. Payments made to third parties upon or subsequent to regulatory approval are capitalized and amortized over the remaining useful life of the related product. We expense the cost of purchased technology and equipment in the period of purchase if we believe that the technology or equipment has not demonstrated technological feasibility and does not have an alternative future use. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and are recognized as research and development expense as the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate a portion of our prepaid and accrued research expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with applicable personnel and third party service providers to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. We make such estimates of our incurred research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated prepaid and accrued research and development expenses include:
● fees paid to contract research organizations in connection with clinical trials;
● fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical trials; and
● fees paid to contract manufacturers in connection with the production of clinical trial materials.
We base our expenses related to research and development and clinical trials on actual costs incurred in addition to our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple third parties, including research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing the research and development service fees, we consider the terms of each agreement, the time period over which the services will be performed and the level of effort required to complete the service. If the actual timing of the performance of the services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
It is difficult to determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of our current or any future pre-clinical programs and any of our current or future clinical trials and any future product candidates we may advance, or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates that obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of any future clinical trials and pre-clinical studies, uncertainties in clinical
trial enrollment rate and significant and changing government regulation. In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could change significantly the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time with respect to the development of that product candidate. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, as well as an assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential, including the likelihood of regulatory approval on a timely basis.
Common Stock Warrant Liability
We account for common stock warrants issued as freestanding instruments in accordance with applicable accounting guidance provided in Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities From Equity, as either liabilities or as equity instruments depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreement. We classify warrant liability on the consolidated balance sheet as noncurrent liabilities, which are revalued at each balance sheet date subsequent to the initial issuance. Changes in the fair value of the warrants are reflected in the consolidated statement of operations as “Change in fair value of common stock warrant liability.” We use the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model to value the related warrant liability. Certain assumptions used in the model include expected volatility, dividend yield and risk-free interest rate. Refer to Note 6 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a detailed description of our accounting for warrants.
Stock-Based Compensation
We issue stock-based awards to employees and non-employees in the form of stock options, restricted stock awards, or RSAs, and may issue restricted stock units, or RSUs.
We account for our stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718 Compensation- Stock Compensation, which establishes accounting for share-based awards, including stock options and restricted stock, exchanged for services and requires companies to expense the estimated fair value of these awards over the requisite service period. We recognize stock-based compensation expense in operations based on the fair value of the award on the date of the grant. The resulting compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period or sooner if the awards immediately vest. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to value our stock option awards. Refer to Note 8 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a detailed description of our accounting for stock-based compensation.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Adopted
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820) - Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement”, which eliminates, adds and modifies certain disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. The standard requires the disclosure of the range and weighted average used to develop significant unobservable inputs and how weighted average is calculated for recurring and nonrecurring Level 3 fair value measurements. The amendment is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and interim periods within those fiscal years with early adoption permitted. The Company adopted ASU 2018-13 during the year ended December 31, 2020 by including disclosure on the range of inputs used to calculate the Company's Level 3 fair value measurements.