Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Bright Lights Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 15, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
First Amendment to Business Combination Agreement
On January 10, 2022, the parties to the Business Combination Agreement (the “BCA”), dated as of November 22, 2021, by and among the Company, Bright Lights Parent Corp., a Delaware corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“ParentCo”), Mower Intermediate Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Intermediate Holdco”), Mower Merger Sub Corp., a Delaware corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of ParentCo (“Merger Sub Corp”), Mower Merger Sub 2, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of Intermediate Holdco (“Merger Sub LLC”), and Manscaped, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Manscaped”) entered into the First Amendment to Business Combination Agreement (the “BCA Amendment”). The BCA Amendment provides that each of the outstanding Company LLC Units (as defined in the BCA) and the shares issuable pursuant to the applicable earnout milestone will be treated as converted to ParentCo Class A common stock, as applicable, issued and to be taken into account in calculating the per share price for purposes of determining whether any earnout milestone has been achieved in connection with certain transactions where all or substantially all the holders of outstanding shares of ParentCo Class A common stock have such shares converted, exchanged or otherwise replaced with the right to receive cash, securities or other property. Additionally, pursuant to the BCA Amendment, the definition of “Earnout Consideration” is amended with respect to each holder of ParentCo Class A common stock and each holder of restricted stock units of ParentCo to equal a portion of the available earnout shares or the available earnout restricted stock units, respectively, as determined by the Board of Managers of Manscaped. The BCA Amendment also removes the definition of “Earnout Pro Rata Portion”. The BCA Amendment also revises the figure in Section 2.4(a) of the BCA to read “22,244,958 Company LLC Units” and amends Section 6.3(a) of the BCA such that, if the registration statement filed in connection with the parties’ business combination is not effective by February 15, 2022, Manscaped shall act in good faith to deliver to the Company its audited financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021, as soon as reasonably practicable following such date. The BCA Amendment is filed as Exhibit 2.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on January 10, 2022, and the foregoing description thereof is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the BCA Amendment.
First Amendment to Sponsor Support Agreement
On January 10, 2022, the parties to the Sponsor Support Agreement entered into the First Amendment to Sponsor Support Agreement (the “SSA Amendment”). Pursuant to the SSA Amendment, the definition of “Earnout Strategic Transaction Price,” which is the price used to determine whether the shares owned by the Sponsor that, as part of the transactions contemplated by the BCA, as amended, are to be subjected to potential forfeiture to ParentCo for no consideration until the occurrence of certain earnout vesting conditions (such shares, the “Sponsor Earnout Shares”), will vest in connection with certain transactions, was amended such that the Sponsor Earnout Shares to be issued are to be taken into account when determining the Earnout Strategic Transaction Price. The SSA Amendment is filed as Exhibit 10.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K as filed with SEC on January 10, 2022, and the foregoing description thereof is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the SSA Amendment.
Working Capital Loan
On January 18, 2022, the Company entered into a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Working Capital Loan”) with the Sponsor. Pursuant to the Working Capital Loan, the Sponsor agreed to loan to the Company up to $1.5 million to be used for working capital purposes. In December 2021, the Sponsor advanced $200,000 to the Company for incurred expenses, which advance is deemed to have been a drawdown under the Working Capital Loan. Up to $1.5 million of the loans may be settled in whole warrants to purchase Class A common stock of the Company at a conversion price equal to $1.00 per warrant. The warrants are identical to the Private Placement Warrants. The loans do not bear any interest, and will be repayable by the Company to the Sponsor upon the earlier of the date by which the Company must complete a Business Combination pursuant to its amended and restated certificate of incorporation (as amended from time to time) and the consummation of the Business Combination between the Company, the Company’s subsidiaries and Manscaped. If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loan is filed as Exhibit 10.1 to our Current Report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on January 18, 2022, and the foregoing description thereof is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Working Capital Loan.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,341,378, which consists of operational and due diligence costs of $7,177,176, a loss on the initial issuance of the Private Placement Warrants of $1,716,000 and transaction costs associated with the Initial Public Offering of $788,627, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $14,425 and changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $8,326,000.
For the period from September 15, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $4,251, which consisted of formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 11, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 6,600,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor generating gross proceeds of $6,600,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $12,301,684 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $4,325,000 of underwriting fees, $7,568,750 of deferred underwriting fees and $407,934 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $2,004,860. Net loss of $1,341,378 was affected by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $8,326,000, transaction costs associated with Initial Public Offering of $788,627, a loss on the initial issuance of the Private Placement Warrants of $1,716,000 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $14,425. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $5,172,316 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from September 15, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $132. Net loss of $4,251 was affected by the change in operating assets and liabilities which provided $4,119 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $87,074. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have determined that the liquidity condition raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through at least one year from issuance date of these financial statements. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than, an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, secretarial, and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on January 7, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, up to $7,568,750 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. Certain investors identified by our Sponsor may purchase units in this offering at the initial public offering price. The underwriters did not receive any underwriting discounts or commissions on units sold in this offering that were purchased by certain investors identified by the Sponsor.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants (together, the “Warrants”) in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40. The Warrants are not considered indexed to the Company’s own common stock, and as such, the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. The Private Placement Warrants and the Public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available were valued using the Modified Monte Carlo Simulation and Modified Black Scholes option pricing models.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating net loss per common share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from net loss per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We adopted ASU 2020-06 and the adoption did not have an impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.