Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Result of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes to those statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. You should review the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and in Part I, Item 1A,“Risk Factors”, for a discussion of factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We are a leading storage cloud platform, providing businesses and consumers cloud services to store, use, and protect their data in an easy and affordable manner. We provide these cloud services through a purpose-built, web-scale software infrastructure built on commodity hardware. We believe that by substantially reducing the complexity and frustration of storing, using, and protecting data, we can empower customers to focus on their core business operations. Through our blog and culture of transparency, we have built a community of millions of readers and brand advocates. Referrals from our community of brand advocates, combined with our highly efficient and primarily self-serve customer acquisition model and an ecosystem of thousands of partners, have allowed us to attract approximately 500,000 customers as of December 31, 2021. These customers use our Storage Cloud platform across more than 175 countries to grow and protect their business data on our approximately 2 exabytes, or 2 trillion megabytes, of data storage under management.
Our Backblaze Storage Cloud provides a platform that is the foundation for our B2 Cloud Storage Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) consumption-based offering and our Backblaze Computer Backup Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) subscription-based offering. B2 Cloud Storage enables customers to store data, developers to build applications, and partners to expand their use cases. The amount of data stored in this cloud service can scale up and down as needed on a pay-as-you-go basis. Backblaze Computer Backup automatically backs up data from laptops and desktops for businesses and individuals. This cloud backup service offers easily understood flat-rate pricing to continuously back up a virtually unlimited amount of data.
Our operations have historically been efficient with limited outside investment. Prior to issuing $10.0 million of convertible notes (which we also refer to as a Simple Agreement for Future Equity agreement (SAFE)) in a private financing round in August 2021, we had raised less than $3.0 million in outside equity since our founding in 2007. This has helped create a historical focus on operational efficiency, creativity, and collaborative problem solving. We believe that focusing on storage use cases and promoting an open ecosystem allows us to integrate well with a broad range of partners. We have consistently invested in our technology platform and highly efficient content-driven and primarily self-serve go-to-market strategy, allowing us to achieve customer, community, and product milestones.
Initial Public Offering
On November 15, 2021, our IPO had its first closing, in which we issued and sold 6,250,000 shares of our Class A common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share. On November 17, 2021, our IPO had its second closing, in which we issued and sold 937,500 additional shares at the same per-share price pursuant to the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase such shares from us for the purpose of covering over-allotments. Together, these two closings resulted in net proceeds of approximately $103.0 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. In connection with the IPO and with the filing of our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation in Delaware and the adoption of our Amended and Restated Bylaws, the following occurred, (i) the reclassification of all outstanding shares of our common stock into an equivalent number of shares of our Class B common stock, (ii) all shares of the convertible preferred stock then outstanding automatically converted into 3,359,195 shares of Class B common stock (iii) the SAFE notes automatically converted into 722,860 shares of Class A common stock.
Our Business Model
Our solutions are designed for individuals and businesses of all sizes and across all industries but have a particularly strong appeal to mid-market organizations (which we define as organizations with 10 to 999 employees) due to their desire for easy-to-use solutions. We generate revenue primarily from our two cloud services:
•B2 Cloud Storage, which enables customers to store data for any use case, and for developers to embed our platform into their applications. In both cases, our customers use this offering in a consumption-based model, and
•Backblaze Computer Backup, which provides virtually unlimited backup to businesses and consumers in a SaaS subscription model.
Our pricing is simple and straightforward, with fees and terms that are shared transparently on our website.
We have maintained our per-gigabyte B2 Cloud Storage pricing for five years, and we announced price increases to our unlimited subscription Computer Backup pricing in February 2019 and July 2021 with no material impact on customer retention as of December 31, 2021.
We provide simple pricing for usage of our cloud services and increase revenue per customer through our customers’ natural data growth or employee growth. Additionally, we provide customers with additional value through cross-sell, upsell, and use case expansion that result in additional revenue per customer. These options for cross-selling and upselling include the following:
•Cross-Sell: After adopting any of our products, customers may expand to other products as their use cases grow, including Computer Backup customers who adopt B2 Cloud Storage to facilitate broader use cases. Adopting additional products expands usage of our platform.
•Upsell: Customers can choose to use various features and services for additional fees, such as Extended Version History, Snapshots, cloud replication (anticipated to be available in the first half of 2022), and enhanced support tiers. For example, our Computer Backup cloud service includes 30-day file version history with all subscriptions; with Extended Version History customers can keep versions as long as they wish, for an additional cost. B2 Cloud Storage offers Snapshots that allow customers to create moment-in-time versions of their data, and we also allow customers to keep their data in multiple geographic regions, both of which provide more customer value. Additionally, customers receive email and chat support for free, but can also opt for enhanced support tiers for an additional cost, which provide dedicated customer support contacts and 24/7 response.
•Use Case Expansion: B2 Cloud Storage customers may adopt the service for one business need, but can expand their use cases as their business evolves. One such example would be a business using B2 Cloud Storage for media asset management storage, which decides to also use the service as an origin store for content distribution; another would be a business that adopts B2 Cloud Storage for backup and archive purposes, which decides to also enable Object Lock for ransomware protection. Use case expansion enables the opportunity to deepen our relationship with our customers and increase revenue.
For prospective customers interested in B2 Cloud Storage, we offer a free tier and a simple, intuitive sign-up process, allowing them to quickly on-board and start using our solutions. Once prospective customers grow beyond the free storage limit, they have the flexibility to only pay for what they need and pay as they go, without any lock-in or long-term commitments. This is delivered via a consumption-based model, and we charge a fixed price per month per gigabyte of data stored on our platform.
For prospective customers interested in Computer Backup, we offer a free 15-day trial and automatically start to back up all their files securely to our Storage Cloud. Prospective customers can then choose to sign up on a per computer basis. The service is delivered via a SaaS model where revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription term. Subscriptions are offered to customers on a monthly, annual, or biennial basis, providing customers flexibility to choose their commitment lengths. We charge a flat rate for this solution and provide virtually unlimited backup capabilities to customers. There are no storage limits or tiers. Customers also have the option to subscribe to Extended Version History,
which enables them to extend retention of old file versions and deleted files, which are typically saved for 30 days, to a year or perpetually.
We have a highly efficient go-to-market model that is built on a self-serve selling motion. Prospective customers find us through a variety of channels including our website, partners, and brand advocates. We have fostered community engagement with content we share on our blog, which includes millions of readers viewing the content we shared in 2021 alone. Our content is intended to encourage organic, inbound traffic that we believe serves as our greatest source of advocates and referrals. Our free trial and self-serve sign-up processes help convert our blog readers and referrals from our brand advocates into customers, with over 80% of our revenue in 2021 coming from self-serve customers. In addition to generating customers, a community of thousands of partners has arisen as a result of our efforts. Our developer, alliance, and managed service provider (MSP) partners expand use cases and attract customers, thereby increasing usage of our Storage Cloud and helping to drive revenue growth. In addition to our self-serve selling motion, we have a sales-assisted selling motion to identify opportunities to increase business with existing customers and to assist larger customers in adopting our services. Our sales-assisted selling motion helps customers that, in 2021, generally were more than 20 times larger in terms of average revenue per customer than our self-serve customers.
Substantially all of our revenue is recurring in nature. We employ a land-and-expand model that drives additional revenue from existing customers. As customers generate, store, and back up more data, their use of our platform increases, creating natural opportunities for revenue expansion. We are able to further expand our relationships with our customers when they adopt new features and use cases that lead to increased usage of our platform. Our land-and-expand strategy is evidenced by our overall net revenue retention rate of 110% and 114% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that the future growth and performance of our business will depend on several factors, including the following:
Scale Self Service Customer Acquisition
Our business depends, in part, on our ability to add new customers. We believe there is a significant opportunity to further grow our customer base by continuing to make investments in sales and marketing. We plan to continue investing in our customer acquisition and inbound demand generation activities, which is driven predominantly by our blog content, our case studies, social sharing, earned media, and our self-serve sign up model. We intend to leverage this model as an efficient approach to attract new customers, turning them into brand advocates, partners, and more referrals. Furthermore, we plan to continue to build and scale our paid lead generation and to increasingly grow in the mid-market.
We also plan to continue to build our ecosystem of partners. We believe that delivering our Storage Cloud solutions through our alliance, developer, and MSP partnerships is an area of opportunity for us. By adding more partners and deepening our relationships with them, we can expand our use cases and help drive new customer acquisition.
Scale Sales-Assisted Efforts
We believe an increasingly important complement to our self-serve customer acquisition model is our targeted inside Sales team that is focused on a low-touch “sales-assisted” model that supports our larger customers if the need arises. This team focuses on inbound inquiries, outbound prospecting targeting specific use cases, and volume expansion of our self-serve customers.
Expansion Within Existing Customers
Our future success will depend in part on our ability to increase usage and adoption of our solutions with existing customers. We intend to increase revenue from existing customer relationships through the development of additional features and use cases, expanding our Customer Success initiatives, and natural customer data growth. We have developed add-on services, such as Extended Version History and multi-region selection, which customers pay for on top of existing offerings. Examples of expanding use cases include utilizing Backblaze for additional purposes such as media storage, hybrid cloud support, analytics repositories, and others. We also plan to grow our Customer Success initiatives to ensure customers avail themselves of the full benefits of our platform, thus resulting in increased adoption. As these
customers continue to generate, store, and back up data, their use of our platform increases, creating natural opportunities for revenue expansion.
Continued Platform Investment and New Product Launches
We are committed to delivering market-leading products that continue to make cloud storage and backup easy. We believe we must maintain our product quality and strength of our brand in order to retain the current customer base as well as drive further revenue growth in our business. We intend to continue investing in our research and development activities to build upon our strong position in the technology community. We also plan to launch new products that are adjacent to our current offerings, which will provide us with the ability to further cross-sell and upsell.
Investments for Continued Scaling
We are focused on our long-term revenue potential and building out our infrastructure to sustain that growth. On a routine basis, we plan to focus resources on optimizing the efficiency of our data storage. In some scenarios, we may choose to pass on potential cost savings to the customer, but in other scenarios we may choose to reinvest cost savings back into infrastructure and design.
International Expansion
While our sales and marketing efforts have primarily focused on the United States, our existing customer base spans more than 175 countries, with 28% of our revenue originating outside of the United States for the year ended December 31, 2021. We believe international expansion represents a meaningful opportunity to generate further demand for our solutions in international geographies. We plan to invest in our operations internationally to reach new customers by expanding in targeted key geographies where we believe there are opportunities for significant return on investment.
Key Business Metrics
We monitor the key business metrics set forth below to help us evaluate our business and growth trends, establish budgets, measure the effectiveness of our sales and marketing efforts, and assess operational efficiencies. The calculation of the key metrics discussed below may differ from other similarly titled metrics used by other companies, securities analysts, or investors.
_____________
(1)The calculation methodology for NRR and gross customer retention rate metrics has been adjusted to improve accuracy with respect to customers that use both our B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup solutions. The calculation methodology for these metrics on a total company basis remains unchanged. Corresponding NRR and gross customer retention rate metrics for all quarters between Q1’20 and Q4’21 under this adjusted methodology have been provided in the table below:
(2)The number of customers for each of B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup solutions include customers that use both our B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup solutions.
Net Revenue Retention Rate
We believe the growth in use of our platform by our existing customers is an important measure of the health of our business and our future growth prospects. We measure this growth by monitoring our overall net revenue retention rate, which measures our ability to retain and expand revenue from existing customers. We believe that we can drive this metric by continuing to focus on our customers and by adding additional products and functionality to our platform.
Our overall NRR is a trailing four-quarter average of the recurring revenue from a cohort of customers in a quarter as compared to the same quarter in the prior year. We calculate our overall net revenue retention rate for a quarter by dividing (i) recurring revenue in the current quarter from any accounts that were active at the end of the same quarter of the prior year by (ii) recurring revenue in the current corresponding quarter from those same accounts. Our overall net revenue retention rate includes any expansion of revenue from existing customers and is net of revenue contraction and customer attrition, and excludes revenue from new customers in the current period. Our net revenue retention rate for B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup is calculated in the same manner as our overall net revenue retention rate based on the revenue from our B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup solutions, respectively.
Gross Customer Retention Rate
We use gross customer retention rate to measure our ability to retain our customers. Our gross customer retention rate reflects only customer losses and does not reflect the expansion or contraction of revenue we earn from our existing customers. We believe our high gross customer retention rates demonstrate that we serve a vital service to our customers, as the vast majority of our customers tend to continue to use our platform from one period to the next. To calculate our gross customer retention rate, we take the trailing four-quarter average of the percentage of cohort of customers who were active at the end of the quarter in the prior year that are still active at the end of the current quarter. We calculate our gross customer retention rate for a quarter by dividing (i) the number of accounts that generated revenue in the last month of the current quarter that also generated recurring revenue during the last month of the corresponding quarter in the prior year, by (ii) the number of accounts that generated recurring revenue during the last month of the corresponding quarter in the prior year.
Annual Recurring Revenue
We define annual recurring revenue (ARR) as the annualized value of all B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup arrangements as of the end of a period. Given the renewable nature of our business, we view ARR as an important indicator of our financial performance and operating results, and we believe it is a useful metric for internal planning and analysis. ARR is calculated based on multiplying the monthly revenue from all B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup arrangements, which represent greater than 98% of our revenue for the periods presented (and excludes Physical Media revenue), for the last month of a period by 12. Our annual recurring revenue for B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup is calculated in the same manner as our overall annual recurring revenue based on the revenue from our Computer Backup and B2 Cloud Storage solutions, respectively. See Notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on revenue from B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup arrangements.
ARR does not have a standardized meaning and is therefore unlikely to be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue and is not intended to be combined with or to replace that item. ARR is not a forecast and the active contracts at the end of a reporting period used in calculating ARR may or may not be extended or renewed by our customers.
While ARR is not a guarantee of future revenue, we consider over 98% of our revenue recurring for the periods presented. As noted above, our gross customer retention rate has been consistent over the periods presented at approximately 90%. Although B2 Cloud Storage is paid for by customers in arrears, we recognize revenue in the month these storage services are delivered, and consider this revenue recurring as customers are charged as long as their data is stored with us. Further, during the periods presented, customers who store data with us generally increase the amount of their data stored over time, as evidenced by our B2 Cloud Storage net revenue retention rate of 130% as of December 31, 2021. Fees from B2 Cloud Storage (consumption-based arrangements) are recognized as services are delivered. Computer Backup (subscription-based arrangements) revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the contractual term of the arrangement beginning on the date that the service commences, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have
been met. See Notes to the financial statements for details on our revenue recognition policy. Additional limitations of ARR include the fact that consumption-based revenue is not guaranteed for future periods, although we believe that our high historic gross customer retention rate is indicative of ARR, and the fact that our subscription terms can be on a monthly basis, although the significant majority of our customers have subscription terms of one year or longer during the periods presented above.
Number of Customers
We define a customer at the end of any period as a distinct account, as identified by a unique account identifier, that has paid for our cloud services, which makes up substantially all of our user base.
Annual Average Revenue Per User
We define annual average revenue per user (Annual ARPU) as the annualized value for the average revenue per customer. Annual ARPU is calculated by dividing our revenue for the last month of a period by the total number of customers as of the last day of the same period, and then multiplying the resulting quotient by 12. Our annual average revenue per user for B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup is calculated in the same manner based on the revenue and number of customers from our B2 Cloud Storage and Computer Backup solutions, respectively.
Additional Key Business Metrics Calculation Notes
The metrics for Net Revenue Retention Rate, Gross Customer Retention Rate, Number of Customers and Annual Average Revenue Per User are currently calculated using only those customers paying by credit card and exclude customers paying by invoice utilizing a different system. The amounts related to the number of customers paying by invoice has historically been immaterial.
Impact of COVID-19
The worldwide spread of COVID-19 has created significant uncertainty in the global economy. There have been no comparable recent events that provide guidance as to the effect the spread of COVID-19 as a global pandemic may have, and, as a result, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 and the extent to which COVID-19 continues to impact our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and difficult to predict.
While the full impact of the pandemic to our business remains unknown and we believe that our results of operations and financial condition have not been materially adversely impacted to date, we also believe that the pandemic has had some impact on our business. Our potential customers, customers, or partners may have experienced, or in the future could experience, downturns or uncertainty in their own business operations due to COVID-19, which may have affected or could affect purchasing and operating decisions. For example, although we believe our ability to retain customers has not been materially impacted by the pandemic, we also believe that the pandemic may have caused some customers to reduce their use of cloud storage with us or to delay increasing their use of our cloud storage offerings. In addition, the pandemic may have caused potential customers to delay their purchasing decisions or to store less data with us. We may also experience customer losses due to customer bankruptcy or cessation of operations, or otherwise.
In addition to the impact on customers, the pandemic has had some impact to our supply chain. For example, starting in April 2020, we began to acquire additional hard drives and related infrastructure through capital lease agreements in order to minimize the impact of potential supply chain disruptions due to the pandemic. The additional leased hard drives resulted in a higher balance of capital equipment and related lease liability, an increase in cash used in financing activities from principal payments, as well as a higher ongoing interest and depreciation expense related to these lease agreements. Accordingly, our supply chain in the future may be disrupted, or we may be unable to obtain infrastructure and related equipment essential to our business on favorable terms or at all. However, based on the impact from the pandemic to date, we believe we have sufficient reserves to minimize any material impact to our business operations should such a disruption occur.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in the first quarter of 2020, we temporarily and periodically closed our office, enabled our non-essential workforce to work remotely, and implemented travel restrictions for non-essential business. These changes remain in effect in 2021 and could extend into future quarters. The changes we have implemented to date have not affected and are not expected to materially affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal controls over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures. Furthermore,
after the outbreak of COVID-19, we have seen slower growth in certain operating expenses due to reduced business travel and the virtualization or cancellation of customer and employee events.
In April 2020, we applied for and received a $2.3 million loan from the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). We submitted our PPP forgiveness application in July 2020, and in June 2021 we received notification from the SBA that our forgiveness application of the PPP loan and accrued interest, totaling $2.3 million, was approved in full, and we had no further obligations related to the PPP loan. Accordingly, we recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP loan as gain on extinguishment of debt on our statement of operations as of December 31, 2021.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. The global impact of COVID-19 continues to rapidly evolve, and we will continue to monitor the situation and the effects on our business and operations.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from our B2 Cloud Storage and Backblaze Computer Backup cloud services offered on our platform. Our platform is offered to our customers through either a consumption or a subscription-based arrangement through B2 Cloud Storage and Backblaze Computer Backup, respectively. Our subscription arrangements range in duration from one month to 24 months, for which we bill our customers up front for the entire period. Our consumption-based arrangements do not have a contractual term and are billed monthly in arrears.
For our subscription arrangements, we provide our cloud services evenly over the contractual period, for which revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract term beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer. Consumption-based revenue is variable and is related to fees charged for our customers’ use of our platform and is recognized as revenue in the period in which the consumption occurs.
In support of our platform, we also derive revenue from products offered to our customers for the ability to securely restore data using a USB drive (USB Restore) and for migrating large data sets to our platform using our proprietary Fireball device. Revenue from USB Restore is recognized as our products are delivered to our customers. Revenue recognized from customer rentals of our Fireball device is time-based.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists of expenses for providing our platform and cloud services to our customers. These expenses include operating in co-location facilities, network and bandwidth costs, and depreciation of our equipment and capital lease equipment in co-location facilities. Personnel-related costs associated with customer support and maintaining service availability, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation are also included. Cost of revenue also includes credit card processing fees, amortization of capitalized internal-use software development costs, and allocated overhead costs.
We intend to continue to invest additional resources in our infrastructure and related personnel, and our customer support organization, to support the growth of our business. Some of these investments, including costs of infrastructure equipment (including related depreciation) and expansion, are incurred in advance of generating revenue, and either the failure to generate anticipated revenue or fluctuations in the timing of revenue could affect our gross margin from period to period.
Operating Expenses
The most significant components of our operating expenses are personnel costs, which consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation. We also incur other non-personnel costs related to our general overhead expenses. We expect that our operating expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we grow our business.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, consultant fees, costs related to technical operations, subscription services for use by our research and development organization and an allocation of our general overhead expenses. We capitalize the portion of our software development costs that meets the criteria for capitalization.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to focus our research and development efforts on adding new features to our platform, improving our cloud service offerings, and increasing the functionality of our existing features. Our research and development expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs. Sales and marketing expenses also include expenditures related to advertising, marketing, our brand awareness activities, commissions paid to marketing partners, and an allocation of our general overhead expenses.
We plan to continue investing in sales and marketing by increasing our sales and marketing headcount, supplementing our self-serve model with a direct sales approach, expanding our partner ecosystem, driving our go-to-market strategies, building our lead generation and brand awareness, and sponsoring additional marketing events. As a result, we expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future. Sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period because of the timing and extent of these expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our accounting, finance, legal, IT, security, human resources, and administrative support personnel and executives. General and administrative expenses also include costs related to legal and other professional services fees, sales, and other taxes; depreciation and amortization; and an allocation of our general overhead expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as our business grows. Following the completion of this offering, we will incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including increased expenses for insurance, costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, investor relations, and professional services expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest related to our capital lease agreements.
Income Tax Provision
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign and state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets because we have concluded that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
__________________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth our statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $13.7 million, or 25%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Consumption-based revenue (B2 Cloud Storage) increased by $8.4 million, which primarily increased due to expansion of existing customers. The remaining increase of $5.2 million was due to subscription-based revenue (Computer Backup), which increased primarily due to the addition of new customers and a price increase for Computer Backup that went into effect in September 2021.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Total cost of revenue increased by $7.3 million, or 28%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $3.3 million for depreciation of our infrastructure equipment, which was mainly a result of purchasing additional hard drives and related infrastructure to
support our growing business and in order to minimize the impact of potential supply chain disruptions caused by COVID-19, and an increase of $4.0 million related to managing and operating our co-location facilities.
Gross margin decreased to 51% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 52% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to cost of revenue increasing at a higher rate as compared to our revenue due primarily to investment in our infrastructure, as described above.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $7.5 million, or 57%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $4.9 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $0.5 million related to facilities and IT overhead allocation, and an increase of $1.4 million related to stock-based compensation expense. We expect these expenses to increase in the future as we continue to add new features and functionality to our offerings. The extent to which these expenses are able to be capitalized related to the development of internal-use software may impact the amount of research and development expenses in future periods.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $7.8 million, or 65%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily attributable to an increase of $4.0 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $1.0 million related to stock-based compensation and an increase of $2.0 million due to increased advertising expenses. We expect these expenses to increase in the future as we expand sales and marketing efforts to support our growing business.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $6.2 million, or 92%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $3.1 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $0.5 million in professional fees for accounting and tax services, and an increase of $1.0 million related to stock-based compensation expense. We expect these expenses to increase in the future as we expand efforts to support our growing business.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $0.8 million, or 27%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to interest expense from capital lease agreements and lease financing obligations we entered into during the second half of 2020 and during 2021, which increased our capital lease liability significantly to $33.2 million as of December 31, 2021. The capital lease agreements and lease financing obligations were for additional hard drives and related infrastructure that we purchased in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in order to minimize the impact of potential supply chain disruptions, and in support of our growing business.
Income Tax Provision
Our provision for income taxes increased by $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a charge related to the limitation on post-2017 federal net operating losses which are limited to 80% beginning in years after December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP, we provide investors with non-GAAP financial measures including adjusted gross margin and adjusted EBITDA, each as defined below. These measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only, have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly-titled non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of these measures as tools for comparison. Because of these limitations, when evaluating our performance, you should consider each of these non-GAAP financial measures alongside other financial performance measures, including the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and our other GAAP results. A reconciliation of each of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is set forth below.
Adjusted Gross Margin
We believe adjusted gross margin, when taken together with our GAAP financial results, provides a meaningful assessment of our performance, and is useful to us for evaluating our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes.
We define adjusted gross margin as gross profit, exclusive of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation expense of our property and equipment, and amortization expense of capitalized internal-use software included within cost of revenue, as a percentage of adjusted gross profit to revenue. We exclude stock-based compensation, which is a non-cash item, because we do not consider it indicative of our core operating performance. We exclude depreciation expense of our property and equipment and amortization expense of capitalized internal-use software, because these may not reflect current or future cash spending levels to support our business. We believe adjusted gross margin provides consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations, as this metric eliminates the effects of depreciation and amortization.
The following table presents a reconciliation of gross profit, the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP, to adjusted gross profit, for each of the periods presented:
Adjusted EBITDA
Our management uses adjusted EBITDA to assess our operating performance. We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, interest expense, income tax provision, and gain on extinguishment of debt. We use adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that adjusted EBITDA, when taken together with our GAAP financial results, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our operating performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations or outlook. We consider adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure because it helps illustrate underlying trends in our business and our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis.
Our calculation of adjusted EBITDA may differ from the calculations of adjusted EBITDA by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. Because of these limitations, when evaluating our performance, you should consider adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including our net loss and other GAAP results. The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP, to adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods presented:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed operations primarily through payments received from our customers. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $104.8 million and $6.1 million, respectively.
In November 2021, we completed our IPO which resulted in net proceeds of approximately $103.0 million, after underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs of approximately $12.0 million.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash provided by operations and our revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to support our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue growth rate, the timing and the amount of cash received from customers, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the price at which we are able to purchase or lease infrastructure equipment, the introduction of platform enhancements, and the continuing market adoption of our platform. In the future, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, and technologies. We may be required or choose to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
In October 2021, we entered into a revolving credit agreement with City National Bank. Under this agreement, among other things, (i) amounts available to be borrowed are $9.5 million and (ii) advances on the line of credit bear interest payable monthly at the average SOFR rate plus 2.75%. The revolving credit agreement matures in September 2024. In connection with this agreement, we fully repaid and subsequently terminated our 2017 revolving credit agreement
with HomeStreet Bank. During December 2021, we entered into the first amendment to the revolving credit agreement with City National Bank. The amendment removed the financial covenants under the agreement and added a requirement to hold collateral in the form of a lien prior to any advance.
In August 2021, we issued $10.0 million of convertible notes in a private financing round to continue investing in our growth initiatives and for general corporate purposes. We also refer to these convertible notes security as a Simple Agreement for Future Equity agreement (SAFE). As of November 2021, the convertible note and the accrued interest have been fully converted to Class A common stock upon the completion of the initial public offering. On November 10, 2021, in connection with the IPO, the SAFE notes automatically converted into 722,860 shares of Class A common stock. We valued the notes on the settlement date of November 10, 2021 based on the Class A common stock price of $16.00, which was the price of the Class A common stock sold in the IPO. This valuation resulted in a realized loss of $1.4 million that the Company recorded in its statement of operations. The accrued interest of $0.1 million was added to the purchased amount upon conversion into equity.
In April 2020, we applied for and received a $2.3 million loan from the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). We submitted our PPP forgiveness application in July 2020, and in June 2021 we received notification from the SBA that our forgiveness application of the PPP loan and accrued interest, totaling $2.3 million, was approved in full, and we had no further obligations related to the PPP loan. Accordingly, we recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP loan as gain on extinguishment of debt on statement of operations as of June 30, 2021.
We enter into capital lease arrangements to obtain hard drives and related equipment for our data center operations. We also enter into leases for our facilities for data centers and office space under non-cancelable operating leases with various expiration dates. As of December 31, 2021, our future minimum payments were $38.2 million and $21.0 million under our capital and operating lease arrangements, respectively. For further information, see Note 10 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is payments received from our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel-related expenses, sales and marketing expenses, infrastructure expenses, and overhead expenses.
Cash provided by operating activities mainly consists of our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including stock-based compensation, depreciation, and amortization of property and equipment, amortization of capitalized internal-use software, net, and changes in operating assets and liabilities during each period.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $3.5 million, which resulted from a net loss of $21.7 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $22.0 million and a net cash inflow of $3.2 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $16.3 million for depreciation and amortization expense, $5.6 million for stock-based compensation expense, $1.6 million for realized loss and accrued interest from the SAFE transaction, $0.8 million for amortization of deferred contract cost and $2.3 million for the gain on extinguishment of the PPP loan. The net cash inflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of a $5.5 million increase in deferred revenue, which increased due to our growing customer base and timing of collections from our customers, in addition to a $1.3 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, which increased due to timing of payment of our expenses, offset by $3.9 million decrease in prepaid and other current assets. Cash provided by operations decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period
in 2020 primarily due to increased spending in support of our expanded research and development and sales and marketing spending to support business growth.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $12.8 million, which resulted from a net loss of $6.6 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $15.5 million and a net cash inflow of $3.9 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $13.0 million for depreciation and amortization expense and $1.9 million for stock-based compensation expense. The net cash inflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of a $2.0 million increase in deferred revenue, which increased due to our growing customer base and timing of collections from our customers, in addition to a $2.3 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, which increased due to timing of payment of our expenses.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11.2 million, resulting primarily from capital expenditures of $7.6 million in support of infrastructure deployments to support our growing business, and $3.6 million related to the development of software mainly for adding new features and enhanced functionality to our platform. We expect cash used in our investing activities to continue to increase in the future as we increase our infrastructure footprint and enhance our platform, in support of our growing business.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5.0 million, resulting primarily from capital expenditures of $2.1 million in support of infrastructure deployments to support our growing business, and $2.9 million related to the development of software mainly for adding new features and enhanced functionality to our platform.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $106.6 million, resulting from $107.0 million in proceeds from the initial public offering in November 2021, $10.0 million in proceeds from the SAFE transaction entered in September 2021, $4.3 million in proceeds from the four lease financing transactions, and $0.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options, offset by $12.2 million principal payments on our capital lease agreements and lease financing obligations of related to hard drives and other infrastructure equipment used in our co-location facilities and $3.0 million in payments of deferred offering expense related to our initial public offering.
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8.7 million. Cash used in financing activities was from principal payments on our capital lease agreements of $10.9 million related to hard drives and other infrastructure equipment used in our co-location facilities, offset by $2.3 million in proceeds received from the PPP loan.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a substantial degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations. For further information, see Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
The Backblaze Storage Cloud provides the core platform for our B2 Cloud Storage consumption-based offering and our Backblaze Computer Backup subscription-based offering. We derive our revenue primarily from fees
earned from customers accessing these offerings through our platform, paid monthly in arrears for consumption-based arrangements for B2 Cloud Storage, or charged upfront for subscription-based arrangements for Backblaze Computer Backup. We provide services to our customers under subscription-based arrangements of one month, one year and two years, which automatically renew at the end of the respective term.
We also recognize revenue from products offered to our customers for the ability to securely restore data using a USB drive (USB Restore) and for migrating large data sets to our platform using our proprietary Fireball device. We refer to these products as our Physical Media revenue. Physical Media revenue was approximately 1% of our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our monthly subscription arrangements do not provide customers with refund rights. One- and two-year subscription arrangements are eligible for a full refund for up to 30 days after subscribing. For Physical Media revenue, we offer a full refund to our customers restoring data using USB drives, if the drives are returned to us within 30 days of receipt. We recognize revenue net of our estimate of expected customer cancellations and returns. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and use of management’s judgment.
As we provide our offerings as a hosted service, we do not provide customers the contractual right to take possession of the software at any time, do not incur set up costs, nor charge an installation fee to new customers.
We determine revenue recognition in accordance with ASC 606 through the following five steps, which include inherent estimates:
1. Identify the contract with a customer. We apply judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intent to pay, which is based on a variety of factors, including the customer’s payment history; however, as approximately 98% of our revenue was generated from customers paying via credit card during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the risk of non-payment is reduced.
2. Identify the performance obligations in the contract. Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the services and products that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct and are distinct in the context of the contract. Our contracts typically contain a single distinct performance obligation representing our Backblaze Storage Cloud platform offerings, which includes Computer Backup and B2 Cloud Storage services and customer support.
3. Determine the transaction price. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring services to the customer. Variable consideration, which contains estimates made by us, is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not occur. Certain fees that are considered consideration payable to a customer are accounted for as a reduction of the transaction price.
4. Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract. We determine the relative standalone selling price for performance obligations based on the price we sell a good or service for separately.
5. Recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation. Revenue is recognized when control of the services is transferred to the customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those services. Performance obligations are satisfied over time as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits as the entity performs. Revenue is generally recognized over the common measure of progress (i.e., time-based or consumption-based) for the entire performance obligation.
For revenue generated from arrangements that involve third-parties, we evaluate whether we are the principal or the agent based on maintaining control over the services being provided and maintaining the relationship with the end-customer. Substantially all of our revenue is reported on a gross basis, as we are the principal.
Stock-Based Compensation
All stock-based compensation to employees is measured on the grant date based on the fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We recognize compensation cost for awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the four-year vesting period. For grants made after our IPO, we use our publicly traded Class A
common stock price to determine the fair value of our Class A common stock. Fluctuations in our Class A common stock price may have a significant impact on the amount of stock-based compensation recognized.
If an award contains a provision whereby vesting is accelerated upon a change in control, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis, as a change in control is considered to be outside of our control and is not considered probable until it occurs. Forfeitures are accounted for in the period in which they occur.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of our stock options. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of complex assumptions, which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. Our option-pricing model requires the input of certain assumptions, including the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent our best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Capitalized Internally-Developed Software, Net
We capitalize qualifying software development costs related to new features and enhancements to the functionality of our platform and related products, as well as implementation. The costs consist of personnel costs (including related benefits and stock-based compensation) that are incurred during the application development stage.
We review capitalization criteria for each project individually, which requires us to exercise judgement as to what costs are capitalizable. Capitalized costs are amortized over the estimated useful life of the software, which is five years, on a straight-line basis, which represents the manner in which the expected benefit will be derived. We determine the useful lives of identifiable project assets after considering the specific facts and circumstances related to each project. The amortization of costs related to the platform applications is included in cost of revenue in the statement of operations.
Significant judgments related to the capitalization of internal use software costs include determining whether it is probable that projects will result in new or additional functionality, concluding on when the application development phase starts and ends, and estimating which costs, especially employee compensation costs, should be capitalized.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See the sections titled “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Accounting Pronouncements Recently Adopted” and “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted” in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act. For so long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation. The JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards unless and until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act for the adoption of accounting standards until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.