ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
Our entire activity for the period from February 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering
”), described below, and since the closing of our Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective acquisition target for our Initial Business Combination. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
Our Sponsor is Black Mountain Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 13, 2021. On October 18, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 24,000,000 units (the “Units”). Each Unit consists of one share of Class A common stock of the Company, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Class A Common Stock”), and three quarters of one warrant of the Company (the “Public Warrants”), with each whole Public Warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock for $11.50 per share. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $240,000,000.
In connection with our Initial Public Offering, the underwriters were granted an option to purchase up to an additional 3,600,000 Units to cover over-allotments, if any. On October 21, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised its over-allotment option and, on October 22, 2021, the underwriters purchased 3,600,000 Units (the “Over-allotment Units”) at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating net proceeds to the Company of $36,000,000.
On October 18, 2021, simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering and pursuant to the Private Placement Warrants Purchase Agreement, dated October 13, 2021, by and between the Company and the Sponsor (the “Private Warrant Purchase Agreement”), we completed the private sale (the “Private Placement”) of 11,600,000 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $11,600,000. On October 22, 2021, simultaneously with the sale of the Over-allotment Units, we completed a private placement with the Sponsor for an additional 1,440,000 warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant (the “Additional Private Placement Warrants” and, together with the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants, the “Warrants”), generating gross proceeds to the Company of $1,440,000.
A total of $281,520,000, comprised of $270,480,000 of the net proceeds from our Initial Public Offering (including the Over-allotment Units) and $11,040,000 of the proceeds of the sale of the Private Placement Warrants (including the Additional Private Placement Warrants) has been deposited in a U.S.-based trust account (“Trust Account”) maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $
899,056
in cash. We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our Initial Business Combination plans. We cannot assure you that we will identify any suitable target candidates or, if identified, that we will be able to complete the acquisition of such candidates on favorable terms or at all.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from February 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $684,917, which consisted of $688,891 in formation costs, offset by interest earned on funds held in Trust Account of $3,974.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had $899,056 in cash and working capital of $657,165.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021, had been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 in offering costs by the Sponsor in exchange for the Founder Shares, and borrowings under the promissory note of $195,000. The promissory note was fully repaid on October 20, 2021, from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering.
In October 2021, we consummated our Public Offering and the Private Placement. Of the net proceeds from our Initial Public Offering and associated Private Placements, $281,520,000 of cash was placed in the Trust Account and $1,960,476 of cash was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for working capital purposes.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the Company has and will continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of its acquisition plans which raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern”, management has determined that if the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination by April 19, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), then the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. The date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution as well as the Company’s working capital deficit raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after the Combination Period. The Company intends to complete a Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities. Beginning on October 14, 2021, the Company has agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. Upon completion of the Initial Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. As of December 31, 2021, we had $25,000 in accrued administrative support expenses.
The underwriters of our Initial Public Offering were entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5%, of which 2% ($5,520,000) was paid at the closing of our Initial Public Offering and 3.5% ($9,660,000) was deferred. The deferred underwriting discounts and commissions will become payable to the underwriters upon the consummation of the Initial Business Combination and will be paid from the amounts held in the Trust Account. The underwriters are not entitled to any interest accrued on the deferred underwriting discounts and commissions.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the JOBS Act, (b) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (c) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting and Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (d) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of our Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the closing of the Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting estimates affecting our financial statements:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
As a result of the right of stockholders to redeem their Public Shares in connection with a tender offer for shares or an Initial Business Combination, all such Public Shares are recorded at redemption amount and classified as temporary equity upon the completion of our Initial Public Offering, in accordance with FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.”
Net Income (Loss) per Share
Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class
method in calculating earnings per share. Adjustment associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.