ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Blockchain Moon Acquisition Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a recently organized blank check company incorporated in Delaware on January 22, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any business, industry or geographical location, we intend to focus our search on high growth businesses in blockchain technologies in North America, Europe, and Asia.
On October 21, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 10,000,000 units at $10.00 per unit, and the sale of 400,000 units to our sponsor, at a price of $10.00 per unit in a private placement that closed simultaneously with the initial public offering. Each Unit consists of one share of common stock, one warrant and one right. Each right entitles the holder thereof to receive one-tenth (1/10) of one share of common stock upon the consummation of an initial business combination. Each warrant entitles the registered holder to purchase one-half (1/2) of a share of common stock at a price of $11.50 per full share, subject to certain adjustments. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and the private units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be generally applied toward consummating a business combination. The underwriters have a 45-day option from the date of initial public offering to purchase up to an additional 1,500,000 units to cover over-allotments, if any. On October 26, 2021 the underwriters fully exercised their over-allotment option.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering (including the underwriter’s over-allotment option) and the private placement, $115,000,000 was placed in a trust account.
We will have only 12 months from the closing of our initial public offering (or up to 18 months from the closing of the initial public offering if we extend the period of time to consummate a business combination by the maximum amount) to complete our initial business
combination (the "Combination Period"). If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within such period, it will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable, and less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of then issued and outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders' rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our rights, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete our initial business combination within the Combination Period.
We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our initial public offering and searching for a business combination target. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from January 22, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $329,480, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $278,354, changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $60,676 and warrants issuance costs of $679 and offset by interest and gain on fair value changes of marketable securities (net), held in Trust Account of $10,229.
Going Concern and Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had $831,693 in cash and a working capital of $1,068,409. Prior to the consummation of our initial public offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from our sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares to our sponsor, and a $250,000 in note payable to our sponsor. Subsequent to the consummation of the initial public offering, we received the net proceeds not held in the Trust Account of approximately $1.4 million.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our financing and acquisition plans. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a business combination. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us working capital loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the private placement units. As of December 31, 2021, we have no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205-40, “Basis of Presentation - Going Concern, we have until October 21, 2022 (absent any extensions of such period by the Sponsor, pursuant to the terms described above) to consummate the proposed business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate the proposed business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after October 21, 2022. We intend to complete the proposed business combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to consummate any business combination by October 21, 2022.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of these financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Warrant Liability
We account for our warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for liability classification under ASC 815. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
Our Private Placement Warrants meet the criteria as liability classified derivative instruments and are recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. We will continue to adjust the liability for changes in fair value until the earlier of the exercise or expiration of the Private Placement Warrants. At that time, the portion of the liability related to the Private Placement Warrants will be reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) ("ASU 2020-06") to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity's own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity's own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.