Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal year, which ends August 31. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
Overview
Since July 2021, our business has been as a blockchain technology company that is building out industrial scale digital asset mining, equipment sales and hosting operations. The Company’s primary business is hosting third-party equipment used in mining of digital asset coins and tokens, specifically Bitcoin, as well as self-mining for its own account. Our state-of-the-art facilities will be specifically designed and constructed for housing advanced mining equipment. Our data centers will provide power, racks, proprietary thermodynamic management (heat dissipation and airflow management), redundant connectivity, 24/7 security, as well as software which provide infrastructure management and custom firmware that boost performance and energy efficiency.
We plan to operate our data centers using immersion cooling technology. Immersion cooling is the process of submerging computer components (or full servers) in a thermally, but not electrically, conductive liquid (dielectric coolant) allowing higher heat transfer performance than air and many other benefits. Immersion cooling can be up to 95% more efficient than standard air cooling, producing an estimated PUE (power usage effectiveness) of 1.05. This cooler environment has been shown to extend machine lives by 30% or longer.
We initially decided to locate our initial facilities in Trinidad, because it has some of the cheapest electricity in the world due to its abundant supplies of oil and gas and because some of our technical staff is located there. We have entered into an agreement with Telecommunications Services of Trinidad & Tobago Limited (“TSTT”), the largest and oldest telecom company in Trinidad, to co-locate up to 125 800 kw containers for hosting digital asset miners. TSTT has up to 93 potential locations for co-location of our containers. Under the agreement, we have the option, but not obligation, to co-locate containers at our own pace. We pay a fixed amount per container, plus the actual electricity costs incurred by our containers in the amount billed to TSTT by the local utility without any markup. The agreement provides that our hosting containers will be billed for electricity usage at the local utility’s standard rates, which is the greater of 3.5 cents per kwh or 75% of the declared reserve capacity, which is equal to the customer’s highest expected monthly kilovolt-ampere demand at $7.40. The term of the agreement expires on October 14, 2031. We have the right to terminate our agreement with TSTT at any time that the price for electricity consumption exceeds $0.05 per kwh.
Until our permanent hosting facilities are operational, we are temporarily leasing space for a small number of ASIC computers with a co-host. We intend to move all of our currently owned and customer owned miners to our new TSTT hosting facilities once they are operational.
In October 2022, we completed the installation of initial hosting containers under our agreement with TSTT. However, prior to commencing operations, TSTT advised us that the utility had refused to honor its existing agreement with TSTT with respect to electricity supplied to our pilot hosting site, and instead indicated that the rate would be approximately $0.09 per kwh. TSTT has informed us that it does not believe that its contract with the local utility entitles it to vary the rate it charges for the use of electricity and has protested the decision. At this time, we are unable to predict how this dispute between TSTT and the utility will be resolved, what form any resolution may take or how long any resolution may take. Accordingly, we are delaying the installation of additional containers in Trinidad until this dispute is resolved. Until the dispute between TSTT and the utility is resolved, we intend to focus our efforts on purchasing or developing hosting locations in the United States and Canada, either directly or in joint ventures with other industry participants.
In light of the recent developments in Trinidad, we are focusing our efforts in the near term on developing hosting locations in the United States and Canada. We are exploring situations where medium to long-term power agreements may be available at affordable prices, whether using traditional power sources such as coal or natural gas, as well as environmentally friendly sources such as hydroelectric, wind and solar-backed projects, which might allow us to generate collateral revenue from the sale of excess power to the local utility grid and from the generation of saleable carbon credits.
We recently entered into a joint arrangement whereby we would contributed one immersion contain and six transformers, and sold four immersion containers to a joint venture with a third party that has procured a location and a medium or long-term power purchase agreement in Pecos, Texas.
Our digital asset mining operation is focused on the generation of digital assets by solving complex cryptographic algorithms to validate transactions on specific digital asset network blockchains, which is commonly referred to as “mining.” Mining requires the use of specialized computers equipped with application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) chips (known as “miners”) to solve complex cryptographic algorithms in support of the Bitcoin blockchain (in a process known as “solving a block”) in exchange for digital asset rewards (primarily bitcoin). Whether we are hosting our client’s computers or mining for our own account with our own computers, the miners participate in “mining pools” organized by “mining pool operators” in which we or our clients share mining power (known as “hash rate”) with the hash rate generated by other miners participating in the pool to earn digital asset rewards. The mining pool operator provides a service that coordinates the computing power of the independent mining enterprises participating in the mining pool. Fees are paid to the mining pool operator to cover the costs of maintaining the pool. The pool uses software that coordinates the pool members’ mining power, identifies new block rewards, records how much hash rate each participant contributes to the pool, and assigns digital asset rewards earned by the pool among its participants in proportion to the hash rate each participant contributed to the pool in connection with solving a block.
Our digital asset self-mining activity competes with a myriad of mining operations throughout the world to complete new blocks in the blockchain and earn the reward in the form of an established unit of a digital asset. Revenue from digital asset mining and hosting third party digital asset miners are impacted by volatility in bitcoin prices, as well as increases in the Bitcoin blockchain’s network hash rate resulting from the growth in the overall quantity and quality of miners working to solve blocks on the Bitcoin blockchain and the difficulty index associated with the secure hashing algorithm employed in solving the blocks. Gross profits from digital asset mining are primarily impacted by the cost of electricity to operate the miners and to a lesser extent by other operating costs. While we expect to sell or exchange a portion of the digital assets we mine to fund our growth strategies or for general corporate purposes, we may hold our digital assets as investments in anticipation of continued adoption of digital assets as a “store of value” and a more efficient medium of exchange than traditional fiat currencies.
As the demand for digital assets increases and digital assets become more widely accepted, there is an increasing demand for professional-grade, scalable infrastructure to support growth of the blockchain ecosystem. We expect to continually evaluate the performance of our data centers, including our ability to access additional megawatts of electric power and to expand our total self-mining and customer and related party hosting hash rates.
We also generate revenues from the advantageous purchase and sale of equipment used for digital asset mining and hosting. We have relationships with some suppliers that enable us to acquire highly desired equipment at attractive prices, which we plan to resell to third parties. In most cases, resales of digital asset mining equipment would be to our hosting customers, which have the dual benefit of generating short-term gross profits from the equipment sale as well as growing the customer base of our hosting business. We have recently resold some hosting equipment in Trinidad to third parties that we determined would not be need in the short-term due to the dispute between TSTT and the local utility described above.
The primary factors that will impact future hosting revenues include: (i) the price of bitcoin, since hosting revenues are primarily a percentage of bitcoin mined by clients; (ii) the completion of operational hosting facilities, as potential hosting clients have been reluctant to sign contracts prior to the date the Company has a fully operational hosting facility; and (iii) the availability of attractive electricity prices, since power usage is the primary marginal cost for any mining operation. Our hosting revenues will also be impacted by the resolution of the dispute between TSTT and the local utility regarding the electricity rate that will be charged our co-location facilities in Trinidad, as well as by the timing of the resolution.
The primary factors that will impact proprietary mining revenues include: (i) the price of bitcoin; (ii) the completion of operational facilities to provide us with a cost-effective facility to operate in; (iii) the availability of attractive electricity prices, since power usage is the primary marginal cost for any mining operation; and (iv) the availability of mining equipment suitable for the Company’s immersion hosting environment at attractive prices and available capacity in the Company’s hosting facilities. Our proprietary mining activities will also be impacted by the resolution of the dispute between TSTT and the local utility regarding the electricity rate that will be charged our co-location facilities in Trinidad, as well as by the timing of the resolution.
Revenues from cryptocurrency mining, whether derived from hosting clients or from proprietary mining, are impacted significantly by volatility in Bitcoin prices, as well as increases in the Bitcoin blockchain’s network hash rate resulting from the growth in the overall quantity and quality of miners working to solve blocks on the Bitcoin blockchain and the difficulty index associated with the secure hashing algorithm employed in solving the blocks. From August 2021 to August 2022, the Bitcoin network hash rate increased by approximately 81.958% as a result of, among other factors, the increased number of miners working to solve blocks on the Bitcoin blockchain during that period, many of which make use of newer, more efficient ASIC chips that are specially designed to solve blocks using the SHA-256 set of cryptographic hash functions employed on the Bitcoin blockchain. For the years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, the average network hash rate working on the Bitcoin blockchain was 225.8037 EH/s and 124.0961 EH/s, respectively. Further, the difficulty index increased over 75.856% in the last year. The market price of Bitcoin fell from $48,834.27 as of September 1, 2021 to $20,048.27 on August 31, 2022.
The primary factors that will impact resales of mining equipment include the availability of equipment at attractive prices and the number of participants willing to enter the mining business or expand their existing operations, which is highly correlated to the margin from mining, as determined by the market price of bitcoin and prevailing energy costs. Also, our resales of mining equipment will be impacted by the existence of hosting capacity with attractive electricity rates in our hosting operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Results of Operations for Years Ended August 31, 2022 and 2021.
Revenues
During the year ended August 31, 2022, the Company generated $23,644 in Bitcoin revenue from hosting third-party miners, compared to $-0- revenue in the year ended August 31, 2021. Hosting revenues during the year ended August 31, 2022 were adversely impacted by the Company’s decision not to charge its hosting client for electricity usage as an accommodation due to delays in completing the permanent facility at which its machines were to be hosted, as described below. The Company had no operations in the year ended August 31, 2021, prior to launching its Bitcoin hosting and mining business in July 2021. The Company signed its first hosting client in February 2022 under a three year contract to host 215 miners. The Company had deployed 103 of the client’s machines during the year ended August 31, 2022 while the Company completed work on permanent facilities. The Company could not deploy the balance of the machines because the temporary facility did not have the capacity and because the hosting environment was not suitable for some machines. The Company originally expected to deploy all of client’s machines by April 2022, but was delayed due to production delays by the Company’s vendor of immersion containers, delays in site preparation in Trinidad, and the delayed availability of certain electrical equipment in Trinidad. The Company completed its first hosting facility in Trinidad in October 2022, but has delayed opening the facility pending resulting of a dispute between our co-location partner in Trinidad and the electricity company in Trinidad over the price that will be charged for electricity provided to your hosting operations. At this time, we do not have an information on when the dispute will be resolved and in what manner. As a consequence, we are currently focusing our efforts on the development of hosting centers in the United States and Canada, both directly and in joint ventures with third parties.
During the year ended August 31, 2022, the Company generated $9,325 in Bitcoin revenue from self-mining digital assets, compared to $-0- revenue in the year ended August 31, 2021.
During the year ended August 31, 2022, the Company generated $394,700 in revenue from equipment sales, compared to $-0- revenue in the year ended August 31, 2021. The largest sale consisted of the sale of non-customized 72 Antminer T-17's and 25 Whatsminer M31S with an aggregate cost basis of $186,657. The gross profit on the sale of these units was calculated but subtracting the cost of the units from the sales proceeds, less accrued depreciation of the equipment. The cost basis of the equipment consisted of the purchase price of the equipment plus shipping costs and value added taxes. The terms of the sale were a cash payment of $168,750 and the execution of a note by the purchaser for $168,750, payable with interest at 10% in two installments, one in the amount of $84,375 due on April 15, 2022 and a second installment of $84,375 in principal and all accrued interest due on May 15, 2022. The Company later agreed to extend the dates of both payments to June 15, 2022 and July 15, 2022, respectively, as an accommodation to the customer for delays in completing the hosting facility in which they will be permanently hosted.
The Company also sold two immersion crypto containers to West Indian Mining Company Ltd. (“Wimco”) for $960,000. Wimco made an initial payment of $50,000 prior to August 31, 2022 which the Company recorded as revenue during the year ended August 31, 2022. Under the terms of the agreement Wimco agreed to make 25 equal monthly installment payments of $40,950 which includes interest at 7.5%. Under the guidelines of ASC 606, since Wimco is a new entity with a limited credit history and terms of the sale to Wimco enable the Company to regain title to the equipment in the event of a payment default, the Company has recorded deferred revenue of $485,234 on the transaction. As Wimco makes its monthly payments, the Company will reduce its note receivable and deferred revenue and recognize income from the sale of equipment, cost of sales and interest income.
The Company expects hosting revenues in future periods to be lower as a result of our decision to focus on self-mining over hosting third party miners. In the current market environment, the price of ASIC miners has fallen to the point that we believe self-mining is more profitable than hosting third party miners. The Company currently owns 362 miners that it plans to use for proprietary mining, the deployment of which will occur when its immersion hosting environment is operational. The Company also expects to generate additional revenues from the resale of certain hosting equipment, primarily containers and transformers. In the fourth quarter of 2022, the Company sold two hosting containers to a third party, and subsequent to August 31, 2022 has sold or contributed five hosting containers and six transformers to a joint venture that is constructing a hosting facility in Texas. In addition, the Company is seeing good opportunities to acquire mining equipment at attractive prices, which should create opportunities for additional revenues.
The primary factors that will impact our revenues in subsequent periods are described in the “-Overview” above.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales related to Bitcoin hosting and mining revenue was $201,292 for the year ended August 31, 2022, compared to $-0- in the year ended August 31, 2021 when there was no revenue. Cost of sales normally includes electricity, utilities, facilities costs, depreciation and supplies. For the year ended August 31, 2022, major components of cost of sales include rent to house mining and hosting equipment in temporary facilities, electricity, and supplies. The Company believes that cost of sales as a percentage of revenues were greater in the year ended August 31, 2022 than what it expects to incur in future periods. Cost of sales in the year ended August 31, 2022 were inflated by costs associated with maintaining temporary hosting facilities while our permanent hosting facility was being completed, costs associated with the setup of temporary hosting facilities and the completion of our new hosting facility that we determined not to capitalize. Furthermore, our temporary hosting facilities carried electricity costs that were materially higher than the costs that we expect to incur in our permanent facilities.
Cost of sales related to sales of mining equipment was $355,407 for the year ended August 31, 2022, compared to $-0- in the year ended August 31, 2021 when there was no revenue. Cost of sales consists of the purchase price of equipment sold, plus shipping and value added tax on the equipment, as well as the cost of writing off a note for $168,750 payable by our initial hosting client in relation to mining equipment sold to the client.
Since we are in the early stages of setting up our infrastructure to generate higher levels of revenues, we expect that our cost of sales to generate asset revenue from hosting or mining for our own account will exceed the revenue we generate until we achieve sufficient economies of scale by deploying more miners. In future periods, the largest component of our cost of sales will consist of electricity costs, which will increase substantially as our hosting facilities are fully utilized. However, hosting clients will be responsible for reimbursing their pro rata share of electricity costs. The balance of the electricity costs attributable to our proprietary mining operations will be paid for by bitcoin revenues generated from those operations.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended August 31, 2022, the Company incurred $1,585,154 in operating expenses compared to $131,815 in operating expenses during the year ended August 31, 2021. Operating expenses for the 2022 period were primarily comprised of $227,597 in general and administrative expenses, $856,925 in professional fees comprised of legal, accounting and approximately $638,000 in non-cash investment banking fees in the form of stock compensation, and $489,096 in related party compensation expense to our officers and employees. Included in the $1,585,154 in 2022 operating expenses is $856,724 in non-cash stock based compensation due to the issuance of common stock for services and to related parties as compensation pursuant to the terms of employment agreements. Additionally, we incurred $11,535 in impairment expenses on our cryptocurrency holdings due to the significant decline in the price of Bitcoin we are holding. The higher level of operating expenses in the 2022 period as compared to the 2021 period is attributable to expenses incurred as part of the Company’s entry into the bitmine hosting business. The Company expects that operating expenses will trend materially higher in future periods as the Company begins paying regular compensation to existing officers and directors, hires additional employees, and incurs other costs associated with the commencement of operations.
Other Income (Expense)
During the year ended August 31, 2022, the Company incurred $291,048 in other expenses, which was comprised solely of interest expense of $291,048 compared to $22,424 of interest expenses during the same year ended August 31, 2021. The increase in interest expense is due to increased levels of borrowings by the Company under its line of credit in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 when the line of credit was only available for the last 40 days of the year and the average amount borrowed was significantly less than in fiscal 2022.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result of the foregoing, during the year ended August 31, 2022, the Company incurred a net loss of ($2,005,233), or ($0.05) per share, as compared to a net loss of ($154,239) or ($0.02) per share during the year ended August 31, 2022. The increase in the Company’s net loss in the year ended August 31, 2022, compared to the year ended August 31, 2021, is attributable to the factors discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of August 31, 2022, the Company had $392,550 in cash on hand.
During the year ended August 31, 2022 the Company had a net loss of $2,005,233.
Cash flows used in operating activities were $1,629,243 for the year ended August 31, 2022 compared to cash flows used of $76,361 for the year ended August 31, 2021. The increase in cash used in operating activities for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 is primarily attributable to an increase in 2022 of the operating loss of $1,065,520, offset by $856,724 of non-cash stock compensation in the year ended August 31, 2022 as compared to $71,250 in the year ended August 31, 2021.
Cash flows used in investing activities were $6,107,306 for the year ended August 31, 2022 compared to cash flows used in investing activities of $427,296 for the year ended August 31, 2021. The entire increase during fiscal 2022 period compared to fiscal 2021 in cash flows used by investing activities is due to the purchase of $5,680,010 more in Bitmine equipment in 2022 compared to 2021.
Cash flows provided by financing activities were $7,910,361 for the year ended August 31, 2022 compared to cash flows provided by financing activities of $720,464 for the year ended August 31, 2021. The increase in cash flows provided by financing activities in fiscal 2022 is attributable to $5,152,500 received from the Unit Offering conducted in the year ended August 31, 2022 as well as $2,757,861 in draws under the LOC Agreement with IDI, net of repayment.
Through August 31, 2022, a significant component of the Company’s current liquidity has been derived from the LOC Agreement with IDI. The LOC Agreement was initially entered into on July 22, 2021, and was amended and restated in its entirety on August 4, 2021, September 29, 2021, March 30, 2022 and June 24, 2022. On August 31, 2022, the Company and IDI agreed to convert all amounts then due under the LOC Agreement into shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock with a stated value equal to the principal and interest due under the LOC Agreement, which resulted in the issuance of 303,966 shares of Series A Preferred Stock for $3,039,662 due thereunder
On October 19, 2022, the Company entered into a new Line of Credit Agreement with IDI (the “2022 LOC Agreement”), under which the Company has the right to borrow up to $1,000,000 to finance the purchase of equipment necessary for the operation of the Company’s business, and related working capital. Loans under the 2022 LOC Agreement accrue interest at twelve percent (12%) per annum, compounded on a 30/360 monthly basis until the loans have been repaid in full. The Company has the right to submit draw requests under the 2022 LOC Agreement until April 15, 2023. Each draw request is subject to the approval of IDI in its sole discretion. The amount drawn, plus all accrued interest therein, is repayable in full on December 1, 2023. As of the date of this Report the amount borrowed under the 2022 LOC Agreement amounted to $400,000
The Company believes that cash on hand, amounts that may borrow under the 2022 LOC Agreement, and expected receipts from sale transactions will provide it with sufficient liquidity to fund its operations for the next 12 months. The Company expects to receive approximately $41,000 monthly from the sale of two immersion containers in August 2022, and approximately $31,000 per month from the sale of four immersion containers to a joint venture in which the company will be both lender to and equity investor. Currently, the Company owns 362 miners which it plans to use for self-mining. Assuming neither the price of bitcoin nor the difficulty index changes, and based on the Company’s expected electricity costs, the Company estimates that it could generate approximately $19,500 in monthly gross profit from the miners once they are moved to a permanent location in Trinidad. Other sources of revenue that the Company expects to receive include equity distributions from the ROC Digital joint venture once it becomes operational in late 2022. The Company does not budget to include any proceeds from the exercise of its outstanding warrants because it is not able to predict when or if the market price of its common stock will exceed the exercise price of its warrants.
Nevertheless, while the Company does not need additional capital to maintain operations, it will need additional capital to expand its digital asset hosting and mining business, and take advantage of opportunities in the market place that currently exist due to the recent decline in digital asset prices. Therefore, the Company has engaged an investment banker and is pursuing additional capital-raising alternatives, including the potential issuance of common stock in a private placement, or the issuance of convertible notes or preferred stock. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional capital or that the terms of any capital raise are not dilutive to current shareholders or carry other terms that are unfavorable to the Company and its shareholders.
Bitcoin Holdings
At August 31, 2022, we held approximately 1.07 Bitcoin with a fair market value of $21,433 on the balance sheet. All of the Bitcoin were classified as “Cryptocurrencies” on the balance sheet. The quoted market value of a single Bitcoin as of August 31, 2022 was approximately $20,050. During the year ended August 31, 2022 we incurred an impairment charge on cryptocurrency of $11,535 due to the significant decline in the market price of cryptocurrency.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
Related Party Transactions
Starting in 2020, Coral Investment Partners, LP, a partnership controlled by Erik Nelson, agreed to make loans to the Company from time to time pursuant to a demand promissory note that bore interest at 24% per annum. The amount due at August 31, 2020 was principal of $50,447 and interest of $1,558. The amount due of principal of $87,447 and interest of $19,476. Was repaid in full in the quarter ended August 31, 2021.
On July 22, 2021, the Company entered into a LOC Agreement with Innovative Digital Investors Emerging Technology, L.P., a limited partnership controlled by Jonathan Bates, our Chairman, and Raymond Mow, our chief financial officer and a director. The LOC Agreement was amended and restated in its entirety on August 4, 2021, September 29, 2021, March 30, 2022 and June 24, 2022 (as amended and restated, the “LOC Agreement”). On August 31, 2022, the Company and IDI agreed to convert all amounts then due under the LOC Agreement into shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock with a stated value equal to the principal and interest due under the LOC Agreement, which resulted in the issuance of 303,966 shares of Series A Preferred Stock for $3,039,662 due thereunder.
On October 19, 2022, the Company entered into a new Line of Credit Agreement (the “2022 LOC Agreement”) with IDI. The 2022 LOC Agreement provides for loans of up to $1,000,000 at the request of the Company to finance the purchase of equipment necessary for the operation of the Company’s business, and related working capital. Loans under the 2022 LOC Agreement accrue interest at twelve percent (12%) per annum, compounded on a 30/360 monthly basis until the loans have been repaid in full. The Company has the right to submit draw requests under the 2022 LOC Agreement until April 15, 2023. Each draw request is subject to the approval of IDI in its sole discretion. The amount drawn, plus all accrued interest therein, is repayable in full on December 1, 2023. As of November 4, 2022, the amount advanced under the 2022 LOC Agreement was $400,000.
Critical Accounting Policies
General
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our financial statements requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We describe in this section certain critical accounting policies that require us to make significant estimates, assumptions and judgments. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time the estimate is made and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect its most significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the financial statements. For further information on the critical accounting policies, see Note 1 of the Financial Statements.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”), which is the source of authoritative accounting principles recognized by the FASB to be applied by nongovernmental entities in the preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the United States.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. The most significant estimates relate to the calculation of stock-based compensation, useful lives and recoverability of long-lived assets, income taxes and contingencies. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience, known or expected trends, and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable given the quality of information available as of the date of these financial statements. The results of these assumptions provide the basis for making estimates about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates. There have been no material changes to the Company’s accounting estimates since the Company’s financial statements for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
On July 1, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2018, are presented under ASC 606.
Revenues from digital currency mining - General
The Company recognizes revenue under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The core principle of the revenue standard is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle:
· Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer;
· Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
· Step 3: Determine the transaction price;
· Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
· Step 5: Recognize revenue when the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
In order to identify the performance obligations in a contract with a customer, a company must assess the promised goods or services in the contract and identify each promised good or service that is distinct. A performance obligation meets ASC 606’s definition of a “distinct” good or service (or bundle of goods or services) if both of the following criteria are met: The customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (i.e., the good or service is capable of being distinct), and the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (i.e., the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract).
If a good or service is not distinct, the good or service is combined with other promised goods or services until a bundle of goods or services is identified that is distinct.
The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer. The consideration promised in a contract with a customer may include fixed amounts, variable amounts, or both. When determining the transaction price, an entity must consider the effects of all of the following:
· Variable consideration
· Constraining estimates of variable consideration
· The existence of a significant financing component in the contract
· Noncash consideration
· Consideration payable to a customer
Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The transaction price allocated to each performance obligation is recognized when that performance obligation is satisfied, at a point in time or over time as appropriate.
The Company has entered into digital asset mining pools by executing contracts, as amended from time to time, with the mining pool operators to provide computing power to the mining pool. The contracts are terminable at any time by either party and the Company’s enforceable right to compensation only begins when the Company provides computing power to the mining pool operator. In exchange for providing computing power, the Company is entitled to a fractional share of the fixed cryptocurrency award the mining pool operator receives (less digital asset transaction fees to the mining pool operator which are immaterial and are recorded as a deduction from revenue), for successfully adding a block to the blockchain. The terms of the agreement provide that neither party can dispute settlement terms after thirty-five days following settlement. The Company’s fractional share is based on the proportion of computing power the Company contributed to the mining pool operator to the total computing power contributed by all mining pool participants in solving the current algorithm.
Providing computing power to solve complex cryptographic algorithms in support of the Bitcoin blockchain (in a process known as “solving a block”) is an output of the Company’s ordinary activities. The provision of providing such computing power is the only performance obligation in the Company’s contracts with mining pool operators. The transaction consideration the Company receives, if any, is noncash consideration, which the Company measures at fair value on the date received, which is not materially different than the fair value at contract inception or the time the Company has earned the award from the pools. The consideration is all variable. Because it is not probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur, the consideration is constrained until the mining pool operator successfully places a block (by being the first to solve an algorithm) and the Company receives confirmation of the consideration it will receive, at which time revenue is recognized. There is no significant financing component in these transactions.
Fair value of the cryptocurrency award received is determined using the market rate of the related cryptocurrency at the time of receipt.
Revenues from Hosting
The Company provides energized space to customers who locate their equipment within the Company’s co-hosting facility. The equipment generating the hosting revenue is owned by the customer. Currently, the Company accepts the mining proceeds daily from the mining pool into a cold wallet address in the Company’s name. The Company sends its hosting client its portion daily, as the Company receives such proceeds. All performance obligations are achieved simultaneously by providing the hosting environment for the customers’ operations. Hosting revenues consist of amounts billed in U.S. dollars for electricity and other fees, and a percentage of cryptocurrency generated by the client’s hosting activities. With regard to hosting revenues that are billed in U.S. dollars, revenues are recorded at the time of invoicing. With regard to hosting revenues that are based on a percentage of cryptocurrency generated by the customer, revenues are recorded based on the Company’s share of cryptocurrency received from the mining pool on the date of receipt.
During the period ending August 31, 2022, all of the Company’s hosting revenue was derived from one hosting customer.
Revenues from the sale of mining equipment
The Company records revenue from the resale of mining equipment it has purchased. Revenue for the sale of mining equipment is recognized under the guidelines of ASC 606.
Revenues From Mining
Revenues from mining cryptocurrency for its own account will be recorded at the spot price for the cryptocurrency on a daily basis based on the Company’s proportionate share of cryptocurrency earned by the mining pools in which the Company participates on the date the Company receives its share from the pool.
Cash and cash equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid temporary cash investments with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. On August 31, 2022, and August 31, 2021, the Company’s cash equivalents totaled $392,550 and $218,737, respectively.
Cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrencies held are accounted for as intangible assets with indefinite useful lives. An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not amortized but assessed for impairment quarterly, when events or changes in circumstances occur indicating that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived asset is impaired. Impairment exists when the carrying amount exceeds its fair value, which is measured using the quoted price of the cryptocurrency at the time its fair value is being measured. In testing for impairment, the Company has the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that an impairment exists. If it is determined that it is not more likely than not that an impairment exists, a quantitative impairment test is not necessary. If the Company concludes otherwise, it is required to perform a quantitative impairment test. To the extent an impairment loss is recognized, the loss establishes the new cost basis of the asset. Subsequent reversal of impairment losses, if the price of cryptocurrency increases is not permitted. During the year ended August 31, 2022, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $11,535 due to a reduction in the quoted price of cryptocurrency.
Cryptocurrency earned by the Company through its mining activities are included within operating activities on the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows. The sales of digital currencies are included within investing activities in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows and any realized gains or losses from such sales are included in other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). The Company accounts for its gains or losses in accordance with the first in first out (“FIFO”) method of accounting.
The Company holds its cryptocurrencies in a cold storage wallet account in its name, and not with a custodian or other intermediary. The Company has an account with Gemini Trust Company, LLC, which is a qualified custodian regulated by the New York Department of Financial Services. Currently, the Company does not store cryptocurrencies at Gemini, and only transfers cryptocurrencies that it desires to liquidate to its account at Gemini immediately prior to the liquidation. The Company uses Gemini’s multi-signature feature for account access.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation using the fair value method following the guidance outlined in Section 718-10 of the FASB ASC for disclosure about stock-based compensation. This section requires a public entity to measure the cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award (with limited exceptions). That cost will be recognized over the period during which service is provided. No compensation cost is recognized for equity instruments for which service is not provided or rendered.
Related party transactions
The Company follows ASC 850, Related Party Disclosures, for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions. In accordance with ASC 850, the Company’s financial statements include disclosures of material related party transactions, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business, as well as transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of financial statements.
Net Loss per Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average common shares outstanding during the period as defined by ASC Topic 260, “Earnings per Share.” Basic earnings per common share calculations are determined by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the year. Diluted earnings per common share calculations are determined by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares and dilutive common share equivalents outstanding. As of August 31, 2022 there were no common stock equivalents that were dilutive.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are provided for the tax effects of transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of taxes currently due plus deferred taxes related primarily to differences between depreciation which is deductible for tax purposes prior to being deductible for book purposes. The deferred tax assets and liabilities represent the future tax return consequences of those differences, which will either be taxable or deductible when the assets and liabilities are recovered or settled. Deferred taxes also are recognized for operating losses that are available to offset future taxable income.
From time to time, the Company may have differences in computing the book and tax bases of property and equipment; reserves for bad debts; capitalized overhead included in inventories; bonus plan payables, and accrued wages to shareholders/employees. Deferred tax expense or benefit is the result of the changes in the deferred tax assets, net of the valuation reserve, and liabilities.
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740 (“FASB ASC 740”), Income Taxes, which clarifies the accounting and disclosure requirements for uncertainty in tax positions. It requires a two-step approach to evaluate tax positions and determine if they should be recognized in the financial statements. The two-step approach involves recognizing any tax positions that are “more likely than not” to occur and then measuring those positions to determine if they are recognizable in the financial statements. Management regularly reviews and analyzes all tax positions and has determined that no uncertain tax positions requiring recognition have occurred.
In general, the Company’s income tax returns are subject to examination by the taxing authorities for three years after they were filed. The Company has not filed any tax returns.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
All other newly issued accounting pronouncements, but not yet effective, have been deemed either immaterial or not applicable.