ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of financial condition as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and results of operations for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2021 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto, included in Part II ITEM 8 of this report.
Forward-Looking Statements
The disclosures set forth in this item are qualified by important factors detailed in Part I captioned Forward-Looking Statements and ITEM 1A captioned Risk Factors of this report and other cautionary statements set forth elsewhere in the report.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical accounting estimates are those estimates made in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that involve a significant level of estimation and uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations. We consider accounting estimates to be critical to our financial results if (i) the accounting estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain, (ii) management could have applied different assumptions during the reported period, and (iii) changes in the accounting estimate are reasonably likely to occur in the future and could have a material impact on our financial statements. Management has determined the following accounting estimates and related policies to be critical:
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans and Unfunded Commitments
The allowance for credit losses on loans is a valuation account that is deducted from the amortized cost basis at the balance sheet date to present the net amount of loans expected to be collected. The allowance for losses on unfunded loan commitments is based on estimates of probability that these commitments will be drawn upon according to historical utilization experience, expected loss severity and loss rates as determined for pooled funded loans. The allowance for credit losses on unfunded commitments is a liability account included in interest payable and other liabilities. Management estimates these allowances quarterly using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Credit loss experience among the Bank and peer groups provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses.
The allowance for credit losses ("ACL") model utilizes a discounted cash flow ("DCF") method to measure the expected credit losses on loans collectively evaluated that are sub-segmented by loan pools with similar credit risk characteristics, which generally correspond to federal regulatory reporting codes. In addition, the DCF method incorporates assumptions for probability of default ("PD"), loss given default ("LGD"), and prepayments and curtailments over the contractual terms of the loans. Under the DCF method, the ACL reflects the difference between the amortized cost basis and the present value of the expected cash flows using the loan's effective rate.
Management considers whether adjustments to the quantitative portion of the ACL are needed for differences in segment-specific risk characteristics or to reflect the extent to which it expects current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts of economic conditions to differ from the conditions that existed during the historical period included in the development of PD and LGD.
Our allowance model is particularly sensitive to forecasted and seasonally-adjusted actual California unemployment rates, which decreased to 6.5% at December 31, 2021 from 9.3% at December 31, 2020. The ACL model incorporates a one-year forecast. For periods beyond the forecast horizon the economic factors revert to historical averages on a straight-line basis over a one-year period. We performed a sensitivity analysis as of December 31, 2021 and determined that a 1% change (e.g., 5.5% to 6.5%) in the forecasted quarterly unemployment rates over the next four quarters resulted in an 8% change to our allowance for credit losses on loans. This impact does not consider other assumption changes to either the quantitative factors, such as probability of default, loss given
default, loan mix or cash flows, prepayment/curtailment rates, and individually analyzed loans, or qualitative factors as discussed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. Additionally, because current economic conditions and forecasts can change, as future events are inherently difficult to predict, the estimated credit losses on loans and unfunded commitments could change significantly.
While we believe we use the best information available to determine the allowance for credit losses, our results of operations could be significantly affected if circumstances differ substantially from the assumptions used in determining the allowance. For information regarding critical estimates related to our allowance for credit losses methodology, the provision for credit losses, and risks to asset quality and lending activity, see ITEM 1A - Risk Factors, the Allowance for Credit Losses section in ITEM 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,
Income Taxes
We are subject to the income tax laws of the U.S., its states, and the municipalities in which we operate. These tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by us and the government taxing authorities. We review our provision for income tax expense monthly and calculate the carrying value of deferred tax assets and liabilities quarterly. In establishing a provision for income tax expense, we make judgments and interpretations about the application of these inherently complex tax laws. In addition, our estimates include making judgements about when future items will affect taxable income. Although management believes that the judgments and estimates used are reasonable, actual results could differ and we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. For further information on our tax assets and liabilities, and related provision for income taxes, see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 11 - Income Taxes in ITEM 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K.
Fair Value Measurements
We use fair value measurements to record certain financial instruments and to determine fair value disclosures. Available-for-sale securities and interest rate swap agreements are financial instruments recorded at fair value on a recurring basis. Additionally, we record at fair value other financial assets on a nonrecurring basis such as collateral dependent loans and other real estate owned. These nonrecurring fair value adjustments typically involve write-downs of, or specific reserves against, individual assets. We group our assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value into three levels within the fair value hierarchy, based on the markets in which the assets and liabilities are traded and the reliability of the assumptions used to determine fair value. The classification of assets and liabilities within the hierarchy is based on whether the inputs to the valuation methodology used in the measurement are observable or unobservable. Observable inputs reflect market-driven or market-based information obtained from independent sources, while unobservable inputs reflect our estimates about market data. The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market data. For financial instruments that trade actively and have quoted market prices or observable market data, there is minimal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. When observable market prices and data are not fully available, management judgment is necessary to estimate fair value. In addition, changes in the market conditions may reduce the availability of quoted prices or observable data. Therefore, when market data is not available, we use valuation techniques that require more management judgment to estimate the appropriate fair value measurement. Fair value is discussed further in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 9 - Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities in ITEM 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K.
Business Combinations
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting where the assets and liabilities of the acquired entities have been recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired. The purchase price allocation process requires significant judgment in the estimation of the fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Management may obtain third-party valuations such as appraisals or discounted cash flow analyses, or we may derive fair values internally using techniques as discussed in Fair Value Measurements above. Management assesses qualifications of third-party valuation specialists, reviews assumptions applied and takes responsibility for the results of fair value estimates. Merger-related expenses include costs directly related to
merger activity such as legal and professional fees, system consolidation and conversion costs, and compensation costs associated with employee severance and retention incentives. We account for merger-related costs as expenses in the periods in which the costs are incurred and the services received. Accounting policies and estimates are discussed further in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 18 - Merger in ITEM 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Financial Highlights
The following are highlights of our financial condition and results of operations. The data was derived from the audited consolidated financial statements of Bank of Marin Bancorp.
Executive Summary
Annual earnings were $33.2 million in 2021 compared to $30.2 million in 2020. Diluted earnings were $2.30 per share in 2021, compared to $2.22 per share in 2020.
The following are highlights of operating and financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2021:
•Merger-related one-time and conversion costs reduced net income by $4.9 million, net of taxes, or 34 cents per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Return on average assets ("ROA") and return on average equity ("ROE") were also significantly impacted by provisions for credit losses on acquired loans and shares issued in conjunction with the merger. As shown in the reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures on page 28, year-to-date ROA of 0.94% and ROE 8.43% would have been 1.08% and 9.67%, respectively, compared to 1.04% and 8.60% in the prior year.
•Loans increased $167.1 million in 2021, or 8%, to $2.256 billion at December 31, 2021, from $2.089 billion at December 31, 2020. Year-over-year growth was largely attributable to $419.4 million in loans from the American River Bank ("ARB") acquisition on August 6, 2021. Non-PPP loan originations of $181.7 million for the year were concentrated in commercial and real estate loans and compared to $165.5 million in 2020. Payoffs included $218.1 million non-PPP loans compared to $169.2 million in 2020. In 2021, PPP loan originations were $136.2 million and PPP loans forgiven and paid off were $328.5 million.
•Credit quality remains strong with non-accrual loans representing 0.37% of the Bank's loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021, compare to 0.44% at December 31, 2020. During 2021, we reversed $1.4 million in credit losses on loans and $992 thousand in credit losses on unfunded commitments. These reversals compared to provisions for credit losses on loans of $4.6 million and provisions for credit losses on unfunded commitments of $1.6 million in the prior year. 2021 activity included the effects of the business combination with ARB, partially offset by ongoing improvements in the underlying economic forecasts. 2020 credit loss provisions included significant qualitative adjustments for uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the adoption of the current expected credit loss methodology.
•Deposits grew $1.304 billion, or 52%, to $3.809 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $2.504 billion at December 31, 2020. Growth was comprised of $790.0 million related to the August 6, 2021 ARB acquisition, new accounts and growth in the existing customer base. Non-interest bearing deposits grew by $555.6 million, or 41%, in 2021 and made up 50% of total deposits at year end. Cost of deposits remained low at 0.07% for the full year of 2021, down from 0.11% in 2020. Additionally, as part of our liquidity management, the Bank maintained $173.1 million and $173.4 million in off-balance sheet deposits with deposit networks at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Net interest income totaled $105.0 million and $96.7 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $8.3 million increase in 2021 was primarily due to higher average loan and investment securities balances and higher SBA PPP loan fee accretion income. These increases were partially offset by $1.3 million in accelerated discount accretion on the early redemption of a subordinated debenture in the first quarter of 2021, and lower yields on investment securities. The tax-equivalent net interest margin decreased by 38 basis points to 3.17% in 2021, compared to 3.55% in 2020 for the reasons already mentioned.
•The efficiency ratio was 63.12% in 2021, up from 55.56% in 2020. As shown in the reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures on page 28, the 2021 efficiency ratio excluding merger-related one-time and conversion costs would have been 57.51%.
•All capital ratios were above regulatory requirements for a well-capitalized institution. The total risk-based capital ratio for Bancorp was 14.6% at December 31, 2021 and 16.0% at December 31, 2020. Tangible common equity to tangible assets declined to 8.8% at December 31, 2021 from 11.3% at December 31, 2020 primarily due to share repurchases and growth in excess liquidity from an increase in legacy Bank of Marin deposits (refer to footnote 4 on page 26 for definition of this non-GAAP financial measure). The total risk-based capital ratio for the Bank was 14.4% at December 31, 2021 and 15.8% at December 31, 2020.
•The Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.24 per share on January 21, 2022. This is the 67th consecutive quarterly dividend paid by Bank of Marin Bancorp. The cash dividend is payable on February 11, 2022 to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 4, 2022.
Statement Regarding Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In this Form 10-K, Bancorp's financial results are presented in accordance with GAAP and refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures. Management believes that presentation of operating results using non-GAAP financial measures provides useful supplemental information to investors and facilitates the analysis of Bancorp's operating results and comparison of operating results across reporting periods. Management also uses non-GAAP financial measures to establish budgets and manage Bancorp's business. A reconciliation of the GAAP financial measures to comparable non-GAAP financial measures is presented below.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the interest earned on loans, investment securities and other interest-earning assets minus the interest expense incurred on deposits and other interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income is affected by changes in general market interest rates and by changes in the amounts and composition of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Interest rate changes can create fluctuations in net interest income and/or margin due to an imbalance in the timing of repricing or maturity of assets or liabilities. We manage interest rate risk exposure with the goal of optimizing the effect of interest rate volatility on net interest income.
Net interest margin is expressed as net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Net interest rate spread is the difference between the average rate earned on total interest-earning assets and the average rate incurred on total interest-bearing liabilities. Both of these measures are reported on a taxable-equivalent basis. Net interest margin is the higher of the two because it reflects interest income earned on assets funded with non-interest-bearing sources of funds, which include demand deposits and stockholders’ equity.
The following table compares interest income, average interest-earning assets, interest expense, and average interest-bearing liabilities for the periods presented. The table also presents net interest income, net interest margin and net interest rate spread for the years indicated.
Analysis of Changes in Net Interest Income
The following table presents the effects of changes in average balances (volume) or changes in average rates on tax-equivalent net interest income for the years indicated. Volume variances are equal to the increase or decrease in average balances multiplied by prior period rates. Rate variances are equal to the increase or decrease in rates multiplied by prior period average balances. Mix variances are attributable to the change in yields or rates multiplied by the change in average balances.
2021 Compared to 2020
Net interest income totaled $105.0 million and $96.7 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $8.3 million increase in 2021 was primarily due to higher average loan and investment securities balances and higher SBA PPP loan income. These increases were partially offset by $1.3 million in accelerated discount accretion on the early redemption of a subordinated debenture in the first quarter of 2021, and lower yields on investment securities.
We recognized $8.3 million in SBA PPP fees, net of cost in 2021, compared to $3.8 million in 2020. As of December 31, 2021, $2.5 million SBA PPP fees, net of deferred costs remained outstanding and will be recognized into income in future periods.
On March 15, 2021, we redeemed the $2.8 million subordinated debenture. The redemption consisted of $4.1 million principal balance, quarterly interest due, and $1.3 million in accelerated accretion of purchase discount. The subordinated debenture carried an average interest rate of 5.68% in 2020.
The tax-equivalent net interest margin decreased 38 basis points to 3.17% in 2021, from 3.55% in 2020 for the reasons already mentioned and as shown in the above table. The SBA PPP loans improved the 2021 net interest margin by 10 basis points, and the early redemption of the subordinated debenture reduced it by 4 basis points.
2020 Compared to 2019
Net interest income totaled $96.7 million and $95.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $1.0 million increase in 2020 was primarily due to SBA PPP loans and lower rates on interest-bearing deposits, largely offset by lower yields on earning-assets, except for investment securities where we collected prepayment penalties on called securities in 2020. Notable balance increases occurred in interest-earning deposits with other banks, commercial real estate loans and deposits. The tax-equivalent net interest margin decreased 43 basis points to 3.55% in 2020, from 3.98% in 2019 for the reasons already mentioned and as shown in the above table. Additionally, the SBA PPP loans lowered the 2020 net interest margin by 6 basis points.
Market Interest Rates
Market interest rates are, in part, based on the target federal funds interest rate (the interest rate banks charge each other for short-term borrowings) implemented by the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee ("FOMC").
In response to the evolving risks to economic activity posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the FOMC made two emergency cuts totaling 150 basis points to the federal funds rate in March 2020. The federal funds target rate range resided between 0.0% to 0.25% in 2021 and 2020, putting downward pressure on our asset yields and net interest margin. In its January 26, 2022 meeting the FOMC kept the federal funds target rate range between 0.0% to 0.25%, but signaled that it will raise interest rates in 2022 to combat inflation. Our net interest margin should benefit from a rising interest rate environment. See