Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and other disclosures included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the disclosures under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In particular, we encourage you to review the risk factor related to the impact of the coronavirus pandemic, “The COVID-19 pandemic could continue to materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.” These risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ significantly from those projected in forward-looking statements contained in this report or implied by past results and trends. Forward-looking statements are statements that attempt to forecast or anticipate future developments in our business, financial condition or results of operations. See the section titled “Forward-Looking Statements” that appears at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (unless another date is indicated), and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments. Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and are presented in U.S. Dollars (USD).
Overview
We are a global biotechnology company that develops and commercializes innovative therapies for people with serious and life-threatening rare diseases and medical conditions. We select product candidates for diseases and conditions that represent a significant unmet medical need, have well-understood biology and provide an opportunity to be first-to-market or offer a significant benefit over existing products.
Our portfolio consists of seven commercial products and multiple clinical and preclinical product candidates for the treatment of various diseases. A summary of our commercial products, as of December 31, 2021, is provided below:
(1)For the treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis IV Type A
(2)For the treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis VI
(3)For the treatment of phenylketonuria
(4)For adult patients with PKU
(5)For the treatment of late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2
(6)For the treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis I
A summary of our on-going clinical development programs as of December 31, 2021, is provided below:
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
2021 Financial Highlights
Key components of our results of operations include the following:
See “Results of Operations” below for discussion of our results for the periods presented.
Uncertainty Relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect economies and business around the world. Our global revenue sources, mostly in the form of demand interruptions such as missed patient infusions and delayed treatment starts for new patients, and our overall business operations were impacted by COVID-19 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and we anticipate a continued impact on our financial results in 2022. The extent and duration of such effects remain uncertain and difficult to predict, particularly as virus variants continue to spread. We are actively monitoring and managing our response and assessing actual and potential impacts to our operating results and financial condition, as well as developments in our business, which could further impact the developments, trends and expectations described below. See the risk factor related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, “The COVID-19 pandemic could continue to materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.” described in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Developments
We continued to grow our commercial business and advance our product candidate pipeline during 2021. We believe that the combination of our internal research programs, acquisitions and partnerships will allow us to continue to develop and commercialize innovative therapies for people with serious and life-threatening rare diseases and medical conditions. Below is a summary of key business developments:
Continued Emphasis on Research and Development
Late-stage Regulatory Portfolio
◦Voxzogo: In August 2021, the European Commission approved Voxzogo for the treatment of children, ages two years and older. Regulatory approvals were also received in Brazil and in the U.S. in November 2021, for children ages five and older with open growth plates. The launch is actively underway, with market access and reimbursement progressing as anticipated. At the end of 2021, there were seven active markets contributing to Voxzogo sales.
Voxzogo marketing authorization reviews in Japan and Australia are in process, with potential approvals in those countries in 2022.
In February 2022, we announced an update from the Phase 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Voxzogo study in infants and young children up to five years of age with achondroplasia. Results at 52 weeks trended in favor of Voxzogo compared to placebo on height (adjusted for age and gender) and annualized growth velocity, with no worsening in proportionality in the overall study population. The safety profile was generally consistent with older children from the Phase 3 study and product label population. We intend to initiate discussions with regulatory health authorities to discuss next steps regarding efforts to expand access to Voxzogo treatment for this younger age group.
•Valoctocogene roxaparvovec: The European Medicines Agency (EMA) validated our Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) for valoctocogene roxaparvovec resulting in an anticipated Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use opinion in the second quarter of 2022. We have provided the EMA with two-year follow-up safety and efficacy data from the GENEr8-1 study.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
Based on the favorable results from the two-year follow-up safety and efficacy data from the GENEr8-1 study, we are targeting a Biologics License Application (BLA) resubmission for valoctocogene roxaparvovec in the second quarter of 2022. If the resubmission satisfies Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) response to the Complete Response Letter received in August 2020, we expect resubmission will be followed by a six-month review procedure by the FDA.
Select Earlier-stage Development Portfolio
◦BMN 307 gene therapy product candidate for PKU: In September 2021, the FDA placed a clinical hold on PHEarless, the Phase 1/2 study evaluating BMN 307, an investigational AAV5-phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene therapy, on adults with PKU. The hold was based on pre-clinical study findings from a model designed to understand the durability of BMN 307 activity in mice bearing two germline mutations, one rendering the mice immunodeficient. The durability study was one of multiple pre-clinical studies we conducted and was not designed to test safety. However, we promptly notified the FDA upon availability of the integration site analysis results. The FDA initiated a clinical hold shortly after being notified and we announced the hold before the next business day after informing the FDA. In February 2022, the FDA requested data from additional non-clinical studies to assess theoretical oncogenic risk to human study participants, which is expected to take several quarters. We will communicate next steps for the program when available.
•BMN 255 for primary hyperoxaluria type 1, a subset of chronic renal disease: The Investigational New Drug application (IND) for BMN 255 is active and we are dosing subjects with dose selection for advanced studies expected in the second half of 2022. We believe the availability of a potent, orally bioavailable, small molecule like BMN 255 may be able to significantly reduce disease and treatment burden in certain people with chronic renal disease.
2022 Outlook
We expect that our product pipeline investments and expanding commercial infrastructure will enable us to execute on our 2022 operating objectives. In 2022, we will continue to focus on our key operating objectives which include continued progression of our product pipeline and continued global expansion of our commercial products. From an R&D perspective, we expect to continue to invest in our various ongoing clinical studies which support both our commercial products and research and early development pipeline. We expect to move forward on our late and early-stage clinical studies for new product candidates, including the resubmission of the BLA for valoctocogene roxaparvovec as noted above. From a commercial perspective, we expect to continue to support our global business as it grows, including support of the commercialization of Voxzogo and pre-commercialization activities related to valoctocogene roxaparvovec.
We expect to continue to experience significant declines in Kuvan revenues in the U.S. due to the October 2020 loss of market exclusivity. We anticipated and prepared for this loss of exclusivity and the reduction in our market share, as well as the adverse effect on our revenues and results of operations. We expect to experience growth in Net Product Revenues with respect to our new and other existing commercial products. We continue to monitor conditions in the macroeconomic environment that could affect our ability to achieve our goals, such as the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, changes in the reimbursement and payer landscape, changes in economic conditions in certain key markets, particularly in Europe and Latin America, market competition and the launch of generic competitors, international government pricing pressures and the potential volatility in foreign currency exchange rates. We will adjust our business processes, as appropriate, to attempt to mitigate these risks to our business.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC), we make assumptions, judgments and estimates that can have a significant impact on our net income/loss and affect the reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results.
The full extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic could continue to directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including revenues, expenses, reserves and allowances, manufacturing, clinical trials and research and development costs will depend on future developments that continue to remain highly uncertain at this time,
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
particularly as virus variants continue to spread. As events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, our estimates may change materially in future periods.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the critical accounting policies below reflect the most critical judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition and Related Allowances
Net Product Revenues - We recognize revenue when the customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. For Aldurazyme revenues, we receive a payment ranging from 39.5% to 50% on worldwide net Aldurazyme sales by Sanofi (formerly referred to as Sanofi Genzyme) depending on sales volume, which is included in Net Product Revenues in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. We recognize our best estimate of the entire revenue that we expect to receive when the product is released and control is transferred to Sanofi. We record Aldurazyme net product revenues based on the estimated variable consideration payable when the product is sold through by Sanofi. Differences between the estimated variable consideration to be received from Sanofi and actual payments received are not expected to be material. If actual results vary from our estimates, we will make adjustments, which would affect Net Product Revenues and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Gross-to-Net Sales Adjustments - We record product sales net of estimated mandatory and supplemental discounts to government payers, in addition to discounts to private payers, and other related charges. Rebates, cash discounts and distributor fees represent the majority of our gross-to-net deductions and are recorded in the same period the related sales occur. Rebates include amounts paid to Medicaid, other government programs, certain managed care providers, as well as foreign government rebates. Rebates, branded co-pay assistance programs, cash discounts and distributor fees are estimates based on contractual arrangements or statutory obligations, which may vary by product and payer. Estimation requires evaluation of our historical experience, customer mix, current contractual and statutory obligations, specific known market events and trends and industry data. We evaluate our customer mix to estimate which sales will be subject to these revenue dilutive items and consider changes to government program guidelines that would impact the actual rebates and/or our estimates of which sales qualify for such rebates.
We update our estimates and assumptions each quarter based on actual historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns and record any necessary adjustments to our reserves to reflect current information. We believe the methodologies that we use to estimate allowances are reasonable and appropriate given the facts and circumstances. However, actual results may differ significantly from our estimates.
The following table summarizes the consolidated activities and ending balances of all our gross-to-net sales adjustments:
Inventory Produced Prior to Regulatory Approval
When future commercialization for a product candidate is considered probable and management believes that material uncertainties related to the ultimate regulatory approval have been significantly reduced and we expect to realize economic benefit in the future, we capitalize pre-launch or pre-qualification manufacturing costs prior to regulatory approval. For inventories that are capitalized in preparation of product launch, management considers a number of factors based on the information available at the time, including the product candidate’s current status in the drug development and regulatory approval process, results from the related pivotal clinical trial, results from meetings with relevant regulatory agencies prior to the filing of regulatory applications, historical experience, as well as potential impediments to the approval process such as product safety or efficacy, as well as commercialization and market trends.
In applying the lower of cost or net realizable value to pre-launch inventory, we estimate a range of likely commercial prices based on our comparable commercial products and consider the product candidate’s stability data for all of the pre-approval production to date to determine whether there is adequate expected shelf life for the capitalized pre-launch production costs. If additional requirements are subsequently presented by the regulatory authorities prior to their final decision, thus extending anticipated regulatory approval timelines resulting in expiration of the product prior to revised demand forecasts, as occurred in the
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
third quarter of 2020 with valoctocogene roxaparvovec, the pre-launch inventory costs are expensed to Cost of Sales. If the marketing application is ultimately rejected by the applicable regulators and the pre-launch inventory cannot be sold for commercial use, the pre-launch inventory costs are expensed to R&D. As of December 31, 2021, there were no pre-launch inventory costs on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Income Taxes
We calculate and provide for income taxes in each of the tax jurisdictions in which we operate. Our Consolidated Balance Sheets reflect net deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are measured using enacted tax rates. The net deferred tax assets primarily represent the tax benefit of tax credits and timing differences between book and tax recognition of certain revenue and expense items, net of a valuation allowance. When it is more likely than not that all or some portion of deferred tax assets may not be realized, we establish a valuation allowance for the amount that may not be realized. We utilize financial projections to support our net deferred tax assets, which contain significant assumptions and estimates of future operations. If such assumptions were to differ significantly, it may have a material impact on our ability to realize our deferred tax assets. Changes in our valuation allowance will result in a change to tax expense.
We establish liabilities or reduce assets for certain tax positions when we believe those certain tax positions are not more likely than not to be sustained if challenged. Each quarter, we evaluate these uncertain tax positions and adjust the related tax assets and liabilities in light of changing facts and circumstances.
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions, including Ireland. Due to economic and political conditions, various countries are actively considering changes to existing tax laws. We cannot predict the form or timing of potential legislative changes that could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations. Management is not aware of any potential changes that would have a material effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 15 to our accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements and our expectation of their impact, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
Results of Operations
Net Income (Loss)
Net Income (Loss) consisted of the following:
2021 compared to 2020
The increase in Net Loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily attributed to the following:
•decreased benefit from income taxes of $890.1 million, primarily due to the completion of an intra-entity transfer of certain IP rights to an Irish subsidiary where our Ex-U.S. regional headquarters are located and we have significant manufacturing and commercial operations, to better align ownership of IP rights with how the business operates, which resulted in a tax benefit of $835.1 million based on the fair value of the transferred IP rights in the third quarter of 2020. There was no similar transaction in 2021; and
•decreased gain on sale of nonfinancial assets of $59.5 million due to the divestiture and sale of the Firdapse business in 2020. There was no similar transaction in 2021; partially offset by
•an increase in gross profit primarily driven by the absence of the $81.2 million inventory charge related to pre-launch valoctocogene roxaparvovec inventory reserves following regulatory responses received in the third quarter of 2020 requesting additional data extending the anticipated regulatory approval timelines.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
Net Product Revenues
Net Product Revenues consisted of the following:
2021 compared to 2020
The decrease in Net Product Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily attributed to the following:
•Kuvan: the decrease was primarily attributed to generic competition as a result of the loss of exclusivity in the U.S. that occurred in October 2020. We anticipated and prepared for this loss of exclusivity and the reduction in our market share, as well as the adverse effect on our revenues and results of operations. We expect to continue to experience adverse effects on our market share and revenues in the future.
•Naglazyme: the decrease was primarily attributed to timing of orders from Latin America and the Middle East partially offset by higher sales in Europe;
•Aldurazyme: the decrease was attributed to higher volume of product fulfillment to Sanofi in 2020 as compared to 2021; partially offset by
•Palynziq: the increase was primarily attributed to a combination of revenue from more patients achieving maintenance dosing in the U.S. and new patients initiating therapy in the U.S.;
•Brineura: the increase was primarily attributed to new patients initiating therapy in Europe and North America; and
•Voxzogo: the increase was due to the commercial launch in 2021, following regulatory approvals in the EU and the U.S. in the third and fourth quarters of 2021, respectively.
In certain countries governments place large periodic orders for Naglazyme and Vimizim. We expect that the timing of these large government orders will continue to be inconsistent, which can create significant period to period variation in our revenues. We anticipate the COVID-19 pandemic will have a continued impact on 2022 Net Product Revenues as many of our products are administered via infusions in a clinic or hospital setting and/or by a healthcare professional. Although we continue to work with our patient community and health care providers to find alternative arrangements where necessary, such as providing infusions at home, the revenue from the doses of our products that are missed by patients and the lost revenue from delayed treatment starts for new patients will never be recouped.
See the risk factors “The sale of generic versions of Kuvan by generic manufacturers may adversely affect our revenues and results of operations” and “The COVID-19 pandemic could continue to materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition” in “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
We face exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the Euro. We use forward foreign currency exchange contracts to hedge a percentage of our foreign currency exposure. The following table shows our Net Product Revenues denominated in USD and foreign currencies:
Relative to the USD, the favorable impact in 2021 was primarily driven by a strengthening of the Euro and Great British Pound; partially offset by weakening of currencies in Latin American markets such as Brazil and Argentina.
See “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” in Part II,