ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in Item 8 “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements include, but are not limited to, statements about future financial and operating results, our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions with respect to future operations, products and services; and other statements identified by words such as “will likely result,” “are expected to,” “will continue,” “is anticipated,” “estimated,” “believe,” “intend,” “plan,” “projection,” “outlook” or words of similar meaning. These forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding the Company’s industry and market sizes, future opportunities for the Company and the Company’s estimated future results. Such forward-looking statements are based upon the current beliefs and expectations of our management and are inherently subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are difficult to predict and generally beyond our control. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from the results anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
BM Technologies, Inc. (“BMTX” or “the Company”) (formerly known as BankMobile) provides state-of-the-art high-tech digital banking and disbursement services to consumers and students nationwide through a full service fintech banking platform, accessible to customers anywhere and anytime through digital channels. BMTX facilitates deposits and banking services between a customer and our Partner Bank, Customers Bank, which is a related party and a Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) insured bank. BMTX’s business model leverages partners’ existing customer bases to achieve high volume, low-cost customer acquisition in its Disbursement, BaaS, and Workplace Banking businesses.
BMTX has four primary revenue sources: interchange and card revenue, servicing fees from our Partner Bank, account fees, and university fees. The majority of revenues are driven by customer activity (deposits, spend, transactions, etc.) but may be paid or passed through by the Company’s Partner Bank, universities, or paid directly by customers. The Company is actively working on its pipeline of prospective new BaaS customers to offer a suite of financial services products.
BMTX is a Delaware corporation, originally incorporated as Megalith Financial Acquisition Corp in November, 2017 and renamed BM Technologies, Inc. in January 2021 at the time of the merger between Megalith Financial Acquisition Corp and BankMobile Technologies, Inc. Until January 4, 2021, BankMobile Technologies, Inc. was a wholly-owned subsidiary of Customers Bank (“Customers Bank”). Customers Bank is a Pennsylvania state-chartered bank and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Customers Bancorp, Inc. (the “Bancorp” or “Customers Bancorp”), a bank holding company. Customers Bank is our Partner Bank. Our Partner Bank holds the FDIC insured deposits that we source and service and is the issuing bank on our debit cards. Our Partner Bank pays us a deposit servicing fee for the deposits generated and passes through interchange income earned from debit transactions. Deposit servicing fees and interchange income are our largest revenue sources.
BMTX is not a bank, does not hold a bank charter, and it does not provide banking services, and as a result we are not subject to direct banking regulation, except as a service provider to our Partner Bank. We are also subject to the regulations of the ED, due to our student Disbursements business, and are periodically examined by them. Our contracts with most of our higher education institutional clients requires us to comply with numerous laws and regulations, including, where applicable, regulations promulgated by the ED regarding the handling of student financial aid funds received by institutions on behalf of their students under Title IV; FERPA; the Electronic Fund Transfer Act and Regulation E; the USA PATRIOT Act and related anti-money laundering requirements; and certain federal rules regarding safeguarding personal information, including rules implementing the privacy provisions of GLBA. Other products and services offered by us may also be subject to other federal and state laws and regulations.
BMTX’s higher education serviced deposits fluctuate throughout the year due primarily to the relationship between the deposits level and the typical cycles of student disbursements from higher education institutions. Serviced deposit balances typically experience seasonal lows in December and July and experience seasonal highs in September and January when individual account balances are generally at their peak. Debit spend follows a similar seasonal trend but may slightly lag increases in balances.
On November 14, 2021, we entered into the Agreement and Plan of Reorganization and Merger with FSB, a Washington state-chartered bank.
Merger with Megalith Financial Acquisition Corporation
On January 4, 2021, BankMobile Technologies, Inc. (“BankMobile”), Megalith Financial Acquisition Corp. (“Megalith”), and MFAC Merger Sub Inc., consummated the transaction contemplated by the merger agreement entered into on August 6, 2020. In connection with the closing of the merger, Megalith Financial Acquisition Corp. changed its name to BM Technologies, Inc. (the “Company”). Effective January 6, 2021, the Company’s units ceased trading, and the Company’s common stock and warrants began trading on the NYSE American under the symbols “BMTX” and “BMTX-WT,” respectively.
The merger was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). Under this method of accounting, Megalith was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes and as a result, the transaction was treated as the equivalent of BankMobile issuing stock for the net assets of Megalith, accompanied by a recapitalization. The excess of the fair value of the shares issued over the value of the net monetary assets of Megalith was recognized as an adjustment to shareholders’ equity. There was no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded in the merger. Prior periods presented for comparative purposes represent the balances and activity of BankMobile Technologies, Inc. (other than shares which were retroactively restated in connection with the merger).
COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The spread of COVID-19 created a global public health crisis that resulted in unprecedented uncertainty, economic volatility, and disruption in financial markets and in governmental, commercial, and consumer activity in the United States and globally, including the markets that BMTX serves. In response to the pandemic, we enabled nearly all of our employees to work remotely and limited business travel. We are a “Remote First” company and most of our employees have no assigned work location or regular in-office work requirement.
With the initial outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020, the Company experienced an initial decline in revenues as compared to the pre-COVID-19 period. On March 27, 2020, the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act” was signed into law and contained substantial tax and spending provisions intended to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and stimulate the economy, including cash payments to taxpayers, increased unemployment benefits, and to support higher education through the Higher Education Emergency Relief Fund (“HEERF”). This stimulus resulted in increased serviced deposit balances, debit card spend, and revenues, a trend that continued into early 2021. However, we have seen the growth rate slow in recent periods compared to the accelerated growth rate we experienced during early 2021.
BUSINESS MEASUREMENTS
We believe that the following business measurements are important performance indicators for our business:
•Debit card POS spend (higher education and new business). Spend represents the dollar amount that our customers spend on their debit cards through a signature or PIN network. Spend is a key performance indicator, as the company earns a small percentage of every dollar spent as interchange income and spend is the primary driver of our card revenues.
•Serviced deposits (ending and average; higher education and new business). Serviced deposits represent the dollar amount of deposits that are in customer accounts serviced by our Company. Our deposit servicing fee is based on a contractual arrangement with our Partner Bank and the average balance of serviced deposits is the primary driver of our deposit servicing fees. Average deposits have the strongest correlation to current period serviced deposits, but ending deposits provide information at a point in time and serve as the starting point for the following period.
•Higher education retention. Retention is a key measure of our value proposition with higher education customers. We measure retention in terms of Signed Student Enrollments (SSEs), which represents the number of students enrolled at higher education institutions. Retention is calculated by subtracting lost SSEs from starting SSEs and taking that amount as a percentage of the starting SSEs.
•Higher education financial aid refund disbursement. Represents the dollar amount of all funds that we process for a college or university partner, whether it is distributed by ACH, check, or into a BankMobile Vibe account. This is a measure of the business we process for our higher education partners in exchange for their subscription and other fees, as well as a measure of the potential that we have the opportunity to capture into our serviced accounts.
•Higher education organic deposits. Organic deposits represent the dollar total of all deposits made into a higher education BankMobile Vibe account except for funds processed through a college or university partner. Because this includes funds that the account holder adds to the account and excludes the funds processed through the higher education institution, it is viewed as a strong indicator of traction with the customer.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We have adopted various accounting policies that govern the application of U.S. GAAP and that are consistent with general practices within the fintech industry in the preparation of these financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements herein.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by us that have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets. We consider these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The judgments and assumptions used are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Due to the nature of the judgments and assumptions management makes, actual results could differ from these judgments and estimates, which could have a material impact on the carrying values of our assets.
The critical accounting policies that are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require complex, subjective judgments are the accounting policies for the following: share-based compensation, provision for operating losses, income taxes, goodwill and other intangibles, developed software, and accounting for public and private warrants.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
The Company uses share-based compensation, including stock, restricted stock units and performance stock units, to provide long-term performance incentives for its employees and directors. Share-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award based on their grant-date fair value for time-based awards. Compensation related to performance-based awards are recognized over the period the performance obligation is expected to be satisfied. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur. Share-based compensation expense is included in Salaries and employee benefits. In addition, the holders of restricted shares may elect to surrender a portion of their shares on the vesting date to cover their income tax obligations.
Provision for Operating Losses
The provision for operating losses represents our payments for losses resulting from fraud or theft-based transactions that have generally been disputed by our serviced deposit account holders and Regulation E card claim losses incurred by us, as well as estimated liability for such losses where such disputes have not been resolved as of the end of the reporting period. Fraud or theft-based related losses are recognized when realized or incurred. Reg E claims made up a vast majority of the losses. The remaining fraud or theft-based losses are mostly Check Fraud and ACH/Wire Fraud.
The main source of Reg E losses is card holder claims of unauthorized use of their debit card. Drivers include, but are not limited to transaction purchase volume, in person vs. online, macroeconomic conditions, changes in customer behavior, and regulatory changes. A customer has 60 days to dispute a charge. BMTX may decline the claim within 10 days or advance the funds to the account holder if the investigation is still pending. BMTX may continue to investigate transactions for 35 more days, before making its final decision. At conclusion of the investigation, the advance is reversed or is made permanent. BMTX’s loss includes closed disputes where the customer is entitled to keep the funds advanced, an expected loss on actual disputes that are pending investigation, which is based on historical experience, as well as an estimate of disputes not yet disputed. The estimated liability for disputes not yet disputed is created by applying historical rates of transactions disputed after the reporting period end date and applying that rate to actual debit card volume in the period. This estimate of future disputes is then adjusted for our estimate of the amount disputed that we expect to result in a loss, which is estimated based on our historical experience. Our estimation process is subject to risks and uncertainties, including that future performance may be different from our historical experience. Accordingly, our actual loss experience may not match expectations.
Fraud or theft-based related losses are recognized when realized or incurred. Drivers include, but are not limited to efforts by organized or unorganized fraudsters to target an account, customer complicity, customer lack of proper password safeguarding or other preventative measures, onboarding approval procedures, changes in account funds availability, in person vs. online transactions, macroeconomic conditions, changes in customer behavior, and regulatory changes.
Income Taxes
BMTX accounts for income taxes under the liability method of accounting for income taxes. The income tax accounting guidance results in two components of income tax expense: current and deferred. Current income tax expense reflects taxes to be paid or refunded for the current period by applying the provisions of the enacted tax law to the taxable income or excess of deductions over revenues. BMTX determines deferred income taxes using the liability (or balance sheet) method. Under this method, the net deferred tax asset or liability is based on the tax effects of the differences between the book and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and enacted changes in tax rates and laws are recognized in the period in which they occur.
A tax position is recognized if it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits, that the tax position will be realized or sustained upon examination. The term more likely than not means a likelihood of more than 50 percent; the term upon examination includes resolution of the related appeals or litigation process. A tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. The determination of whether or not a tax position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold considers the facts, circumstances and information available at the reporting date and is subject to management’s judgment.
In assessing the realizability of federal or state deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income and prudent, feasible and permissible as well as available tax planning strategies in making this assessment.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the identifiable net assets of businesses acquired through business combinations accounted for under the acquisition method. Other intangible assets represent purchased assets that lack physical substance but can be distinguished from goodwill because of contractual or other legal rights. Intangible assets that have finite lives, such as university relationships, are subject to impairment testing. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over twenty years.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually as of October 31 and between annual tests when events and circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. The goodwill impairment charge represents the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. BMTX applies a qualitative assessment to determine if the one-step quantitative impairment test is necessary.
Other intangibles subject to amortization are reviewed for impairment under FASB ASC 360, Property, Plant and Equipment, which requires that a long-lived asset or asset group be tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The carrying value of a long-lived asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset.
As part of its qualitative assessment, BMTX reviews regional and national trends in current and expected economic conditions, examining indicators such as GDP growth, interest rates and unemployment rates. BMTX also considers its own historical performance (through BankMobile), expectations of future performance, indicative deal values, and other trends specific to its industry.
Developed Software
Developed software includes internally developed software and developed software acquired in the Higher One Disbursement business acquisition. Internally developed software and related capitalized work-in-process costs relate to the development of digital banking platforms to connect BaaS banking customers to partner banks.
BMTX capitalizes certain internal and external costs incurred to develop internal-use software during the application development stage. BMTX also capitalizes the cost of specified upgrades and enhancements to internal-use software that result in additional functionality. Once a development project is substantially complete and the software is ready for its intended use, BMTX begins amortizing these costs on a straight-line basis over the internal-use software’s estimated useful life, which range from three to seven years.
The Higher One Disbursement business developed software is related to the Disbursement business services to colleges and universities and delivering services to students. The Higher One Disbursement business developed software was recorded at the amount determined by a third-party valuation expert and was estimated based on expected revenue attributable to the software utilizing a discounted cash flow methodology, giving consideration to potential obsolescence. The estimated useful life of the Higher One Disbursement business developed software is 10 years.
The Company reviews the carrying value of developed software for impairment by measuring the carrying amount of the asset against the estimated undiscounted future cash flows associated with it. If the Company determines that the carrying amount is impaired, the asset is written down to fair value. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows or management’s estimates, depending on the nature of the assets.
Public & Private Warrants
The Company has Public and Private Warrants outstanding as a result of the merger transaction which occurred on January 4, 2021. Each whole warrant entitles the registered holder to purchase one whole share of common stock at a price of $11.50 a share. The warrants expire January 4, 2026, or earlier upon redemption or liquidation and the Company has redemption rights if our common stock trades above $24.00 for 20 out of 30 days. The Private Warrants are identical to the Public Warrants except that the Private Warrants are non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the sponsor and certain others.
The Private Warrants and the Public Warrants are treated differently for accounting purposes. In accordance with FASB ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, the Private Warrants are accounted for as liabilities and will be marked-to-market each reporting period with the change recognized in earnings. In general, under the mark-to-market accounting model, as the Company’s stock price increases, the warrant liability increases, and the Company recognizes additional expense in its Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss) - the opposite when the stock price declines. Accordingly, the periodic revaluation of the Private Warrants could result in significant volatility in our reported earnings. The amounts recognized are a mark-to-market accounting determination and are non-cash.
In accordance with FASB ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, for accounting purposes the Public Warrants are treated as equity instruments. Accordingly, the Public Warrants are not marked-to-market each reporting period, thus there is no impact to earnings. Any future exercises of the Public Warrants will be recorded as cash received and recorded in Cash and cash equivalents, with a corresponding offset to Additional paid-in capital in equity.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
The FASB has issued accounting standards that have not yet become effective and that may impact BMTX’s consolidated financial statements or its disclosures in future periods. Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies provides information regarding those accounting standards.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements, including the accompanying notes. The following summarized tables set forth our operating results for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
NM refers to changes greater than 150%.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we had substantially higher operating profitability as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was almost entirely due to additional revenues which increased 43% as compared to the prior year as compared to operating expenses which increased by only 16% resulting in improved operating profitability. The increase in revenue is primarily driven by an increase in Servicing fees from Partner Bank which increased $22.6 million as compared to the prior period. In addition to increased income from operations, we experienced a year to date gain on the fair value of the private warrant liability and decreased interest expense. The resulting increased profitability for the period drove an increase in income tax expense for the period. The increased profitability as compared to the prior period was reflected in our Basic and Diluted Earnings Per Share amounts which increased to $1.44 and $1.43 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, respectively as compared to $(1.99) for both Basic and Diluted Earnings Per Share for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The reasons for these movements in revenue and expenses are discussed in further detail below.
Operating Revenues
NM refers to changes greater than 150%.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, total revenues increased $28.6 million, or 43% as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to a $22.6 million increase in Servicing fees from our Partner Bank, driven by an increase in average serviced deposits period over period from $0.8 billion to $1.6 billion. The Company expects continued growth in average serviced deposits in the future. In addition, we had a $4.0 million increase in Other revenue, due to higher banking-as-a-service project revenues, and a $2.2 million increase in Interchange and card revenue due to an increase in total spend as compared to the prior period. These increases in revenue were partially offset by a decrease in Account fees of $0.6 million. The decrease in Account fees of $0.6 million is primarily driven by reduced fees in our Higher Education business.
Operating Expenses
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses increased $12.1 million, or 16% as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to a $12.0 million increase in Salaries and employee benefits, a $1.6 million increase in Technology, communication, and processing, and a $1.1 million increase in Professional services. The increase in Salaries and employee benefits included $9.5 million for the January 4th, 2021 share-based compensation award and $0.8 million for the accelerated vesting of restricted stock units and stock options previously granted by our former parent to certain of the Company’s employees in connection with the divestiture of the Company, and $1.0 million for executive restricted share units granted during 2021. The increase in Technology, communication, and processing expense year-over-year reflects an increase in stand-alone technology and cloud computing costs, as well as lower partner reimbursements of certain technology costs in 2021. These increases were partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in Customer related supplies, a $0.7 million decrease in Merger and acquisition related expenses, and a $0.6 million decrease in Other expense.
Income Tax Expense
The Company’s effective tax rate was 25.2% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. The effective tax rate differs from the Company’s federal statutory rate of 21.0% due to the non-taxable fair value adjustments related to the non-compensatory private warrant liability being recorded through earnings as well as tax expense related to the estimated annual increase of the valuation allowance established against deferred tax assets.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We currently finance our operations through cash flows provided by operating activities. We had a substantial increase in cash from operating activities in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. We had $25.7 million of Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021.
We intend to fund our ongoing operating activities with our existing cash and expected cash flows from operations; we believe these sources of liquidity will be adequate for at least the next twelve months. However, should additional liquidity be necessary, the Company could consider equity or debt financing, but there are no assurances that additional capital would be available or on terms that are acceptable to us.
The table below summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
NM refers to changes greater than 150%.
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $27.5 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to cash provided of $16.0 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $11.5 million. The increase was driven primarily by the increase in Income (loss) from operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities decreased $3.3 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to reduced capitalization of development costs related to internal use software as compared to the prior year.
Cash Flows Used in Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities decreased $13.5 million as compared to the prior year. The $4.1 million used in financing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 reflects the repayment of $21.0 million of debt substantially offset by $16.9 million of net cash proceeds from the recapitalization transaction. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, $19.0 million was recorded for repayments on borrowings that were partially offset by $1.4 million in capital contributions from the Company’s Partner Bank.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, BMTX repaid its debt outstanding. Note 7 - Borrowings from Partner Bank in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements herein provides additional information. There were no other material changes in our contractual obligations during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
A summary of the Company’s outstanding contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 is as follows:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.