ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K (and the documents incorporated herein by reference) contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act"), that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements generally can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as "may," "will," "expect," "intend," "estimate," "anticipate," "project," "predict," "plan," "believe," or "continue," or the negative thereof or variations thereon and/or references to “goals”, “targets”, “projections” or similar terminology. The expectations reflected in forward-looking statements may prove to be incorrect. “The Company's actual results of operations, most of which are beyond the Company's control, could differ materially. We wish to caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward looking statements, which speak only as of the date made. Any forward-looking statements represent management's best judgment as to what may occur in the future. However, forward looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and important factors beyond our control that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from historical results of operations and events and those presently anticipated or projected.
These factors include adverse economic conditions, entry of new and stronger competitors, inadequate capital and limited ability to obtain financing, needed personnel and equipment, unexpected costs, failure (or delay) to gain product certifications and/or regulatory approvals in the United States (or particular states) or foreign countries, loss (permanently or for any extended period of time) of the services of members of the Company’s small core management team (many of whom are age 70 or older) and failure to capitalize upon access to new markets. Additional risks and uncertainties that may affect forward looking statements about Bion's business and prospects include: i) the possibility that markets for nutrient reduction credits (discussed below) and/or other ways to monetize nutrient reductions and other environmental benefits will be slow to develop (or not develop at all), ii) PA1’s dissolution and its effect on how the Company is viewed, (if any), iii) the possibility that competitors will develop more comprehensive and/or less expensive environmental solutions, iv) delays in market awareness of Bion and our Systems, v) uncertainties and costs increases related to research and development efforts to update and improve Bion’s technologies and applications thereof, and/or vi) delays and/or costs exceeding expectations relating to Bion's development of the Initial Project, JVs and/or Projects and vii) failure of marketing strategies, each of which could have both immediate and long term material adverse effects by placing us behind our competitors and requiring expenditures of our limited resources.
THESE RISKS, UNCERTAINTIES AND FACTORS BEYOND OUR CONTROL ARE MAGNIFIED DURING THE CURRENT UNCERTAIN PERIOD RELATED TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND THE UNIQUE ECONOMIC, FINANCIAL, GOVERNMENTAL AND HEALTH-RELATED CONDITIONS IN WHICH THE COMPANY, THE ENTIRE COUNTRY AND THE ENTIRE WORLD NOW RESIDE. TO DATE THE COMPANY HAS EXPERIENCED DIRECT IMPACTS IN VARIOUS AREAS INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION: I) GOVERNMENT-ORDERED SHUTDOWNS WHICH HAVE SLOWED THE COMPANY’S RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND OTHER INITIATIVES, II) SHIFTED FOCUS OF STATE AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WHICH IS LIKELY TO NEGATIVELY IMPACT THE COMPANY’S LEGISLATIVE INITIATIVES IN PENNSYLVANIA AND WASHINGTON DC, III) STRAINS AND UNCERTAINTIES IN BOTH THE EQUITY AND DEBT MARKETS HAVE MADE DISCUSSION AND PLANNING OF FUNDING OF THE COMPANY AND ITS INITIATIVES AND PROJECTS WITH INVESTMENT BANKERS, BANKS AND POTENTIAL STRATEGIC PARTNERS MORE TENUOUS, IV) STRAINS AND UNCERTAINTIES IN THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR AND MARKETS HAVE MADE DISCUSSION AND PLANNING OF FUNDING OF THE COMPANY AND ITS INITIATIVES AND PROJECTS MORE DIFFICULT AS FUTURE INDUSTRY CONDITIONS ARE NOW MORE DIFFICULT TO ASSESS/PREDICT, V) CONSTRAINTS DUE TO PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED IN THE GLOBAL INDUSTRIAL SUPPLY CHAIN WHICH HAVE INCREASED ANTICIPATED PROJECT DEVELOPMENT COSTS, VI) DUE TO THE AGE AND HEALTH OF OUR CORE MANAGEMENT TEAM, MOST OF WHOM ARE AGE 70 OR OLDER AND HAVE HAD ONE OR MORE EXISTING HEALTH ISSUES, THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC PLACES THE COMPANY AT GREATER RISK THAN WAS PREVIOUSLY THE CASE (TO A HIGHER DEGREE THAN WOULD BE THE CASE IF THE COMPANY HAD A LARGER, DEEPER AND/OR YOUNGER CORE MANAGEMENT TEAM), AND VII) THERE ALMOST CERTAINLY WILL BE OTHER UNANTICIPATED CONSEQUENCES FOR THE COMPANY AS A RESULT OF THE CURRENT PANDEMIC EMERGENCY AND ITS AFTERMATH.
Bion disclaims any obligation subsequently to revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements filed with this Report.
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
Bion Environmental Technologies, Inc.'s ("Bion," "Company," "We," "Us," or "Our") was incorporated in 1987 in the State of Colorado. Bion’s mission is to create extraordinary value for our shareholders and employees (all of whom own securities in the Company) while delivering premium, sustainable products to our customers through ventures developing profitable, transparent, and sustainable solutions for livestock agriculture.
Our patented and proprietary technology provides advanced waste treatment and resource recovery for large-scale livestock production facilities (also known as “Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations” or “CAFOs"). Livestock production and its waste, particularly from CAFOs, has been identified as one of the greatest soil, air, and water quality problems in the U.S. today. Application of our third generation technology and business/technology platform (“Gen3Tech”) can largely mitigate these environmental problems, while simultaneously improving operational/ resource efficiencies by recovering high-value co-products from the CAFOs’ waste stream. These waste stream ‘assets’ - nutrients and methane - have traditionally been wasted or underutilized and are the same ‘pollutants’ that today fuel harmful algae blooms, contaminate groundwater, and exacerbate climate change.
Bion’s business model and technology platform can create the opportunity for joint ventures s (in various contractual forms)(“JVs”) between the Company and large livestock/food/fertilizer industry participants based upon the supplemental cash flow generated by implementation of our Gen3Tech business model, which cash flows will support the costs of technology implementation (including servicing related debt). We anticipate this will result in substantial long term value for Bion. In the context of such JVs, we believe that the verifiable sustainable branding opportunities (conventional and organic) in meat will represent the single largest enhanced revenue contributor provided by Bion to the JVs (and Bion licensees). The Company believes that the largest portion of its business with be conducted through such JVs, but a material portion may involve licensing and or other approaches.
Bion’s Gen3 Tech was designed to capture and stabilize these assets and produce renewable energy, fertilizer products, and clean water as part of the process of raising verifiably sustainable livestock. All steps and stages in the treatment process will be third-party verified, providing the basis for additional revenues, including renewable energy-related credits and, eventually, payment for ecosystem services, such as nutrient credits as described below. The same verified data will be used to substantiate the claims of a USDA-certified sustainable brand that will support premium pricing for the meat/ animal protein products that are produced in Bion facilities.
During the first half of 2022 Bion began marketing our sustainable beef opportunity to retailers, food service distributors and the meat industry in the U.S. In general, the response has been favorable. During July 2022, Bion announced a letter of intent (“Ribbonwire LOI”) to develop its first large-scale commercial project, a 15,000-head sustainable beef cattle feeding operation together with the Ribbonwire Ranch, in Dalhart, Texas (with a provision to expand to 60,000 head) (“Dalhart Project”). The Dalhart Project will be developed to produce blockchain-verified, sustainable beef (with reduced the stress on cattle caused by extreme weather and temperatures and resulting higher feed/weight gain efficiency) while remediating the environmental impacts associated usually associated with cattle CAFOs. Bion’s patented technology will treat the waste stream and recover/refine valuable coproducts that include clean water, renewable natural gas (RNG), photovoltaic solar electricity, organic fertilizer and potentially other products. We anticipate converting the Ribbonwire LOI into a definitive agreement with Ribbonwire Ranch and creating distribution agreements with key retailers and food service distributors during the current fiscal year.
Bion’s business model and technology platform can create the opportunity for joint ventures s (in various contractual forms)(“JVs”) between the Company and large livestock/food/fertilizer industry participants based upon the supplemental cash flow generated by implementation of our Gen3Tech business model, which cash flows will support the costs of technology implementation (including servicing related debt). We anticipate this will result in substantial long-term value for Bion. In the context of such JVs, we believe that the verifiable sustainable branding opportunities (conventional and organic) in meat will represent the single largest enhanced revenue contributor provided by Bion to the JVs (and, in some cases, Bion licensees). The Company believes that the largest portion of its business with be conducted through such JVs, but a material portion may involve licensing and or other approaches.
Bion’s Gen3Tech was designed to capture and stabilize these assets and produce renewable energy, fertilizer products, and clean water as part of the process of raising verifiably sustainable livestock. All steps and stages in the treatment process will be third-party verified, providing the basis for additional revenues, including renewable energy-related credits and, eventually, payment for ecosystem services, such as nutrient credits as described below. The same verified data will be used to substantiate the claims of a USDA-certified sustainable brand that will support premium pricing for the meat/ animal protein products that are produced in Bion facilities.
Our business plan is focused on executing multiple agreements and letters of intent related to the “Bion Beef Opportunity” and commencing development of multiple sustainable beef joint venture projects over the next twelve-eighteen (12-18) months while moving forward with the Initial Project (see below) and the Dalhart Project. Bion also intends to pursue other opportunities in the livestock industry enabled by our Gen3Tech business model. The Ribbonwire LOI announcement has generated significant interest within the livestock industry (among ranchers, feedlot operators, farmers and other AG industry parties). We believe that this interest, combined with consumer interest in ‘sustainable products’ and the growing enthusiasm among some livestock industry parties for environmental/sustainable/regenerative practices, provides Bion (and its partners/venturers) with an opportunity to move forward with a truly sustainable solution in this industry segment.
During the next six months, the Company intends to construct and begin operations of phase 1 of our Initial Project located near Fair Oaks, Indiana. Bion expects the Initial Project to provide data that illustrates the effectiveness of our Gen3Tech in a commercial setting by the end of the 2nd quarter in fiscal 2023 which will support development of the Dalhart Project (and other projects) during fiscal 2023 and thereafter. We believe this data will also provide additional potential stakeholders (cattle producers, cattle feeders, packers, distributors, retailers and financial institutions) with the information they need to proceed with confidence in collaborating with Bion on multiple new projects (see below).
Bion is now focused primarily on: i) development/construction of the Initial Project, our initial commercial-scale Gen3Tech installation (see discussion herein below and Notes to Financial Statements , ii) development/construction of the Dalhart Project, iii) developing applications and markets for its sustainable (conventional and organic) animal protein products and its low carbon organic fertilizer products , iv) discussions regarding initiation and development of agreements and joint ventures (“JVs” as discussed below) (and related projects) based on the augmented capabilities of our Gen3Tech business platform (in the sustainable beef and other livestock segments), while (v) continuing to pursue business opportunities related to large retrofit projects (such as the Kreider poultry project JV described below) and vi) ongoing R&D activities.
HISTORY, BACKGROUND AND CURRENT ACTIVITIES
See discussion at Item 1 above.
Pennvest Loan and Bion PA1 LLC (“PA1”) Dissolution
PA1, the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary, was dissolved on December 29, 2021 on which date it owed approximately $10,010,000 under the terms of the Pennvest Loan related to the construction of the Kreider 1 System including accrued interest and late charges totaling $2,255,802 as of that date. Through the date of the dissolution, PA1 was a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and its assets and liabilities were included on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. At September 30, 2021, PA1’s total assets were $297 and its total liabilities were $10,154,334 (including the Pennvest Loan in the aggregate amount of $9,939,148, accounts payable of $214,235 and accrued liabilities of $950) which sums were included in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets in its Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2021. Subsequent to the dissolution of PA1, its assets and liabilities are no longer consolidated and included in the Company’s balance sheets. As of December 29, 2021, PA1’s total assets were nil and its total liabilities were $10,234,501 (including the Pennvest Loan in the aggregate amount of $10,009,802, accounts payable of $212,263 and accrued liabilities of $12,436. The net amount of $10,234,501 was recognized as a gain on the legal dissolution of a subsidiary in other (income) expense.
As background, the terms of the Pennvest Loan provided for funding of up to $7,754,000 which was to be repaid by interest-only payments for three years, followed by an additional ten-year amortization of principal. The Pennvest Loan accrued interest at 2.547% per annum for years 1 through 5 and 3.184% per annum for years 6 through maturity. The Pennvest Loan required minimum annual principal payments of approximately $5,886,000 in fiscal years 2013 through 2021, and $846,000 in fiscal year 2022, $873,000 in fiscal year 2023 and $149,000 in fiscal year 2024. The Pennvest Loan was collateralized by PA1’s Kreider 1 System and by a pledge of all revenues generated from Kreider 1 including, but not limited to, revenues generated from nutrient reduction credit sales and by-product sales. In addition, in consideration for the excess credit risk associated with the project, Pennvest was entitled to participate in the profits from Kreider 1 calculated on a net cash flow basis, as defined. The Company has incurred interest expense related to the Pennvest Loan of $123,444 and $246,887 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Based on the limited development of the depth and breadth of the Pennsylvania nutrient reduction credit market, PA1 commenced discussions and negotiations with Pennvest related to forbearance and/or re-structuring the obligations under the Pennvest Loan during 2013. In the context of such negotiations, PA1 elected not to make interest payments to Pennvest on the Pennvest Loan since January 2013. Additionally, the PA1 did not make any principal payments, which were to begin in fiscal 2013, and, therefore, the Company classified the Pennvest Loan as a current liability through the dissolution of PA1 on December 29, 2021.
During August 2012, the Company provided Pennvest (and the PADEP) with data demonstrating that the Kreider 1 system met the ‘technology guaranty’ standards which were incorporated in the Pennvest financing documents and, as a result, the Pennvest Loan has been solely an obligation of PA1 since that date. Note, however, the Company’s consolidated balance sheets as of June 30, 2021 reflects the Pennvest Loan as a liability of $9,868,495 despite the fact that the obligation (if any) was solely an obligation of PA1.
On September 25, 2014, the Pennsylvania Infrastructure Investment Authority (“Pennvest”) exercised its right to declare the PA1’s Pennvest Loan in default, accelerated the Pennvest Loan and demanded that PA1 pay $8,137,117 (principal, interest plus late charges) on or before October 24, 2014. PA1 did not make the payment and did/does not have the resources to make the payments demanded by Pennvest. PA1 commenced discussions and negotiations with Pennvest concerning this matter but Pennvest rejected PA1’s proposal made during the fall of 2014. PA1 made a final proposal to Pennvest during September 2021 which proposal was also rejected by Pennvest. PA1 provided Pennvest with its financial statements (which include a description of system status) annually. During the 2021 fiscal year, Pennvest’s auditors requested a ‘corrective action plan’ and PA1 informed Pennvest that “… there is no viable corrective action plan for the Pennvest Loan (‘Loan’). The facility funded by the Loan has been shut down for many years (which has been disclosed in the annual financial reports to Pennvest and in public filings by the parent of Bion PA 1, LLC) and the technology utilized in the facility is now obsolete. The facility has not been commercially operated for approximately six years and has generated zero income. We recommend that Pennvest take appropriate steps to remove and sell the equipment.” Pennvest responded favorably to the approach of selling the equipment.
On December 29, 2021, the Company approved and executed a ‘Consent of the Sole Member of Bion PA 1’ (the “Consent to Dissolution”) that authorized the complete liquidation and dissolution of PA1. A Statement of Dissolution was filed by PA1 with the Colorado Secretary of State on December 29, 2021. The Company is of the understanding that the liquidation value of Bion PA 1’s property is substantially below the current amount outstanding under the Funding Agreement dated October 27, 2010 by and between PA1 and Pennvest, the only known secured creditor of PA1. Post-dissolution, PA1’s activities will be limited entirely to activities required to properly distribute its net assets to creditors and wind down its business.
PA1 and Pennvest agreed to have the equipment sold by a third party auctioneer who arranged for the sale of its property and delivery of all proceeds (net of commissions and customary costs of sale) to Pennvest. The auction took place during the period between May 13-18, 2022. The Company’s personnel assisted PA1 with this process as needed at no cost to PA1. The net sum of $104,725 was realized from the asset sale, which sum was delivered to Pennvest on June 15, 2022. PA1 believes that the remaining unsold assets will be transferred to Kreider Farms during the next quarter in order to complete the winding up of the Kreider 1 project.
Upon the complete distribution of all assets of PA1, whether by transfer or sale and distribution of net proceeds as provided above, PA1 will use commercially reasonable efforts to cause the cessation of all activities. No distributions of PA1’s assets will be made to the Company or its affiliates. The Consent to Dissolution authorized Mark A. Smith, the Company’s President and the sole manager of PA1, to cause to be delivered for filing the Statement of Dissolution, to give notice of the dissolution, and to take any other act necessary to wind up and liquidate the business.
PA1 has made no payments to vendors or other creditors in connection with the dissolution other than the payment to Pennvest described above. No distributions or payments of any kind have ever been made to the Company, the sole member of PA1 since inception and no payment will be made to the Company or any affiliate in connection with the dissolution.
For more information regarding the history and background of the Pennvest Loan and PA1, please review our Form’s 10-K for the years from 2008 through 2021 including the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included therein.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC RELATED MATTERS:
The Company faces risks and uncertainties and factors beyond our control that are magnified during the current Covid-19 pandemic and the unique economic, financial, governmental and health-related conditions in which the Company, the country and the entire world now reside. To date the Company has experienced direct impacts in various areas including but without limitation: i) government ordered shutdowns which have slowed the Company’s research and development projects and other initiatives, ii) shifted focus of state and federal governments which is likely to negatively impact the Company’s legislative initiatives in Pennsylvania and Washington D. C., iii) strains and uncertainties in both the equity and debt markets which have made discussion and planning of funding of the Company and its initiatives and projects with investment bankers, banks and potential strategic partners more tenuous, iv) strains and uncertainties in the agricultural sector and markets have made discussion and planning more difficult as future industry conditions are now more difficult to assess and predict, v) constraints due to problems experienced in the global industrial supply chain since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, which have delayed certain research and development testing and have delayed and/or increased the cost of construction of the Company’s initial 3G Tech installation as equipment/services remain difficult to acquire in a timely manner, vi) due to the age and health of our core management team, many of whom are age 70 or older and have had one or more existing health issues (including brief periods of Covid-19 infection), the Covid-19 pandemic places the Company at greater risk than was previously the case (to a higher degree than would be the case if the Company had a larger, deeper and/or younger core management team), and vii) there almost certainly will be other unanticipated
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Revenue Recognition
The Company currently does not generate revenue and if and when the Company begins to generate revenue the Company will comply with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”.
Stock-based compensation
The Company follows the provisions of ASC 718, which generally requires that share-based compensation transactions be accounted and recognized in the consolidated statement of operations based upon their grant date fair values.
Pursuant to ASC Topic 815 “Derivatives and Hedging” (“Topic 815”), the Company reviews all financial instruments for the existence of features which may require fair value accounting and a related mark-to-market adjustment at each reporting period end. Once determined, the Company assesses these instruments as derivative liabilities. The fair value of these instruments is adjusted to reflect the fair value at each reporting period end, with any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as an adjustment to fair value of derivatives. . As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, there are no derivative financial instruments.
Options:
The Company has issued options to employees and consultants under the 2006 Plan to purchase common shares of the Company. Options are valued on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The expected volatility is based on the historical price volatility of the Company’s common stock. The dividend yield represents the Company’s anticipated cash dividend on common stock over the expected term of the stock options. The U.S. Treasury bill rate for the expected term of the stock options was utilized to determine the risk-free interest rate. The expected term of stock options represents the period of time the stock options granted are expected to be outstanding based upon management’s estimates.
Warrants:
The Company has issued warrants to purchase common shares of the Company. Warrants are valued using a fair value based method, whereby the fair value of the warrant is determined at the warrant issue date using a market-based option valuation model based on factors including an evaluation of the Company’s value as of the date of the issuance, consideration of the Company’s limited liquid resources and business prospects, the market price of the Company’s stock in its mostly inactive public market and the historical valuations and purchases of the Company’s warrants. When warrants are issued in combination with debt or equity securities, the warrants are valued and accounted for based on the relative fair value of the warrants in relation to the total value assigned to the debt or equity securities and warrants combined.
Lease Accounting:
The Company accounts for leases under ASC 842, Leases (“ASC 842”). Accordingly, the Company will determine whether an arrangement contains a lease at the inception of the arrangement. If a lease is determined to exist, the term of such lease is assessed based on the date on which the underlying asset is made available for the Company’s use by the lessor. The Company’s assessment of the lease term reflects the non-cancelable term of the lease, inclusive of any rent-free periods and/or periods covered by early-termination options which the Company is reasonably certain of not exercising, as well as periods covered by renewal options which the Company is reasonably certain of exercising. The Company also determines lease classification as either operating or finance at lease commencement, which governs the pattern of expense recognition and the presentation reflected in the consolidated statements of operations over the lease term.
For leases with a term exceeding 12 months, a lease liability is recorded on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets at lease commencement reflecting the present value of its fixed minimum payment obligations over the lease term. A corresponding right-of-use (“ROU”) asset equal to the initial lease liability is also recorded, adjusted for any prepaid rent and/or initial direct costs incurred in connection with execution of the lease and reduced by any lease incentives received. For purposes of measuring the present value of its fixed payment obligations for a given lease, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate, determined based on information available at lease commencement, as rates implicit in its leasing arrangements are typically not readily determinable. The Company's incremental borrowing rate reflects the rate it would pay to borrow on a secured basis and incorporates the term and economic environment of the associated lease.
YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2022 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2021
Revenue
Total revenues were nil for both the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
General and Administrative
Total general and administrative expenses were $2,348,000 and $2,078,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
General and administrative expenses, excluding stock-based compensation charges of $269,000 and $850,000, were $2,079,000 and $1,228,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, representing an $851,000 increase. Salaries and related payroll tax expenses were $340,000 and $319,000, for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, representing a $21,000 increase. Consulting costs were $561,000 and $391,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The $170,000 increase in consulting costs is due to a general increase in the levels of Company’s business activity without a large increase in the Company’s personnel including the consulting engagement with William O’Neill, who is now the Company’s CEO, during the periods from July 1, 2021 through April 30, 2022 during which the Company paid $160,000 to secure his services ($25,000 was capitalized to the 3G project). Investor relations expenses were $395,000 and $149,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and the $246,000 increase is due to the 2022 shareholder meeting and new contract with an investor relations firm and increased activity during the year ended June 30, 2022 due to the resumption of investor conferences. Legal costs were $291,000 and $8,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, due to the hiring of a law firm to represent the Company in a lawsuit for the hack and attempt to steal the Company’s domain, engaging a law firm on the dissolution of PA-1, legal work in relation to corporate structure matters and preparation for the 2022 shareholder meeting and other matters.
General and administrative stock-based employee compensation for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 consists of the following:
Stock-based compensation charges were $269,000 and $850,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The fair value of stock options expensed for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $261,000 and $816,000, respectively. The Company capitalized $136,000 in stock-based compensation to the 3G project as of June 30, 2022. The Company granted 730,000 options during the year ended June 30, 2022 which were fully vested at grant date, and 960,000 options during the period ended June 30, 2021, which were fully vested at grant date.
Depreciation
Total depreciation expense was $1,161 and $827 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Research and Development
Total research and development expenses were $201,000 and $749,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Research and development expenses, excluding stock-based compensation charges of $22,000 and $202,000, were $179,000 and $547,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, representing a $368,000 decrease largely resulting from completion of the bulk of the research and development work on our Gen3Tech as we shifted our efforts to work on the Initial Project. Salaries and related payroll tax expenses were $32,000 and $94,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, as more salary expense was allocated to administrative expense for the year ended June 30, 2022. Consulting costs were $80,000 and $214,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The decrease in consulting is due to capitalizing costs on the 3G project in 2022. The Company also incurred $55,000 and $48,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively in legal costs related to patent applications and renewals. The Company incurred $6,000 and $144,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively in the development of new technologies for its anaerobic digestate process.
Research and development stock-based employee compensation for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 consists of the following:
Stock-based compensation charges were $22,000 and $202,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The Company granted 730,000 and 960,000 fully vested options during the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, a portion of which were allocated to research and development.
Loss from Operations
As a result of the factors described above, the loss from operations was $2,550,000 and $2,828,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Other (Income) Expense
Other (income) expense was ($10,841,000) and $623,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The Company recognized a gain on the dissolution of PA1 of $10,235,000 and a gain of $902,000 for the sale of a domain name. Total interest expense of $302,000 and $658,000 was recorded during the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Interest of $32,000 and nil was capitalized as part of the 3G project in property and equipment during the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Interest expense related to deferred compensation, loan payable and convertible notes prior to capitalization of $32,000 to the 3G project was $334,000 and $472,000 for years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The $138,000 decrease is due the dissolution of PA-1 and no interest related to the Pennvest loan during the last six months ended June 30, 2022. Interest expense related to investor warrant modifications was nil and $187,000 for year end June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Net Loss Attributable to the Noncontrolling Interest
The net loss attributable to the noncontrolling interest was $1,500 and $2,800 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Bion’s Common Stockholders
As a result of the factors described above, the net income (loss) attributable to Bion’s stockholders was $8,292,000 and ($3,448,000) for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and the net income (loss) per basic common share was $.20 and ($.10) for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company's consolidated financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2022 have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The Report of our Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on the Company's consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended June 30, 2022 includes a "going concern" explanatory paragraph which means that the auditors stated that conditions exist that raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
Operating Activities
As of June 30,2022, the Company had cash of approximately $3,160,000. During the year ended June 30, 2022, net cash used in operating activities was $671,000, primarily consisting of cash operating expenses related to salaries and benefits, and other general and administrative costs such as insurance, legal, accounting, consulting and investor relations expenses as well as the purchase of property and equipment. Cash expenditures were offset by proceeds from financing activities, primarily the exercise of warrants. As previously noted, the Company is currently not generating significant revenue and accordingly has not generated cash flows from operations. The Company does not anticipate generating sufficient revenues to offset operating and capital costs for a minimum of two to five years. While there are no assurances that the Company will be successful in its efforts to develop and construct its Projects and market its Systems, it is certain that the Company will require substantial funding from external sources. Given the unsettled state of the current credit and capital markets for companies such as Bion, there is no assurance the Company will be able to raise the funds it needs on reasonable terms.
Investing Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company invested $2,062,000 in the purchase of property and equipment, primarily related to project construction in process. During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company invested $666,375 in a non-cash purchase of equipment for accounts payable related to the June 6, 2022 notice of completion of certain work in process and an invoice from Buflovak for the next 25% payment on the January 28, 2022 purchase order related to the Initial Project. The $666,375 was included in construction in process and accounts payable at June 30, 2022 and was paid on July 5, 2022 bringing the aggregate payments to $1,999,125 as of the date of this report.
Financing Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company received gross cash proceeds of $1,737,000 from the exercise of 2,315,550 warrants into shares of the Company’s common stock and paid approximately $19,000 in cash commissions related to the exercise of warrants.
As of June 30, 2022, the Company has debt obligations consisting of: a) deferred compensation of $595,000 and b) convertible notes payable - affiliates of $5,171,000.
Plan of Operations and Outlook
As of June 30, 2022, the Company had cash of approximately $3,160,000.
The Company continues to explore sources of additional financing to satisfy its current operating requirements as it is not currently generating any significant revenues. During fiscal years 2022 and 2021, the Company has faced progressively less difficulty in raising equity funding (but substantial equity dilution has resulted from the larger amounts of equity financing during the periods). However, the Company anticipates substantial increases in demands for capital and operating expenditures as it moves toward commercial implementation of its 3G Tech and development of JVs and, therefore, is likely to continue to face, significant cash flow management challenges due to limited capital resources and working capital constraints which have only recently begun to be alleviated. As a result, the Company has faced, and continues to face, significant cash flow management challenges due to material working capital constraints. To partially mitigate these working capital constraints, the Company's core senior management and some key employees and consultants have been deferring all or part of their cash compensation and/or are accepting compensation in the form of securities of the Company (Notes 5 and 7 to Financial Statements) and members of the Company's senior management have from time to time made loans to the Company. During the year ended June 30, 2018 senior management and certain core employees and consultants agreed to a one-time extinguishment of liabilities owed by the Company which in aggregate totaled $2,404,000. As of June 30 2022, such deferrals/loans totaled approximately $5,765,000 (including accrued interest and deferred compensation converted into convertible obligations and convertible promissory notes but excluding conversions of deferred compensation into the Company's common stock by officers, employees and consultants that have already been completed). The extended constraints on available resources have had, and continue to have, negative effects on the pace and scope of the Company's effort to develop its business. The Company made reductions in its personnel during the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2015 and again in 2018. The constraint on available resources has had, and continues to have, negative effects on the pace and scope of the Company’s efforts to develop its business. The Company has had to delay payment of trade obligations and has had to economize in many ways that have potentially negative consequences. If the Company is able to continue its recent increased success in its efforts to raise needed funds during the remainder of the current fiscal year (and subsequent periods), of which there is no assurance, management will not need to consider deeper cuts (including additional personnel cuts) and curtailment of ongoing activities including research and development activities.
The Company will need to obtain additional capital to fund its operations and technology development, to satisfy existing creditors, to develop the Initial Project, JVs, Projects (including Integrated Projects) and CAFO Retrofit waste remediation systems (potentially including the Kreider 2 facility. The Company anticipates that it will seek to raise from $20,000,000 to $80,000,000 or more (debt and equity) during the next twelve months. However, as discussed above, there is no guarantee that we will be able to raise sufficient funds or further capital for the operations planned in the near future.
The Company is not currently generating any significant revenues. Further, the Company’s anticipated revenues, if any, from existing projects, JVs and proposed projects will not be sufficient to meet the Company’s anticipated operational and capital expenditure needs for many years. During the year ended June 30, 2021 the Company raised gross proceeds of approximately $5,209,000 through the sale of its securities and paid commissions of approximately $165,000, and anticipates raising additional funds from such sales and transactions. During the year ended June 30, 2022 the Company raised gross proceeds for approximately $1,737,000 and paid commissions of approximately $18,600. However, there is no guarantee that we will be able to raise sufficient funds or further capital for the operations planned in the near future.
Because the Company is not currently generating significant revenues, the Company will need to obtain additional capital to fund its operations and technology development, to satisfy existing creditors, to develop the Initial Project and subsequent Projects.
As indicated above, the Company anticipates that it will seek to raise from $20,000,000 to $80,000,000 or more (from debt, equity, joint venture, strategic partnering, etc.) during the next twelve months, some of which may be in the context of joint ventures for the development of one or more large scale projects. We reiterate that there is no assurance, especially in the extremely unsettled capital markets that presently exist for companies such as Bion, that the Company will be able to obtain the funds that it needs to stay in business, finance its Projects and other activities, continue its technology development and/or to successfully develop its business.
See “Pennvest Loan and Bion PA1 LLC (“PA1”) Dissolution” above and the Company’s Forms 10-K for the year 2009-2021 for discussion and more details related to the dissolution of PA1, the Pennvest Loan and the Kreider 1 project.
There is extremely limited likelihood that funds required during the next twelve months or in the periods immediately thereafter will be generated from operations and there is no assurance that those funds will be available from external sources such as debt or equity financings or other potential sources. The lack of additional capital resulting from the inability to generate cash flow from operations and/or to raise capital from external sources would force the Company to substantially curtail or cease operations and would, therefore, have a material adverse effect on its business. Further, there can be no assurance that any such required funds, if available, will be available on attractive terms or that they will not have a significantly dilutive effect on the Company's existing shareholders. All of these factors have been exacerbated by the extremely limited and unsettled credit and capital markets presently existing for companies such as Bion.
Covid-19 pandemic related matters:
The Company faces risks and uncertainties and factors beyond our control that are magnified during the current Covid-19 pandemic and the unique economic, financial, governmental and health-related conditions in which the Company, the country and the entire world now reside. To date the Company has experienced direct impacts in various areas including but without limitation: i) government ordered shutdowns which have slowed the Company’s research and development projects and other initiatives, ii) shifted focus of state and federal governments which is likely to negatively impact the Company’s legislative initiatives in Pennsylvania and Washington D. C., iii) strains and uncertainties in both the equity and debt markets which have made discussion and planning of funding of the Company and its initiatives and projects with investment bankers, banks and potential strategic partners more tenuous, iv) strains and uncertainties in the agricultural sector and markets have made discussion and planning more difficult as future industry conditions are now more difficult to assess and predict, v) constraints due to problems experienced in the global industrial supply chain since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, which have delayed certain research and development testing and have delayed and/or increased the cost of construction of the Company’s initial 3G Tech installation as equipment/services remain difficult to acquire in a timely manner, vi) due to the age and health of our core management team, many of whom are age 70 or older and have had one or more existing health issues (including brief periods of Covid-19 infection), the Covid-19 pandemic places the Company at greater risk than was previously the case (to a higher degree than would be the case if the Company had a larger, deeper and/or younger core management team), and vii) there almost certainly will be other unanticipated consequences for the Company as a result of the current pandemic emergency and its aftermath.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
We have the following material contractual obligations (in addition to employment and consulting agreements with management and employees):
The Company entered into an agreement on September 23, 2021, to lease approximately four acres of land near Fair Oaks, Indiana, for the development site of its Initial Project.
The following table summarized the supplemental cash flow information for the year ended June 30, 2022:
The future minimum lease payment under noncancelable operating lease with terms greater than one year as of June 30, 2022:
The weighted average remaining lease term and discounted rate related to the Company’s lease liability as of June 30, 2022 were 3 years and 10%, respectively. The Company’s lease discount rate is generally based on the estimates of its incremental borrowing rate as the discount rates implicit in the Company’s lease cannot be readily determined.
Through 3G1 the Company is in the process of developing the Initial Project. See discussion above and in the Notes to our Financial Statements.
OFF-BALANCE SHEETS ARRANGEMENTS
The Company does not have any off-balance sheets arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.