Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Benefitfocus is an industry-leading, cloud-based benefits administration technology company serving employers and health plans. We help organizations simplify the complexity of benefits administration while engaging people in the right healthcare and benefit programs for them and their families. We also deliver insights to employers, health plans and their advisors to help maximize returns on their healthcare investment; and our services help reduce administrative burden and costs for organizations.
Benefitfocus solutions are based on a multi-tenant architecture and have a user-friendly interface designed for people to access all of their benefits in one place. Our comprehensive one-to-many model supports a broad line-up of benefits including core medical benefit plans; ancillary benefits, such as, dental, life, disability insurance, mental health and financial wellness; and a full array of voluntary benefits. Our platform includes functionality designed to help consumers identify and evaluate benefit options available to them. As the number of employer benefits plans has increased, with each plan subject to many different business rules and requirements, demand for Benefitfocus solutions is growing.
Our economic model includes a transaction-oriented solution, known as our Benefit Catalog, that aligns brokers, carriers and suppliers around the needs of employers and employees. In this model, Benefit Catalog sellers, who are carriers and suppliers, offer their voluntary and specialty benefit products in a “marketplace” alongside the benefits enrollment platform. This marketplace is designed to increase the economic value of the employee and consumer lives on our platform by aligning Benefit Catalog products to consumer needs. In exchange for Benefitfocus delivering employee/consumer access, data-driven analysis and operational efficiencies, seller partners pay us a percentage of the purchases completed on our platform. Carrier agreements generally have terms of two to four years and are typically cancellable upon breach of contract or insolvency. Supplier contracts have terms of one year or less and are generally cancellable upon breach of contract, failure to cure, bankruptcy and termination for convenience.
We classify our revenue into three streams - subscription, platform, and professional services revenue. Subscription and platform revenue are combined and reported as software services revenue.
Subscription revenue primarily consists of monthly subscription fees paid to us by our employer and health plan customers for access to, and usage of, cloud-based benefits software solutions for a specified contract term. Subscription fees are generally charged based on the number of employees or subscribers with access to the solution. Subscription revenue accounted for approximately 68%, 67%, and 66% of our total revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Platform revenue includes Benefit Catalog transactional revenue, which is generated from the value of the policies or products enrolled in through our marketplace. Benefit Catalog revenue from insured products is generally recognized over the policy period of the enrolled products. In arrangements where we sell policies to employees of our customers as the broker, we earn insurance broker commissions. Revenue from insurance broker commissions and Benefit Catalog supplier transactions is generally recognized at the time when open enrollment is complete and the orders for policies are transferred to the supplier. Platform revenue accounted for approximately 15%, 13%, and 11% of our total revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our professional services revenue stream is largely derived from the implementation of our customers onto our platform, which typically includes discovery, configuration and deployment, integration, testing, and training. We also provide customer support services and customized media content that supports our customers’ effort to educate and communicate with consumers. Professional services revenue accounted for approximately 17%, 20%, and 23% of our total revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Expanding our customer base is a key element of our growth strategy. We believe that our continued innovation and solutions, which extend the functionality of our offerings, provide more robust data analytics capabilities and enhance our ability to quickly respond to evolving market needs. We believe these innovative capabilities, as well as strong customer service, will help us attract additional lives to our platform through new employer customers, partners and brokers and increase our revenue from existing customers and relationships.
We believe that there is a substantial addressable market for our products and services, and we have been investing to further enhance and expand our products over the past several years. We continue to invest in technology and services to better serve our customers, which we believe are an important source of growth for our business. Through our considerable domain expertise, a best-in-class experience, as well as continued innovation on our platform, we believe we will drive better customer retention. As we have invested in growth, we have had operating losses in each of the last eleven years. Although our operating results have improved, we could incur operating losses in future periods. Due to the nature of our customer relationships, which have been stable in spite of some
customer losses over the past years, and our hybrid subscription and transaction-based financial model, we believe that our current investment in growth should lead to increased revenue in the long-term, which may allow us to achieve profitability in the relatively near future. Of course, our ability to achieve profitability will continue to be subject to many factors beyond our control.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic. We continue to actively monitor COVID-19, including the development of COVID-19 variants, and its potential impact on our operations and financial results. In response to the pandemic, we implemented cost management actions in the second quarter of 2020 to maintain our financial health and liquidity through these economic uncertain times. These included actions to reduce our workforce by approximately 17%, renegotiating vendor service contracts and reducing discretionary expenditures such as travel and professional services. These actions also included investing in accelerating automation efforts to gain efficiencies.
During the initial peak of the COVID-19 pandemic in the second quarter of 2020, we experienced sales delays as HR professionals and health plan administrators shifted their focus to other priorities and challenges their businesses faced as a result of the pandemic. We believe the financial impacts from COVID-19 are temporary in nature and do not significantly affect our business model and growth strategy in the long-term. Therefore, we did not consider the COVID-19 pandemic to have been a triggering event to accelerate our annual impairments tests.
We evaluated our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets and determined there were no interim triggering events as it was not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units would be less than their respective carrying amounts. Additionally, we evaluated our long-lived assets, including our property, plant and equipment, lease right-of-use assets and other intangible assets. During the second quarter of 2021, we recorded an impairment loss as a result of subleasing space based on the excess of carrying value over the calculated fair value of the sublease of one of our headquarter building financing lease right of use (“ROU”) assets. As we continue to evaluate our real estate footprint and one that assumes fewer of our associates will work from the office on a full-time basis, we may incur additional impairments on our ROU assets as we evaluate options to sublet certain locations.
While the ultimate impact of the pandemic on our business and financial results remains uncertain, our business has been particularly impacted by new sales. The longer sales cycles we experienced and slowdown in new sales activity in 2020 and the first half of 2021 negatively impacted growth in subscription revenue and platform revenue from new business in 2021. Demand from our health plan customers has not returned to pre-pandemic levels, noting health plan administrators continue to redirect focus and resources to competing priorities. Additionally, the impacts of the pandemic on the broader U.S. labor market has resulted in higher seasonal contract labor costs in 2021.
However, as a result of the nature of our customer relationships, the stability of our subscription revenue, the cost restructuring actions taken in the second quarter of 2020 as well as the first half of 2021, and our ongoing investments in automation and process improvements, we believe we will continue to generate cash flows from operations in the relatively near future. Of course, our ability to generate cash flows from operations is subject to many risks and factors beyond our control.
Key Financial and Operating Performance Metrics
We regularly monitor a number of financial and operating metrics in order to measure our current performance and project our future performance. These metrics help us develop and refine our growth strategies and make strategic decisions. We discuss revenue, gross margin, and the components of operating loss in “Components of Operating Results” below. In addition, we utilize other key metrics as described below.
Net Benefit Eligible Lives
Part of our growth strategy is to expand our customer base. This includes driving revenue growth from adding lives to our platform and driving incremental transaction revenue. We believe the number of net benefit eligible lives is a key indicator of our market penetration, growth and future revenue opportunity. We believe net benefit eligible lives is the foundation of our platform revenue opportunity. We define a net benefit eligible life as a person with access to a benefits enrollment subscription under standard contracting or a freelancer with access to benefits enrollment, plus their estimated dependents, as of the measurement date. This definition excludes lives from other subscription-related contracts.
The number of net benefit eligible lives decreased during 2021, primarily due to the termination of a contract with an entity with a substantial number of freelancers. Additionally, we experienced a decline in lives on our platform from certain health plan customers as a result of lowered counts at the time of renewal in 2021.
Software Services Revenue Retention Rate
We believe that our ability to retain our customers and expand the revenue they generate for us over time is an important component of our growth strategy and reflects the long-term value of our customer relationships. We measure our performance on this basis using a metric we refer to as our software services revenue retention rate. We calculate this metric for a particular period by establishing the group of our customers that had revenue for a given period. We then calculate our software services revenue retention
rate by taking the amount of software services revenue we recognized for this group in the subsequent comparable period (for which we are reporting the rate) and dividing it by the software services revenue we recognized for the group in the prior period.
Our software services revenue retention rate was greater than 95% for year ended December 31, 2021, compared to being greater than 90% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and greater than 95% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The lower retention rate in 2020 was primarily the result of the impact on revenue from the renegotiation of a certain customer contract. Excluding this customer, our software revenue retention rate exceeded 95% for all periods. We expect our software revenue retention rate to continue at or slightly below current rates.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA represents our losses before net interest and other expenses, taxes, and depreciation and amortization expense, adjusted to eliminate stock-based compensation, transaction and acquisition-related costs expensed, restructuring costs, impairment of goodwill, intangible assets, and long-lived assets, gain or loss on extinguishment of debt, costs not core to our business and, now, loss on settlement of lawsuits. The revision to our definition of adjusted EBITDA had no impact on our reported adjusted EBITDA in prior periods. Please note that other companies might define their non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do.
We believe that the exclusion of the expenses eliminated in calculating adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core business. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results. However, adjusted EBITDA is not a measure calculated in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), and should not be considered as an alternative to any measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
We have included adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short- and long-term operational plans. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of the expenses eliminated in calculating adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core business. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results.
Our use of adjusted EBITDA as an analytical tool has limitations, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•
although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized might have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the potentially dilutive impact of stock-based compensation;
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest, tax or dividend payments that would reduce the cash available to us; and
•
other companies, including companies in our industry, might calculate adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider adjusted EBITDA alongside other GAAP-based financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, gross profit, net loss and our other GAAP financial results. The following table presents for each of the periods indicated a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, net loss (in thousands):
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
We derive the majority of our revenue from monthly subscription fees paid to us by our employer and health plan customers for access to, and usage of, our cloud-based benefits software solutions for a specified contract term. We derive platform revenue from both insurance broker commissions from the sale of voluntary and ancillary benefits policies to employees of our customers and from transaction revenue from life and ancillary insurance carriers and specialty providers. We also derive revenue from professional services fees, which primarily include fees related to the implementation of our customers onto our platform and delivery of our call center services. Our implementation services typically include discovery, configuration and deployment, integration, testing, and training.
The following table sets forth a breakdown of our revenue by stream for the periods indicated (in thousands):
We recognize revenue when control of these services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Taxes collected from customers relating to services and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenues.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•
Identification of each contract with a customer;
•
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•
Determination of the transaction price;
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•
Recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied.
Software Services Revenue
Software services revenue consists of subscription and platform revenue.
Subscription Revenue
Subscription revenue primarily consists of monthly subscription fees paid to us by our customers for access to, and usage of, cloud-based benefits software solutions for a specified contract term. Fees are generally charged based on the number of employees or subscribers with access to the solution.
Subscription revenue is generally recognized on a ratable basis over the contract term beginning on the date the subscription services are made available to the customer. Our subscription service contracts are generally three years.
Subscription revenue also includes fees paid for other services, such as event sponsorships and certain data services.
Platform Revenue
Platform revenue is generated from the value of the policies or products enrolled in through our marketplace. Platform revenue from carriers is generally recognized over the policy period of the enrolled products. In arrangements where we sell policies to employees of our customers as the broker, we earn insurance broker commissions. Revenue from insurance broker commissions and Benefit Catalog supplier transactions is recognized at the point when the orders for the policies are received and transferred to the insurance carrier or supplier and is reduced by constraints for variable consideration associated with collectability, policy cancellation and termination risks.
Professional Services Revenue
Professional services revenue primarily consists of fees related to the implementation of software products purchased by customers. Implementation services typically include discovery, configuration and deployment, integration, testing, and training. Fees from consulting services, call center services, support services and training are also included in professional services revenue.
We determined that implementation services for certain of our health plan customers significantly modify or customize the software solution and, as such, do not represent a distinct performance obligation. Accordingly, revenue from such implementation services with these health plan customers are generally recognized over the contract term of the associated software services contract, including any extension periods representing a material right. We utilize estimates of hours as a measure of progress to determine revenue for certain types of arrangements.
Revenue from implementation services with employer customers is generally recognized as those services are performed.
Revenue from support and training fees is recognized over the service contract period.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Certain of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, the individual performance obligations are accounted for separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. We determine the standalone selling prices based on their overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors, including the value of their contracts, the software services sold, customer size and complexity, and the number and types of users within the contracts.
Overhead Allocation
Expenses associated with our facilities, security, information technology, and depreciation and amortization, are allocated between cost of revenue and operating expenses based on employee headcount determined by the nature of work performed.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation, for employees, whom we refer to as associates, providing services to our customers and supporting our software platform infrastructure. Additional expenses in cost of revenue include co-location facility costs for our data centers, depreciation expense for computer equipment directly associated with generating revenue, infrastructure maintenance costs, contract labor, professional fees, amortization expenses associated with acquired intangibles and capitalized internally developed software costs, allocated overhead, and other direct costs.
We expense cost of revenue associated with fulfilling performance obligations as we incur the costs. Costs that relate directly to a customer contract that are not related to satisfying a performance obligation are capitalized and amortized to cost of revenue over the estimated period of benefit of the contract asset, which is generally five years.
Subscription and platform revenue are both generated from our platform and result from the same set of assets and activities. As such, we are not able to meaningfully separate and assign costs of revenue to subscription and platform revenue separately.
We expect cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue to decline and gross margins to increase as we realize the full impact of our restructuring activities and increased automation. However, this trend may vary on a quarterly basis.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs are the most significant component of each of these expense categories. We expect our operating
expenses as a percentage of revenue for 2022 to be near or lower to levels realized for 2021. As we continue to invest in our product offerings, as well as our rationalization decisions that we have put in place, we expect to see an overall improvement in our operating expense.
Sales and marketing expense. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and commissions, for our sales and marketing associates. Costs to obtain a contract that are incremental, such as sales commissions, are capitalized and amortized to expense over the estimated period of benefit of the asset, which is generally four to five years. Additional expenses include advertising, lead generation, promotional event programs, corporate communications, travel, and allocated overhead. For instance, our most significant promotional event is One Place, which we hold annually.
Research and development expense. Research and development expense consists primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, for our research and development associates. Additional expenses include costs related to the development, quality assurance, and testing of new technology, and enhancement of our existing platform technology, consulting, travel, and allocated overhead. We believe continuing to invest in research and development efforts is essential to maintaining our competitive position. We are investing in transforming our development philosophy and practices to that of an agile development organization. We believe this will allow us to more quickly innovate and adapt to changing market conditions and customer needs.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation for administrative, finance and accounting, information systems, legal, and human resource associates. Additional expenses include consulting and professional fees, insurance and other corporate expenses, and travel. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in the near-term as we incur professional services expenses in connection with any activist shareholder matters and securities class action, and executive employment agreement legal defense, which are not related to our core business.
Restructuring costs. Restructuring costs are comprised of one-time severance charges, continuation of health benefits and outplacement services. During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, we incurred restructuring costs associated with eliminating certain positions in the organization.
Other Income and Expense
Other income and expense consists primarily of interest income and expense and gain (loss) on disposal of property and equipment, as well as charge related to loss on settlement of lawsuit. Interest income represents interest received on our cash and cash equivalents. Interest expense consists primarily of the interest incurred on outstanding convertible debt and borrowings under our lease arrangements and credit facility. During the third quarter of 2021, we repurchased outstanding senior convertible notes which resulted in a loss. During the third quarter of 2020, we repurchased outstanding senior convertible notes which resulted in a gain.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes. We recorded an income tax benefit in 2021 and incurred minimal income tax expense for 2020 and 2019. Net operating loss carryforwards for federal income tax purposes were approximately $327.8 million at December 31, 2021. State net operating loss carryforwards were approximately $295.9 million at December 31, 2021. Federal and state net operating loss carryforwards will expire at various dates beginning in 2022, if not utilized. Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
(1)
Cost of revenue and operating expenses include stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of revenue for each of the periods indicated (as a percentage of revenue):
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
(1)
Rounding may impact the summation of amounts.
Subscription revenue was relatively flat year over year. While we experienced improvements in returns and allowances over the prior year, those improvements were offset by the impact of the renegotiation of a certain customer contract.
Platform revenue increased from growth in premiums and additional volume on the platform. As discussed above in “Components of Operating Results - Revenue”, we recognize platform revenue from carriers and specialty products over the policy period and we recognize commissions revenue at a point in time.
The decrease in professional services revenue was attributable to a decrease in implementation revenue and lower levels of demand from custom requests from health plan customers.
We expect total revenue to continue to decline in 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to lower revenues associated with our health plan customers, as a result of lower levels of demand for custom requests and lower renewals, as well as planned reduction in non-core revenue such as legacy on-prem Connecture revenue and unprofitable professional services revenues. As previously discussed, we experienced longer sales cycles beginning in 2020 and through first half of 2021 and a slowdown in new sales activity which negatively impact subscription and platform revenue in future periods.
Cost of Revenue
The decrease in cost of revenue was attributable to decreases in salaries, stock-based compensation and other personnel-related costs of $9.4 million as a result of our restructuring actions. These decreases were partially offset by increased depreciation expense of $1.1 million attributable to an increase in depreciation of capitalized internally developed software costs and an increase of $1.8 million in product and computer infrastructure costs. Cost of revenue included $2.1 million and $3.7 million of stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $19.9 million and $18.8 million of depreciation and amortization for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Gross Profit
The increase in software services gross profit was driven by a $3.5 million, or 1.6%, increase in software services revenue and a decrease in software services cost of revenue of $2.5 million. The decrease in software services cost of revenue was driven by decreased salary and personnel-related costs and professional services of $5.8 million offset by a $1.3 million increase in amortization of capitalized internally developed software and $2.1 million in higher data storage costs and third-party software costs including the costs to terminate a certain software license contract. Software services cost of revenue included $1.2 million and $2.1 million of stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $16.8 million and $15.5 million of depreciation and amortization for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The decrease in professional services gross profit was driven by a $8.5 million, or 16.0%, decrease in professional services revenue partially offset by a decrease in professional services cost of revenue of $4.2 million. The decrease in the professional services costs of revenue was attributed to reducing our cost structure to align with the decrease in demand for professional services including decreases in salary and personnel-related costs from headcount reductions and slightly offset by increased labor costs used during open enrollment. Professional services cost of revenue included $0.9 million and $1.6 million of stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, professional services cost of revenue included $3.1 million and $3.3 million of depreciation and amortization in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We expect professional services margins in the near term to continue to trend lower due to fewer large implementation projects and increased labor costs associated with our seasonal contract labor, slightly offset by shifting to higher margin professional services work.
Operating Expenses
The decrease in sales and marketing expense was primarily attributable to a $5.0 million decrease in salaries and personnel-related costs, including professional fees, a $0.4 million decrease in travel-related costs, and a $0.3 million decrease in the cost of marketing events and advertising expense resulting from of our restructuring actions. These decreases were partially offset by a $0.5
million increase in commissions expense. The decrease in salaries and personnel-related costs was primarily driven by decreased headcount. The decrease in travel-related costs was driven by travel restrictions imposed in response to the pandemic. The cost of marketing events decreased in part because of lower costs incurred with our annual user conference, One Place, which was planned as a digital event in the current year compared to the prior year when it was planned as an in-person event.
The decrease in research and development expense is primarily attributable to a decrease in personnel-related costs and external development and engineering consulting of $5.4 million resulting from our restructuring actions, partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in capitalized internally developed software costs.
The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to a $4.0 million impairment charge related to a sublease of part of one our leased buildings on our headquarter campus and a $8.6 million increase in professional fees primarily related to costs incurred associated with activist shareholder matters, securities class action and executive employment agreement legal defense and a $0.6 million increase in salaries and personnel-related costs.
Current period restructuring costs are the result of a reduction to our workforce in January 2021 and the elimination of the office of the executive chairman in June 2021, comprised of one-time severance charges, continuation of health benefits and outplacement services.
Stock-based Compensation
Cost of revenue and operating expenses include an aggregate of $13.9 million and $14.5 million of stock-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a decrease of $0.6 million. The decrease is primarily attributable to the benefit from cancellations of Restricted Stock Units (“RSUs”) during 2021 from associates that left the Company and a decrease in the aggregate fair value of RSUs granted during the year.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
(1)
Rounding may impact the summation of amounts.
Subscription revenue decreased primarily due to a $14.5 million negative impact from the renegotiation of a customer contract and a $13.6 million negative impact from customers that terminated products and services. These decreases were partially offset by $13.5 million increases in revenue from the addition of new customers, contractual price increases and volume increases. An increase in specific reserves contributed to an additional decrease in subscription revenue of $1.9 million.
Platform revenue increased from growth in premiums and new products from Benefit Catalog, primarily from insurance carriers. As discussed above in “Components of Operating Results - Revenue”, we recognize platform revenue from carriers over the policy period and we recognize commissions revenue at a point in time.
The decrease in professional services revenue was primarily attributable to a decrease in implementation revenue, customer-specific development, and the result of terminated services. The decreases were partially offset by increases from new and existing customers.
We expect total revenue to continue to be less in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including a slowed sales cycle in 2020 and the effects of higher unemployment. As previously discussed, we experienced longer sales cycles in 2020 and a slowdown in new sales activity which will negatively impact subscription and platform revenue in future periods. Additionally, we expect revenue from health plan customers to decline in 2021 as some customers might renew their agreements with a lower minimum number of covered employees because of an increase in unemployment. We also expect professional services revenue to decrease as we focus on profitability by managing away from unprofitable work.
Cost of Revenue
The decrease in cost of revenue was attributable to decreases in salaries and other personnel-related costs of $6.6 million, costs related to external development, engineering consulting, and customer support of $7.3 million, and travel-related expenses of $1.3 million. These decreases result from our actions taken during the year in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to maintain financial health and liquidity discussed above in “Overview”. These decreases were partially offset by increased depreciation expense of $2.7 million attributable to an increase in capitalized software development costs. Cost of revenue included $3.7 million and $3.6 million of stock-based compensation expense for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and $18.8 million and $16.0 million of depreciation and amortization for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Gross Profit
The decrease in software services gross profit was driven by a $13.9 million, or 6%, decrease in software services revenue and an increase in software services cost of revenue of $4.9 million from increases in salary and personnel-related costs and depreciation expense. The increase in software services costs of revenue was primarily attributable to increased investment to support our ongoing customers and primarily driven by increases in salary and personnel-related costs and external development and engineering consulting of $5.1 million and depreciation and amortization expense of $2.3 million related to capitalized software development costs. The increase in software services cost of revenue included $2.1 million of stock-based compensation expense for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and $15.5 million and $12.8 million of depreciation and amortization for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Professional services gross profit increased $6.0 million as professional services revenue decreased by $13.6 million and cost of revenue decreased by $19.6 million. The decrease in professional services cost of revenue is primarily attributable to decreases in salary and personnel-related costs due to headcount reductions that took place during the year, as well as decreased utilization of contract labor. Additionally, salaries and personnel-related costs were impacted by an increase in the deferral of fulfillment costs from carrier implementation projects and a decrease in amortization of capitalized fulfillment costs as older projects became fully amortized. Professional services cost of revenue included $1.6 million and $1.5 million of stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, professional services cost of revenue included $3.3 million and $3.2 million of depreciation and amortization for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We expect the trend of positive professional services margin to continue on an annual basis as a result of investing in accelerating automation and shifting to higher margin professional services work.
Operating Expenses
The decrease in sales and marketing expense was primarily attributable to a $16.8 million decrease in salaries and personnel-related costs, a $3.4 million decrease in travel-related costs, and a $3.2 million decrease in the cost of marketing events. These
decreases result from our actions taken during the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to maintain financial health and liquidity as discussed above in “Overview”. The decrease in salaries and personnel-related costs was driven by decreased headcount as well as lower commissions and bonuses earned caused by delays and longer sales cycle time for new sales activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in travel-related costs was driven by travel restrictions imposed in response to the pandemic. The cost of marketing events decreased in part as a result of moving our events, including our user conference, OnePlace, to a digital platform in response to the COVID-19 pandemic which resulted in lower costs in the current period compared to the prior period.
The decrease in research and development expense is primarily attributable to a decrease in personnel-related costs and external development and engineering consulting of $8.3 million. Additionally, a decrease of $0.5 million in travel-related costs was primarily attributable to travel restrictions imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The decrease in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to a $5.2 million decrease in salaries and personnel-related costs as well as a decrease of $2.7 million in professional fees, travel-related costs and contract labor. These decreases result from our actions taken during the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to maintain financial health and liquidity discussed as above in “Overview”.
As discussed above in “Overview”, in the quarter ended June 30, 2020, we reduced our work force by approximately 17%. Restructuring costs recognized as a result of this action was $5.6 million and consisted of $5.3 million of salaries and personnel-related expense related to severance payments. The remaining amount is attributable to professional fees for outplacement services and legal fees.
Stock-based Compensation
Cost of revenue and operating expenses include an aggregate of $14.5 million and $19.6 million of stock-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a decrease of $5.0 million. The decrease is primarily attributable to the benefit from cancellations of RSUs during 2020 from associates that left the Company and a decrease in the aggregate fair value of RSUs granted during the year.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results might differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition - Estimation of Platform Revenue from Insurance Broker Commissions
Our platform revenue from insurance broker commissions and Benefit Catalog supplier transactions is recognized at the point when the orders for the policies are received and transferred to the insurance carrier or supplier. The transaction price is reduced by constraints for variable consideration associated with collectability, policy cancellation and termination risks. We estimate variable consideration primarily using the expected value method based on both historical and current estimates. We then use judgment to develop constraints on the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price to account for risks in collectability, policy cancellation and termination. Changes in those estimates can have a material effect on the amount of revenue recognized in a period. During 2021, the constraint rate decreased by less than 1%, or less than 0.1 percentage points, during the year. An increase in the constraint rate of one percentage point, would negatively impact revenue recognized in 2021 by approximately $0.1 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, our primary sources of liquidity were our cash and cash equivalents totaling $31.0 million, $37.0 million in marketable securities, $16.5 million in accounts receivables, net of allowance, and unused availability under our revolving line of credit of $50.0 million.
We entered into a credit facility agreement with Silicon Valley Bank on March 3, 2020. This agreement replaced our previous agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, which expired on February 20, 2020. The three-year agreement has a borrowing limit of $50 million, with the ability for us to increase it up to $100 million. We are bound by customary representations and warranties and restrictive covenants in connection with the credit facility, including financial covenants related to quick ratio and EBITDA. In the event of a default, the lenders may declare all obligations immediately due and stop advancing money or extending credit under the line of credit. The line of credit is collateralized by substantially all of our personal property assets, including intellectual property and the equity
of our subsidiaries. The terms of our credit facility are described in Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In June 2020, we issued 1,777,778 shares of Series A Preferred Stock (the “Preferred Stock”) at a purchase price of $45 per share, resulting in total gross proceeds of approximately $80 million. The Preferred Stock ranks senior to our common stock with respect to dividends and distributions on liquidation, winding-up and dissolution. Each share of the Preferred Stock has an initial stated value of $45 per share. Holders of shares of the Preferred Stock are entitled a dividend equal to 8.00% per annum (the “Regular Dividends”), payable quarterly, beginning on June 30, 2020. The Regular Dividends are payable in cash or in kind, at our option. In the event a Regular Dividend is paid in kind, the stated value of each share of the Preferred Stock will be increased by an amount equal to the accrued Regular Dividend not paid in cash. As of December 31, 2021, we had paid all of the Preferred Stock dividends in cash. Holders of the Preferred Stock are also entitled to participate in and receive any dividends declared or paid on the common stock on an as-converted basis, and no dividends may be paid to holders of the common stock unless full participating dividends are concurrently paid to the holders of the Preferred Stock. Each holder of the Preferred Stock has the right, at its option, to convert its shares of the Preferred Stock, in whole or in part, into fully paid and non-assessable shares of the common stock, at any time and from time to time. The number of shares of the common stock into which a share of the Preferred Stock will convert at any time is equal to the quotient obtained by dividing its stated value then in effect plus any accumulated and unpaid Regular Dividends by its conversion price of $15.00. The conversion price is subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, including in the event of any stock split, stock dividend, recapitalization or similar events. At closing, before payment of any dividends in kind, the 1,777,778 shares of the Preferred Stock were convertible into 5,333,334 shares of common stock. We may, at our option, redeem the outstanding shares of the Preferred Stock following the fourth anniversary of its issuance. Redemption by us is subject to certain liquidity conditions, as well conditions connected with the trading price of its common stock. The terms of the Preferred Stock are described in Note 13 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In December 2018, we issued $240 million aggregate principal amount of 1.25% convertible senior notes (the “Notes”) due December 15, 2023, unless earlier purchased by us or converted by the holder pursuant to their terms. Interest is payable semiannually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year. Upon conversion, we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at our election. At issuance, the Notes had an initial conversion rate of 18.8076 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount which represents an initial effective conversion price of approximately $53.17 per share of common stock.
In connection with the issuance of the Notes, we entered into capped call transactions with certain counterparties affiliated with the initial purchasers and others. The capped call transactions are expected to reduce potential dilution of earnings per share upon conversion of the Notes. Under the capped call transactions, we purchased capped call options that in the aggregate relate to the total number of shares of our common stock underlying the Notes, with an initial strike price of approximately $53.17 per share, which corresponds to the initial conversion price of the Notes and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of the Notes and have a cap price of approximately $89.98. The terms of the Notes are described further in Note 10 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
During the third quarter of 2021, we repurchased Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $100.2 million for an aggregate of $98.7 million in cash. As of the end of the 2021, the remaining outstanding Notes were convertible into 2,277,017 shares of common stock. In connection with the repurchase of the Notes, we terminated a portion of the capped call transactions which resulted in an immaterial amount of payments to us in cash.
Our cash flows from operations have improved in recent years and were positive for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. However, for the year ended December 31, 2019, cash flows from operations were negative due to timing in changes in working capital, a decrease in the balance of deferred revenue and the impact of acquired deferred revenue which yields revenue with no cash inflows. We expect the trend of positive cash flows from operations in at least the near term as we continue to manage our costs.
Based on our current level of operations and restructured costs, we believe our future cash flow from operating activities and existing balances of cash and marketable securities, and availability under our revolving line of credit will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Going forward, we may access capital markets to raise additional equity or debt financing for various business reasons, including required debt payments and acquisitions. The timing, term, size, and pricing of any such financing will depend on investor interest and market conditions, and there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any such financing on favorable terms or at all.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements and Contractual Obligations
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities balances and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements through at least the next 12 months.
Our short-term material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021, are primarily comprised of lease obligations, dividends on our Preferred Stock, interest on our convertible senior notes, and payments to vendors related to our technology infrastructure. These obligations will be funded from cash from operations and our balances of current assets.
Our long-term material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021, include lease obligations, repayment of our convertible senior notes, if not converted, and dividends on our Preferred Stock, if not converted or paid in kind. Our long-term obligations will be funded from cash from operations, balances of current assets, and if necessary, borrowing under our revolving line of credit or future credit arrangements, the sale of debt securities, or sale of equity.
In addition, we continue to reassess our need for office space. During 2021, we entered into sublease agreements for a part of one building on our headquarters campus in Charleston, South Carolina and our office in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Since March 2020, most of our associates have worked remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic. While our facilities have remained open and accessible, they have been underutilized since March 2020. We have shifted to a permanent hybrid workforce that combines remote work with traditional in office resources. The timing, amount of additional space to ultimately be sublet, expected amount of sublease income, and amount of impairment loss we might recognize in connection with a sublease, if any, is uncertain. Any amounts received under subleases would offset our lease payments and reduce our cash requirements associated with our lease obligations.
The details of the arrangements that give rise to these short- and long-term cash requirements are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our customer growth rate, subscription renewal activity, the timing and extent of development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced services offerings, and the continuing market acceptance of our services. We might require additional capital beyond our currently anticipated amounts. If our available cash and cash equivalents balances are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell equity or convertible debt securities or enter into an additional credit facility. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and those securities may have rights senior to those of our common shares. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of convertible debt securities, these securities could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Additional capital might not be available on reasonable terms, or at all.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)”. The update simplifies the accounting for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock by reducing the number of accounting models and the number of embedded conversion features that could be recognized separately from the primary contract. This ASU also enhances transparency and improves disclosures for convertible instruments and earnings per share guidance. It will be effective for the Company beginning January 1, 2022. This ASU permits the use of either the modified retrospective or fully retrospective method of transition. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of ASU 2020-06 on its consolidated financial statements but anticipates that it will result in a reduction in non-cash interest expense related to its convertible senior notes.
We are evaluating other accounting standards and exposure drafts that have been issued or proposed by the FASB or other standards setting bodies that do not require adoption until a future date to determine whether adoption will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.