ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Bannix Acquisition Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on January 21, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
On September 14, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 6,900,000 units at $10.00 per unit (the “Units”). The units sold included the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment. Each Unit consists of one share of our common stock (the “Public Shares”), one redeemable warrant to purchase one share of our common stock at a price of $11.50 per share and one right. Each right entitles the holder thereof to receive one-tenth (1/10) of one share of our common stock upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO and the over-allotment, we consummated the issuance of 406,000 private placement units (the “Private Placement Units”) as follows: we sold 181,000 Private Placement Units to certain investors for aggregate cash proceeds of $2,460,000 and issued an additional 225,000 private placement units to our Sponsors in exchange for the cancellation of $1,105,000 in loans and a promissory note due to them. Each Private Placement Unit consists of one share of our common stock, one redeemable warrant to purchase one share of our common stock at a price of $11.50 per whole share and one right. Each right entitles the holder thereof to receive one-tenth (1/10) of one share of our common stock upon the consummation of our Business Combination. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO and the Private Placement Units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be generally applied toward consummating our Business Combination.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering on September 14, 2021, a total of $69,690,000 of the net proceeds from the IPO, the Over-Allotment and the Private Placement were deposited in a trust account established for the benefit of our public stockholders.
If we have not completed our initial business combination within 15 months, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable, and less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in connection with our initial public offering and our search for a target for our initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from January 21, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $1,845,643, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $395,702, an unrealized gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,703,220, interest income on the trust account of $1,502, and offering expenses related to the warrant issuance of $463,377.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $429,444 in cash in our operating account and working capital of $363,213.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a capital contribution from the Sponsors of $28,750 for common stock and from loans from a Sponsor and related parties in order to pay offering costs. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsors or an affiliate of our sponsors or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there was $28,890 owed to Sponsors and related parties and no other amounts outstanding under any Working Capital, Sponsors or related party loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of these financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Fair Value of Warrant Liability
The Company accounted for the warrants issued in connection with the IPO and private placement in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” whereby under that provision, the warrants did not meet the criteria for equity treatment and were recorded as a liability. Accordingly, the Company classified the warrants as a liability at fair value in the year ended December 31, 2021 and will adjust them to fair value at each reporting period. This liability will be re-measured at each balance sheet date until the warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in the Company’s statement of operations.
Common Stock Subject to Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity and subsequently measured at redemption value. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s shares of common stock sold as part of the IPO feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, all shares of common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at their net carrying value and classified as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet. The initial carrying value of the common stock subject to redemption is recorded at an amount equal to the proceeds of the public offering less (i) the fair value of the public warrants and less (ii) offering costs allocable to the common stock sold as part of the units in the public offering. In accordance with the alternative methods described in ASC Subtopic 480-10-S99-3A(15), “Classification and Measurement of Redeemable Securities.” the Company has made an accounting policy election to accrete changes in the difference between the initial carrying amount and the redemption amount ($10.10 per share) over the period form the IPO date to the expected redemption date. For purposes of accretion, the Company has estimated that it will take 15 months for a business combination to occur and accordingly will accrete the carrying amount to the redemption value using the effective interest method over that period. Such changes are reflected in additional paid in capital, or in the absence of additional paid-in capital, in accumulated deficit.
Deferred Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of ASC Subtopic 340-10-S99-1, “Expenses of Offering.” Our offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through December 31, 2021 that were directly related to the IPO. Upon consummation of the IPO, offering costs were allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the IPO on a relative fair value basis compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with our warrant liabilities were expensed as incurred and presented as non-operating expenses in our statement of operations. Offering costs associated with the shares of our common stock were charged to temporary equity (common stock subject to possible redemption) upon the completion of the IPO.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - “Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 as of January 1, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on September 10, 2021, the holders of the founder shares, the private placement units and private placement units that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement to be signed prior to or on the closing date of this offering requiring us to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of our initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriters Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 30-day option from the date of the initial public offering to purchase up to an additional 900,000 units to cover over-allotments, if any at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. This option was fully exercised at the time of the IPO.
The underwriters were entitled to a cash underwriting discount of 3% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $2,070,000, which includes a deferred underwriting discount of $225,000 in the aggregate which will be payable to the underwriters from the amounts to be brought in by the sponsors solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a business combination marketing fee of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the sale of Units in the initial public offering held in the trust account upon the completion of the initial Business Combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.