Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Business
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on March 12, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination.
Our entire activity for the period from March 12, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and Initial Public Offering, described below, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective acquisition target for a Business Combination. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
The Registration Statement for the Initial Public Offering was declared effective on September 7, 2021. In September 2021, we consummated its Initial Public Offering of 15,700,000 Units, including 700,000 Units that were issued pursuant to the underwriter’s partial exercise of its over-allotment option. Each Unit consists of one share of Class A Common Stock, and one-half of one Public Warrant, with each whole Public Warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock for $11.50 per share. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $157,000,000.
In connection with the Initial Public Offering, the underwriter was granted an option to purchase up to an additional 2,250,000 Units to cover over-allotments, if any. On September 22, 2021, the underwriter partially exercised its over-allotment option and, on September 27, 2021, the underwriter purchased 700,000 Over-allotment Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $7,000,000.
On September 10, 2021, simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering we completed the Private Placement of the Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8,000,000. On September 27, 2021, simultaneously with the sale of the Over-allotment Units, we completed the Additional Private Placement Warrants, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $210,000. The total Private Placement Warrants after the “Additional Private Placement Warrants” is $8,210,000.
A total of $158,570,000, comprised of $153,860,000 of the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering (including the Over-allotment Units) and $4,710,000 of the proceeds of the sale of the Private Placement Warrants (including the Additional Private Placement Warrants) has been deposited in the Trust Account.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $1,384,587 in cash. Further, we expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination plans. We cannot assure you that we will identify any suitable target candidates or, if identified, that we will be able to complete the acquisition of such candidates on favorable terms or at all.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to effectuate the Initial Public Offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating revenue in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective Business Combination candidates.
For the period from March 12, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $1,476,232, which consisted of $86,290 in formation costs, $1,232,075 in operating expenses, and $161,644 in franchise tax expense, offset by a $3,777 gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,384,587 outside of the Trust Account, and working capital of approximately $1,347,753. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans by our Sponsor, officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
We do not currently believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are more than we estimate, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
For inception (March 12, 2021) to date ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,677,611. Net loss of $1,476,232 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities that used $404,717, a $3,777 gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account, $187,115 in share-based compensation expense and $20,000 in formation and operating costs that were paid through the issuance of common stock to the Sponsor.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash held in Trust Account of $158,573,777. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account (less taxes paid and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Going Concern
On a routine basis, we assess going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 205-40 “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern". As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,384,587 in our operating bank account, $1,347,753 of working capital, and $158,573,777 of cash held in the Trust Account to be used for a Business Combination or to repurchase or redeem our common stock in connection therewith. We believe that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing, however, there is a risk that our liquidity may not be sufficient. The Sponsor intends, but is not obligated to, provide us with Working Capital Loans to sustain operations in the event of a liquidity deficiency.
We have until March 10, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date and an extension is not requested by the Sponsor there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. While Management expects to complete a Business Combination prior to March 10, 2023, this date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities. The Company has agreed to reimburse the Sponsor or an affiliate thereof in an amount equal to $15,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. As of December 31, 2021, $60,000 was paid for the administrative support, and no amounts were accrued for.
The underwriters of the Initial Public Offering were entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5%, of which 2% (approximately $3,140,000) was paid at the closing of the Initial Public Offering and 3.5% (approximately $5,495,000) was deferred. The deferred underwriting discounts and commissions will become payable to the underwriters upon the consummation of the initial Business Combination and will be paid from the amounts held in the Trust Account. The underwriters are not entitled to any interest accrued on the deferred underwriting discounts and commissions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of unaudited financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting estimates effecting our financial statements:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480. Class A Common Stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A Common Stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the periods.
The shares of Class B Common Stock will automatically convert into shares of Class A Common Stock at the time of the Company’s initial Business Combination on a one-for-one basis, subject to adjustment.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of loss per share for shares of common stock subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of loss per share.
Adjustment associated with the redeemable shares of Class A Common Stock is excluded from loss per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.